
Dyer, IN Code of Ordinances


DYER, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-40 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 2018-03, passed 4-26-18



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



PREFACE



   The Dyer Town Code is a codification of the general and permanent
Ordinances and Resolutions of the Town enacted through Ordinance No. 94-25,
passed December 13, 1994, and Resolution No. 94-1 adopted April 12, 1994.



   Special Ordinances which relate to limited or special purposes, such as
bond issues, specific zoning lot changes, salaries, budgets, appropriations,
transfers and the levying of special assessments, are not included.  Such
special ordinances and resolutions are continued in full force and effect and
are not affected by this codification.



   The Ordinances contained in this Code were organized by subject matter
classifications. Obsolete and conflicting provisions have been eliminated and
the remaining laws, edited and revised where necessary. To facilitate usage,
the Code Chapters are arranged by subject matter, and numbered consecutively.
Each Chapter is preceded by a Chapter Table of Contents which designates the
material included within the Chapter.



   The Comparative Tables Chapter lists all ordinances and resolutions
contained in this Code chronologically by ordinance number or resolution
number, and identifies date of passage, the former ordinance Section or
resolution Section and the new Code Section of this Code. Where appropriate,
the Chapters have been subdivided into Articles, Divisions, and Sections.
Catchlines describe the contents of each Section and appear in bold print as
a further reference aid.



   Footnotes are contained throughout the Code with reference to important
State law citations. Historical information, where applicable, is at the end
of each Section identifying in parenthesis the order or resolution number,
section, and date of passage or adoption.



   Hoosier Codification Service, Inc. wishes to express their appreciation
for the cooperation and assistance of all of the Dyer Town Officials and
employees during the preparation of the Dyer Codification, and especially:
Maryann Brown, Clerk-Treasurer; Catherine A. Koschal, Council President;
Edward Altgilbers, former Vice-President of the Town Council; Michael J.
Kapitan, former Council Member; Jeffery Keilman, former Council Member;
Dennis M. Hawrot, Vice-President; Steven M. Bodnar, Sr., Council Member; John
N. Korfias, Council Member; Jacqueline A. Kennedy, Council Member; Glen
Eberly, Town Council Coordinator; John Tweedle, former Town Attorney; John
Sedia, Town Attorney and Rick Eberly, Zoning Administrator. General
supervision in preparation of Dyer Town Code was by attorney Kathleen C.
Farrand, Betty Lou Nimtz, Chief Editorial Assistant, Sherri Cochran,
Productions and Graphics Assistant, Raelyn Harris, Senior Editorial
Assistant, and Kimberly A. Clark, Editorial Assistant.



   Hoosier Codification Service, Inc.
   South Bend, Indiana
   March 14, 1995



Certification



   We, the members of the Town Council, and Maryann Brown,
Clerk-Treasurer, of the Town of Dyer, County of Lake, the State of Indiana,
hereby certify that the general and permanent Ordinances and Resolutions of
the Town of Dyer, Indiana, as revised, amended, restated, rearranged,
renumbered, and recodified, and presented in 12 Chapters, are correct as
printed, and constitute the Dyer Town Code.



   Signed this           day of
                  , 1995.



                           Dyer Town Council



      By:



      Catherine A. Koschal, Council President



      Dennis M. Hawrot, Council Vice-President



      Steven M. Bodnar, Sr., Council Member



      John N. Korfias, Council Member



      Jacqueline A. Kennedy, Council Member



Attest:



Maryann Brown, Clerk-Treasurer



Attest as to Legality:



John Sedia, Town Attorney



Officials of the
Town of Dyer, Indiana
2018




Town Council





Joseph Cinko - President, Ward 1





Eric Schultz - Vice President, Ward 2





Alan Brooks, Ward 3





Mary Tanis, Ward 4





Steve Kramer, Ward 5










Patricia Hawrot, Clerk-Treasurer





Thomas DeGiulio, Town Manager










Thad Stutler, Fire Chief





David W. Hein, Chief of Police









ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 95-5



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF DYER,
INDIANA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN
ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE
MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR
VIOLATIONS THEREOF; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE AND
OFFICIALLY ADOPTING THE DYER TOWN CODE.



                                                   
                                                   
             



   Whereas, Indiana Code § 36-1-5-3 mandates that the legislative body of
every City, Town, and County shall codify all of their ordinances which are
of a general and permanent nature into a complete and simplified Code; and



   Whereas, the Town of Dyer has reviewed all of their laws and has
identified all laws which should become part of the Dyer Town Code; and



   Whereas, the Town Council of Dyer, Indiana, believes that this
codification and adoption of the Dyer Town Code is in the best interests of
the Town;



   Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana, as follows:



   Section I.  The following codification and revision of ordinances
consisting of Chapters 1 through 12, inclusive, entitled "Dyer Town Code",
two (2) copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer is hereby adopted and enacted as the Dyer Town Code for the
Town of Dyer, Lake County, State of Indiana.



   The format of the Dyer Town Code is as follows:



      Title Page



      Preface Page



      Table of Contents Page



      Certification Page



      Public Officials Page



      A Brief History of Dyer, Indiana



      Chapter 1   -   General Provisions



      Chapter 2   -   Town Administration



      Chapter 3   -   Town Legislative and Judicial Branches



      Chapter 4   -   Fees, Licenses and Permits



      Chapter 5   -   Parks and Recreation



      Chapter 6   -   Public Health and Safety



      Chapter 7   -   Building and Construction Regulations



      Chapter 8   -   Traffic and Parking Regulations



      Chapter 9   -   Utilities



      Chapter 10   -   Zoning and Subdivisions



      Chapter 11   -   Comparative Tables



      Chapter 12   -   Code Index



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



   It shall be treated and considered as a codification and revision of
ordinances of the Town of Dyer which shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances passed and adopted by the Town Council on or before
December 13, 1994, the date when Ordinance No. 94-25 was passed, the last
Ordinance included therein, except those exceptionally saved from repeal or
continued as restatements or reenactments of original ordinances and
amendments thereto which are in full force and effect for any purpose.  And
it shall be treated and considered as a codification and revision of
ordinances of the Town of Dyer which shall supersede all other general and
permanent resolutions passed and adopted by the Town Council on or before
April 12, 1994, the date when Res. No. 94-11 was adopted.



   Section II.  All provisions of the Dyer Town Code shall be in full
force and effect following publication of this ordinance, and all ordinances
of a general and permanent nature of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, enacted on
final passage on or before December 13, 1994 and not incorporated in this
Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby
repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as
herein provided.



   Section III.  The repeal provided for in Section II shall not affect
any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or
imposed before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal
affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the Town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Town or
any evidence of the Town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the Town; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative
ordinances or resolutions of the Council, not in conflict or inconsistent
with the provisions of such Code; nor shall such repeal affect any right of
franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the Council of any
person, firm or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance
dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing,
paving, widening or establishing grades of any street or public way in the
Town; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes
not included herein; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution
relating to salaries of Town employees; nor shall such repeal affect any
ordinance providing for local improvements and levying special assessments
therefor; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting
any plat or ordinance extending the boundaries of the Town; nor shall such
repeal affect any ordinance or resolution establishing, re-establishing or
modifying the boundaries or zoning districts, or changing the zoning
classification of any lot or parcel of land; or vacations of public property;
or real or personal tax abatement.  Each of the above-mentioned ordinances
shall in no way be repealed by this ordinance except as the same may be in
conflict with the provisions of such Code.



   Section IV.  Any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the
same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that
reference to the Dyer Town Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments.



   Section V.  Two (2) copies of the Dyer Town Code shall be kept on file
in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, or someone authorized by her, to insert
into their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the
intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code when the same
shall have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such
Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Council. 
A copy of such Code shall be available to all persons desiring to examine the
same and shall be considered the official Code of the Town of Dyer, Indiana.



   Section VI.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation
to change by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to
insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the Code, any ordinance, or
the law of the Town of Dyer to be misrepresented thereby.  Any person, firm
or corporation violating this Section shall be punished as provided in 1-9 of
such Code.



   Section VII.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town
Council that the Sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases of such
Code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, Section,
Article, Division, or Chapter of such Code shall be declared unconstitutional
or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of such
Code.



   Section VIII.  Whenever in this ordinance or in such Code an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever
in this ordinance or in such Code the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such
provision of this ordinance or of such Code shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00).  The fine assessed
for the violation of any ordinance requiring a license may be a sum equal to
the amount required by the ordinance to be paid for such license, unless
otherwise provided.



   Section IX.  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of such Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be by the Town abated
as provided by law, and each day such condition shall continue to be regarded
as a new and separate offense.



   Section X.  The following fees and fines are specifically established
as part of this ordinance:



   Dyer Town Code, § 4-10   -   Five dollars ($5.00) for a copy of
the first page of an incident report, and three dollars ($3.00) for all
subsequent pages.



   Dyer Town Code, § 4-38   -   A fee of $40.00 for each
reinspection required for plumbing, house drainage and sewers.



   Dyer Town Code, § 7-60   -   Three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00) fee for beginning work without a permit and being "red-tagged".



   Dyer Town Code, § 7-64   -   Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer
Work reinspection or inspection subsequent to red tag - $40.00 fee.



   Dyer Town Code, § 7-67   -   Reinspection fee of $40.00
established with $15.00 addressing administrative expenses and the remaining
$25.00 being paid to the inspector.



   Dyer Town Code, § 8-106 -   Traffic fine of $22.00 plus $3.00 State
Certificate fee for a moving violation and a penalty of $15.00 for a parking
violation.



   Dyer Town Code, § 8-160 -   Impounded Vehicle fees and charges
which are posted and approved.



   Section XI.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict
herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.



   Section XII.  This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval as provided by law.



   Passed by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, on this 11th
day of April, 1995.



                              Town Council of
Dyer, Indiana



                              By:



                                 Catherine
A. Koschal /s/                     



                                 President



                                 Dennis M.
Howrot /s/                         



Attest:                              Vice-Preside
nt



Maryann Brown /s/                               Steven M.
Bodnar Sr. /s/                     



Clerk-Treasurer                        Council Member



                                 John W.
Korfias /s/                           



Attest as to Legality:                     Council Member



John Sedia /s/                                      
                                                 



Town Attorney                        Jacqueline A.
Kennedy, Council Member



ORDINANCE NO. 95-31



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF DYER, LAKE COUNTY, INDIANA.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
completed the First Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Dyer,
which supplement contains all ordinances of a general nature enacted since
the original Codification of Ordinances of the Town; and



   WHEREAS, said American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make references to sections of the Indiana Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of Council to accept these updated sections
in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Indiana;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer,
State of Indiana:



   SECTION 1.  That the First Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Dyer as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.



   SECTION 2.  That this Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from
and after its date of passage.



PASSED this 14th day of November, 1995.



             
NAYS                                AYES



                                                   
                                                 
           



                                                   
        John W. Korfias  /s/                           
 



                                                   
        Catherine A. Koschal  /s/                       



                                                   
        Steven M. Bodnar, Sr.  /s/                       



                                                   
        Jacqueline A. Kennedy  /s/                     



                                                   
                                                 
             



   Town Council



   Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana



ATTEST:



Maryann Brown  /s/                     



Clerk-Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 96-38



   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF DYER, LAKE COUNTY, INDIANA.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio has
contracted with the Town of Dyer to continually supplement the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Dyer by receiving from the Town of Dyer Ordinances
as may be enacted from time to time by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer
and inserting them into the appropriate section of the Code of Ordinances of
the Town of Dyer; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation prior to inserting these
Ordinances into the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Dyer, may make, from
time to time, footnotes and other parenthetical references to Sections of the
Indiana Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Dyer Town Council to accept these
enacted Ordinances as a part of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana from American Legal Publishing Corporation;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer,
Lake County, Indiana that all supplements to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Dyer as might be submitted to the Town of Dyer by American Legal
Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati with the exact wording as passed by the
Dyer Town Council are adopted, incorporated and made a part of the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Dyer, Indiana upon their receipt from American
Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, together with any footnotes or
other parenthetical references to the Indiana Code.



   ALL OF WHICH IS ORDAINED by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Lake
County, Indiana this 11th day of June, 1996.



             
NAYS                                AYES



                                                   
        Dennis M. Hawrot /s/                           



                                 President



                                                   
        Steven M. Bodnar, Sr.  /s/                       
                                 Vice-Presiden
t



                                                   
        John W. Korfias  /s/                           
                                   Council
Member



                                                   
        Paul Hayes  /s/                             
       
                                 Council
Member



                                                   
        Jacqueline A. Kennedy  /s/                     
                                 Council
Member



   Town Council



   Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana



ATTEST:



Thomas G. Hoffman  /s/                     



Clerk-Treasurer



CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS



ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.



Sec. 1-1   Code Citation and Designation.



Sec. 1-2   Effective Date of Code; Repeal of General Ordinances in
Conflict; Savings Clause.



Sec. 1-3   Definitions.



Sec. 1-4   Code Applications.



Sec. 1-5   Interpretation of Section Numbers.



Sec. 1-6   Repeal Shall Not Revive Ordinances.



Sec. 1-7   Effective Date of Ordinances.



Sec. 1-8   Severability of Code.



Sec. 1-9   General Penalties.



Sec. 1-10   Supplementation of Code.



Sec. 1-11   Codes - Property of the Town.



Sec. 1-12   Errors and Omissions.



Sec. 1-13   Town Seal.



ARTICLE 1. IN GENERAL.



Sec. 1-1  Code Citation and Designation.1



The ordinances and resolutions contained in the following Chapters, Articles,
Divisions and Sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Dyer Town
Code," and may be cited as the "Town Code" or in the provisions which follows
as "this Code."



                               



1   I.C., §§ 36-1-5-1 through 36-1-5-6, address the codification of
ordinances by all units of government except Townships.



Sec. 1-2  Effective Date of Code; Repeal of General Ordinances in Conflict;
Savings Clause. 2



   (a)   All of the provisions of this Code shall be in full force and
effect from the date of passage and the filing of this Code in the offices of
the Clerk-Treasurer, and all other ordinances of a general and permanent
nature in force at that time are hereby repealed from and after said date.



   (b)   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall
affect any ordinance:



      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
Town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the Town or any evidence of
the Town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the Town;



      (2)   Granting any right or franchise;



      (3)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the
Town;



      (4)   Making any appropriation;



      (5)   Levying or imposing taxes;



      (6)   Establishing or prescribing grades in the Town;



      (7)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefore;



      (8)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
Town or otherwise relating to subdivisions;



      (9)   Extending or contracting the boundaries of the Town;



      (10)   Prescribing the number, classification benefits or
compensation of any Town officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith;



      (11)   Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking
zones; specific speed zones; parking meter zones; and specific stop or yield
intersections;



      (12)   Pertaining to zoning or the Town's zoning jurisdiction;



      (13)   Relating to taxation, not inconsistent with this Code;



      (14)   Which is temporary, although general in effect;



      (15)   Which is special, although permanent in effect;



      (16)   The purpose of which has been accomplished; and all
such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the
same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file
in the Clerk-Treasurer's Office.



                               



2   Adoption of ordinances and resolutions and publication of a Town Code
see: I.C., §§ 36-5-2-10 and 36-5-2-10.2.



Sec. 1-3  Definitions. 3



   (a)   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the
following definitions shall be applied:



      (1)   Board means the Town Council of the Town, except where
the context clearly indicates otherwise.



      (2)   Clerk-Treasurer means the Clerk and Fiscal Officer of
the Town of Dyer.



      (3)   Code means the Dyer Town Code.



      (4)   Council means the Town Council.



      (5)   County means the County of Lake, State of Indiana.



      (6)   Et seq. is the Latin phrase meaning and the following.



      (7)   Gender means words used in the masculine gender shall
include feminine and neuter.



      (8)   I.C., shall refer to state law found in the Indiana Code.



      (9)   Law includes the Constitution of Indiana, statutes, and
ordinances.



      (10)   May is permissive.



      (11)   Must and shall are each mandatory.



      (12)   Oath includes an affirmation of declaration in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words swear and sworn shall be equivalent to the words affirm
and affirmed.



      (13)   Owner, applied to a building or land, includes any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety,
of the whole or a part of such building or land.



      (14)   Person means any individual, firm, corporation,
association, fiduciary, or governmental entity.



      (15)   State means the State of Indiana.



      (16)   Street means all streets, highways, avenues,
boulevards, lanes, courts, squares, roads, alleys, viaducts, or other public
ways in the Town which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to
public use.



      (17)   Town means the Town of Dyer, Indiana, or the area
within the territorial limits of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, and such
territory, if any, outside of the Town over which the Town has jurisdiction
or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.



      (18)   Town Council means and includes all former references
to the Board of Trustees.4



                               



3   I.C., §§ 36-1-2-1 through 36-1-2-24, set forth the definitions of
general applicability.



4   On March 30, 1989, House Enrolled Act No. 1042 took effect officially
changing the terms "Board of Trustees" to Town Council."



Sec. 1-4  Code Application.



This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the Town of Dyer and to that territory outside this
Town, if any, over which the Town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of
any constitutional provision or law.



Sec. 1-5  Interpretation of Section Numbers.



   (a)   Each Chapter is comprised of Articles which address subject
matter classifications within the Chapter. Articles may then be divided into
Divisions, which further define the particular topic.



   (b)   Each Section of this Code shall be numbered consecutively by
Chapter. The number shall consist of two (2) component parts separated by a
dash, the figure before the dash referring to the Chapter number, and the
figure after the dash referring to the position of the Section within the
Chapter.



   (c)   The decimal system shall be used for all additions or
amendments to this Code. When a Chapter or Section is to be added, the new
Chapter or Section shall he given a decimal character.



Sec. 1-6  Repeal Shall Not Revive Ordinances.



The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an
ordinance or revive any ordinances which have been repealed thereby.



Sec. 1-7  Effective Date of Ordinances.



Unless otherwise expressly provided, an ordinance shall take effect when
passed according to Indiana Code, § 36-4-6-14.



Sec. 1-8  Severability of Code.



If any Chapter, Article, Division, Section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this Code.



Sec. 1-9  General Penalties.



   (a)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code shall
be guilty of an ordinance violation.5



   (b)   Each day a violation of this Code is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.6



   (c)   Except in cases where a minimum fine is prescribed by a
specific Section of this Code, any person convicted of an ordinance violation
shall be punished by a fine of not more than Two Thousand Five Hundred
Dollars ($2,500.00).7



   (d)   The Town may bring a civil action to enjoin any person from:



      (1)   Violating any ordinance regulating or prohibiting a
condition or use of property; or8



      (2)   Engaging in conduct without a license if an Ordinance
requires a license to engage in the conduct.9



   (e)   The court may suspend all or any part of a penalty imposed for
an ordinance violation and may require as a condition of such suspension that
the defendant shall perform uncompensated work that benefits the community.



                               



5   I.C., §§ 34-4-32-1 through 34-4-32-5, address infraction and
ordinance violation enforcement proceedings.



6   I.C., § 9-4-1-127.1, addresses Class C infractions.



7   I.C., § 36-1-38, authorizes a maximum fine of $2,500 for an ordinance
violation.



8   I.C., § 36-1-6-2, addresses ordinance violations affecting real
property an the Town taking expenses of compliance as a lien against the
property.



9   I.C., § 36-1-6-4, addresses injunctions.



Sec. 1-10  Supplementation of Code.



   (a)   By contract or by Town personnel, supplements to this Code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Town
Council. A supplemental update to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered
by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a
supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and
will, where necessary, replace pages which have became obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been
inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the
Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (c)   When preparing a supplement of this Code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to so do
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles for
Sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and
make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to Sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing Section and other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words "this Ordinance" or words of the same
meaning to "this Chapter," "this Article," etc., as the case may be, or to
"Sections _____to____" (inserting Section numbers to indicate the Sections of
this Code which embody the substantive Sections of the Ordinance incorporated
into the Code); and



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance Sections inserted into the Code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.



Sec. 1-11  Codes - Property of Town.



All copies of the Dyer The Code except those which are sold by the Town at a
price established by the Town Council, shall be the property of the Town of
Dyer, and any such copies delivered over to elected and/or appointed
officials or officials shall not retain said documents after the expiration
of their term or terms of office or appointment.



Sec. 1-12  Errors and Omission.



If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, or the use of a word or words to which
no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word
or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be
corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
affect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exist
regarding the nature of extent of the error.



Sec. 1-13  Town Seal. 10



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of the Town's seal
and affix it to such documents and instruments as required



   (b)   The Town Seal of Dyer shall be the form and style as affixed
to the Certification page of this Code.



                               



10   I.C., § 36-1-4-4, authorizes a Town to have a Corporate seal.



CHAPTER 2
TOWN ADMINISTRATION



ARTICLE 1. THE TOWN CLERK-TREASURER.



Sec. 2-1   Term of Office of Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-2   Powers and Duties of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-3   Compensation of Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-4   Deputies and Employees.



Sec. 2-5   Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Invest and Reinvest Surplus
Monies.



Sec. 2-6   Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Make Claim Payments Prior to Town
Council/Board Approval.



Sec. 2-7   Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Pay County Expenses and
Obligation.



Sec. 2-8   Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Verify Information.



Sec. 2-9   Clerk-Treasurer's Role Regarding Mail.



Sec. 2-10   Clerk-Treasurer's Role Regarding Maintaining Documents.



Sec. 2-11   Clerk-Treasurer to Oversee Ordinance Violations Bureau.



Sec. 2-12   through Sec. 2-19 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. THE TOWN MANAGER.



Sec. 2-20   Through Sec. 2-22 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. DEPARTMENTS OF THE TOWN.



   Division I. In General.



Sec. 2-23   Town Departments.



Sec. 2-24   Organizational Charts.



Sec. 2-25 and Sec. 2-41 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Department of Parks and Recreation.



Sec. 2-42   Department of Parks and Recreation Established.



Sec. 2-43   Dyer Park and Recreation Board



Sec. 2-44   Powers and Duties of the Board.



Sec. 2-45   Park Rules and Regulations.



Sec. 2-46 through Sec. 2-54 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Department of Public Works.



Sec. 2-55   Department of Public Works Created.



Sec. 2-56   Director and Duties.



Sec. 2-57   Public Works Regulations.



Sec. 2-58   Department of Public Works Non-Smoking Policy.



Sec. 2-59 and Sec. 2-60 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Department of Redevelopment.



Sec. 2-61   Department of Redevelopment Established.



Sec. 2-62   Redevelopment Districts.



Sec. 2-63   Terms of Redevelopment Commissioners.



Sec. 2-64 through Sec. 2-67 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V. Department of Storm Water Management.



Sec. 2-68   Department of Storm Water Management.



Sec. 2-69   Territory Included with Districts.



Sec. 2-70   Board of Storm Water Management.



Sec. 2-71   Special Taxing District.



Sec. 2-72 through Sec. 2-74 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VI. Department of Waterworks.



Sec. 2-75   Department of Waterworks.



Sec. 2-76   Board of Directors.



Sec. 2-77   Powers and Duties.



Sec. 2-78   Waterworks Regulations.



Sec. 2-79 through Sec. 2-81 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Other Support Services.



Sec. 2-82   Engineering Services.



Sec. 2-83   Legal Services.



Sec. 2-84 through Sec. 2-89 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VIII.  Metropolitan Police Department.



Sec. 2-90   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners Established.



Sec. 2-91   Terms and Qualifications of Commissioners.



Sec. 2-92   Board's Powers and Duties Regarding Town Police Department.



Sec. 2-93   Appointment, Compensation, Tenure of the Chief of Police.



Sec. 2-94   Powers and Duties of Sworn Police Officers.



Sec. 2-95   Adoption of Rules and Regulations Governing the Police
Department.



Sec. 2-96   Application Fee for Police Department Applicants.



Sec. 2-97   Police Department Correspondence.



Sec. 2-98   Law Enforcement Records.



Sec. 2-99   Police Reserves.



Sec. 2-100 through Sec. 2-103 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IX. Volunteer Fire Department.



Sec. 2-104   Volunteer Fire Department Established



Sec. 2-105   Town Employees Who Act as Volunteer Firefighters.



Sec. 2-106   Logging Procedures.



Sec. 2-107   Volunteer Fire Department Ambulance Service.



Sec. 2-108 through Sec. 2-112 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES.



   Division 1. Miscellaneous Entities.



Sec. 2-113   Board of Sanitary Commissioners.



Sec. 2-114   Dyer Redevelopment Commission.



Sec. 2-115   Dyer Historical Society Established.



Sec. 2-116   Dyer Community Foundation.



Sec. 2-117   Quad-Town Forum.



Sec. 2-118   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 2-119   Dyer Town Hall Building Corporation.



Sec. 2-120   Dyer Emergency Preparedness Committee.



Sec. 2-121   Dyer Recycling Committee.



Sec. 2-122   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 2-123   Criminal Background Investigations.



Sec. 2-124   Town of Dyer Youth Council.



Sec. 2-125   Town of Dyer Enhancement Team.



Sec. 2-126 through Sec. 2-129 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Dyer Development Commission.



Sec. 2-130   Dyer Development Commission Created.



Sec. 2-131   Commission Membership.



Sec. 2-132   Commissioners, Disclosure of Interests.



Sec. 2-133   Commissioner's Duty to Investigate Need, Reports.



Sec. 2-134   Powers of Municipality and Commission.



Sec. 2-135   Special Tax, Use of Proceeds, Transfer of Funds.



Sec. 2-136 through Sec. 2-139 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. PERSONNEL RULES.



   Division I. Americans With Disabilities (ADA).



Sec. 2-140   Town Policy.



Sec. 2-141   A.D.A. Coordinator.



Sec. 2-142 through Sec. 2-144 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Deferred Compensation.



Sec. 2-145   Deferred Compensation Plan Established.



Sec. 2-146   Role of Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-147 through Sec. 2-149 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Benefits Under Indiana State Laws.



Sec. 2-150   Workers' Compensation, Occupational Diseases and Employers'
Liability.



Sec. 2-151   Public Employees Retirement Fund (PERF).



Sec. 2-152 through Sec. 2-157 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Family and Medical Leave Act Personnel Policy.



Sec. 2-158   Employee Eligibility.



Sec. 2-159   Definitions.



Sec. 2-160   FMLA Availability.



Sec. 2-161   Notice and Certification Requirements.



Sec. 2-162   Implementation and FMLA Leave Benefits.



Sec. 2-163   Employment Protection/Limitations.



Sec. 2-164   Effective Date.



Sec. 2-165 and Sec. 2-166 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V. Miscellaneous Regulations.



Sec. 2-167   Town Pay Periods.



Sec. 2-168   Mileage Allowance.



Sec. 2-169   Purchasing Regulations.



Sec. 2-170   Establishing Electronic Reverse Auction Procedures.



Sec. 2-171   Credit Cards.



   Division VI. Code of Standards of Conduct - Federal Funding.



Sec. 2-172   Conduct Code Adopted.



Sec. 2-173   Standards of Conduct.



Sec. 2-174   Conflicts.



Sec. 2-175   Violations.



Sec. 2-176 and Sec. 2-177 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Personnel Policies.



Sec. 2-178   Personnel Policies Included by Reference.



Sec. 2-179   Extraordinary Situations.



ARTICLE 6.  FUNDS ESTABLISHED.



Sec. 2-180   Special Non-Park Activities Operating Fund.



Sec. 2-181   Public Safety Income Tax Fund.



Sec. 2-182   Employee Comprehensive Medical Insurance Fund.



Sec. 2-183   Building and/or Remodeling Fund.



Sec. 2-184   Cumulative Capital Development Fund.



Sec. 2-185   Subdivision Professional Distribution.



Sec. 2-186   Debt Service Fund.



Sec. 2-187   Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.



Sec. 2-188   Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund.



Sec. 2-189   Metropolitan Police Pension Fund.



Sec. 2-190   Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH).



Sec. 2-191   Local Road and Street Fund (LRS).



Sec. 2-192   Police Department Incident Report Account.



Sec. 2-193   In Re Forfeiture Fund.



Sec. 2-194   Racketeering Forfeiture Fund.



Sec. 2-195   Federal Equitable Sharing Program Fund.



Sec. 2-196   Cumulative Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund.



Sec. 2-197   Miscellaneous Funds.



Sec. 2-198   Park and Recreation Department Funds.



Sec. 2-199   Casino Gaming Revenue Fund.



Sec. 2-200   Alphabetical Listing of Funds.



Sec. 2-201   Law Enforcement Aid and Confidential Petty Cash Fund.



Sec. 2-202   Special Town Hall Building Maintenance and Capital
Improvement Non-Reverting Fund.



Sec. 2-203   Partnership for a Drug Free Lake County Fund.



Sec. 2-204   Leaking Underground Storage Tank Soil Remediation Fund.



Sec. 2-205   Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase II Project Construction Fund.



Sec. 2-206   Amtrak Fund.



Sec. 2-207   Police Department Special Revenue Fund.



Sec. 2-208   Rental Housing Inspection Fund.



Sec. 2-209   Economic Development Income Tax Fund.



Sec. 2-209.1   Rainy Day Fund



Sec. 2-209.2   Local Option Income Tax Special Distribution Fund.



Sec. 2-209.3   Main Street TIF Fund.



Sec. 2-209.4   Health & Employee Benefit Insurance Non-Reverting Fund.



Sec. 2-209.5   Multi-Peril Insurance Fund.



ARTICLE 7. TOWN MEMBERSHIPS AND AGREEMENTS.



Sec. 2-210   Town Memberships Authorized.



Sec. 2-211   Interlocal Government Agreements and Mutual Aid Agreements.



Sec. 2-212 through Sec. 2-219 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



Sec. 2-220   Ordinance Violation Bureau Established.



Sec. 2-221   Schedule of Code Provisions and Violations.



Sec. 2-222   Civil Penalties.



Sec. 2-223   Court Proceedings.



Sec. 2-224 through Sec. 2-229 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 9. TOWN POLICIES.



Sec. 2-230   Uncollectible accounts receivable.



Sec. 2-231   Fixed Asset Capitalization Policy.



Sec. 2-232   Bidding Practices and Submission Requirements



Sec. 2-233   Internal Control Policies



Sec. 2-234 through Sec. 2-249 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 10. TAXATION.



Sec. 2-250   Municipal Motor Vehicle License Excise Wheel Surtax and
Municipal Wheel Tax.



Sec. 2-251 through Sec. 2-259 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1.  THE TOWN CLERK-TREASURER.



Sec. 2-1  Term of Office of Clerk Treasurer. 1



   (a)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is an elected position whose term of
office is for four (4) years, beginning at noon on January 1st after his or
her election and continuing until a successor is elected and qualified.



   (b)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected by the voters of the
whole Town.2



                         



1   I.C., § 36-5-6-3, addresses the Clerk-Treasurer's term in office.



2   I.C., § 36-5-6-4, addresses the election of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-2  Powers3 and Duties4 of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (a)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, take
depositions, and take acknowledgments of instruments as required by law.



   (b)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer may perform all duties prescribed by
law, which include but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   receive and care for all Town monies, and pay them out
upon order of the Town Council;



      (2)   keep accounts of all Town monies;



      (3)   file monthly reports with the Town Council showing all
receipts and disbursements of the Town Treasury for the preceding month;



      (4)   maintain records which are open for inspection by the
Town Council;



      (5)   collect fines resulting from ordinance violations;



      (6)   issue all licenses; and



      (7)   attend all Town Council meetings and maintain a
recording of its proceedings.5



   (c)   The Clerk-Treasurer is both the Town Clerk and Town Fiscal
Officer pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-5-6-2.



                         



3   I.C., § 36-5-6-5, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to administer oaths
and sets forth related powers.



4   I.C., § 36-5-2-8, sets forth the Clerk-Treasurers role regarding the
Town Council.



5   I.C., § 36-5-6-6, sets forth the power and duties of the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-3  Compensation of Clerk-Treasurer. 6



The compensation for the services of the person holding the office of
Clerk-Treasurer shall be fixed by the Town Council.



                     



6   I.C., § 36-5-3-2, addresses compensation of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-4  Deputies and Employees. 7



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, is
authorized to appoint a Deputy Clerk-Treasurer to assist her in all of the
duties of this office. The Deputy Clerk-Treasurer shall serve at the pleasure
of the Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord. No. 522, § I, § 2, 9-13-63).



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint the number of deputies and
employees with salaries being approved by the Town Council. Deputies and
employees so hired serve at the pleasure of the Clerk-Treasurer.



                     



7   I.C., § 36-5-6-4, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to appoint deputies
of employees.



Sec. 2-5  Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to invest and Reinvest Surplus Monies. 8



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to invest and reinvest
surplus monies from any and all municipal and utility funds, and the Dyer
Metropolitan Police Pension Fund so as to receive interest and returns at the
highest possible rate and under the most favorable circumstances to the Town
of Dyer. (Ord. No. 80-02, § 1, 1-8-80).



   (b)   All such investment of funds is to be for such term as may be
agreed upon from time to time between the Clerk-Treasurer and the
participating depositories, and that the maturity or redemption date not be
later than the time when such funds are required to be available for the
purposes as provided by law; otherwise such investments shall be made so as
to have a maturity or redemption date of one (1) year or less from the date
of purchase (Ord. No. 80-02, § 2, 1-8-80).



   (c)   All such investments shall be in compliance with the public
depository law for the State of Indiana and the interest derived from such
investment shall become a part of the funds invested and not a part of either
the General Fund of the State of Indiana or the General Fund of the Town of
Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 80-02, § 3, 1-8-80).



                     



8   I.C., §§ 5-13-9-1 through 5-13-9-8, address deposit and invest
powers.



Sec. 2-6  Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Make Claim Payments Prior to Town
Council/Board Approval.



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer, subject to division
(b) herein, is authorized to make payments in advance of Town Council, Board
or Commission approval for the following types of expenses:



      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:



         (a)   the United States government; or



         (b)   an agency or a political subdivision of the United
States government;



         (c)   the government of the State of Indiana; or



         (d)   an agency or department or branch of the
government of the State of Indiana, including a body politic and corporate of
the state.



      (2)   License fees or permit fees.



      (3)   Insurance premiums.



      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.



      (5)   Federal grant programs if:



         (a)   advance funding is not prohibited; and



         (b)   the contracting party provides sufficient security
for the amount advanced.



      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute.



      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements.



      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements.



      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds.



      (10) Payroll.



      (11) State and federal taxes.



      (12)   The following additional expenses outlined in this
section:



         (a)   expenses incurred and identified for approved
community events;



         (b)   refunds, which are in consequence of a class or
program cancellation or for event or program deposits as may be made by the
parks and recreation department;



         (c)   vendor payments in support of recreation, or
special events programs;



         (d)   payment of the funeral benefits outlined in
Indiana Code § 36-8-6-9.8(4) to heirs or estates of deceased retired members
of the metropolitan police department;



         (e)   payments to such vendors or service providers,
public or private, which have provided services or goods to the municipality
and for which a delay of payment incurs penalties or late payment charges,
including credit card payments;



         (f)   payments for the purchase of real estate;
provided, that the purchase and price has been duly authorized and approved
by action of the proper council, board or commission, and the purchase was
executed in compliance with Indiana Code §§ 33-24, 36-1-10.5, 36-7, 36-9 or
36-10 and other relevant laws;



         (g)   expenditures for transfers or temporary loans in
consequence of cash flow needs; provided, that the transfer or temporary loan
has been duly authorized and approved by action of the proper council, board
or commission;



         (h)   payments made for the purchase of road salt, or
other supplies, where a vendor requires payment to be remitted at time of
delivery, provided the proper department head determines such payment to be
in the interest of public safety;



         (i)   payments as may be identified in an ordinance.



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall make said payments on behalf of the
Town Council, but the Clerk-Treasurer shall not make said payments on behalf
of any Board or Commission having jurisdiction over allowance of the claim
until authorized to do so in writing by said Board or Commission.



   (c)   Each payment of expenses under this ordinance must be
supported by a fully itemized invoice or bill and certification by the fiscal
officer.



   (d)   The Town Council or the Board or Commission having
jurisdiction over the allowance of the claim shall review and allow the claim
at the body's next regular meeting following the preapproved payment of the
expense. (Ord. No. 87-32, 8-9-87; Ord. No. 95-27, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 2016-09,
5-12-16).



Sec. 2-7  Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Pay Continuing Expenses and
Obligations.



The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pay the following continuing expenses
and obligations of the Town previously approved by the Town Council without
the necessity if processing claims for payment of each such expense:



   1.   Wages, social security, payroll taxes, pension, postage,
scavenger fees, utility obligations, and other payroll related expenses,
authorized and payable pursuant to the wage and salary ordinance and
amendments thereto.



   2.   Insurance premiums on insurance contracts entered into by the
Town Council.



   3.   Rental payments due on leases executed by the Dyer Town
Council. (Ord. No. 84-39, 9-11-84).



Sec. 2-8  Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Verify Information.



The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer is designated the officer of the Town
who will be responsible for providing information to the Public Employees
Retirement Fund on creditable service for an employee of the Town of Dyer.
(Ord. No. 82-41, 11-9-82).



Sec. 2-9  Clerk-Treasurer's Role Regarding Mail.



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer, or Deputy
Clerk-Treasurer, in the case of her absence, shall receive all incoming
correspondence addressed to the Clerk-Treasurer, Clerk-Treasurer's office,
Sewer and Water Utility Bills and all correspondence addressed simply to the
"Town of Dyer", without a specific individual or department specified.



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer, or Deputy Clerk-Treasurer, shall date,
open, document and distribute/handle all such mail.



   (c)   If mail is addressed to the "Town of Dyer", the original shall
be retained by the Clerk-Treasurer and a copy distributed to the Town
Council. (Res. No. 82-8, § 1, 3-9-82).



Sec. 2-10  Clerk-Treasurer's Role Regarding Maintaining Documents.



The Clerk-Treasurer, as the legal keeper of all records of the Town of Dyer,
shall be provided all original documents including, but not limited to
ordinances, resolutions contracts, grants, consultant agreements, reports,
studies, and shall also be provided with a copy of all correspondence
pertaining to financial, budgetary, treasury, debt management, purchasing,
and personnel matters. All of the above shall be retained in the Office of
the Clerk-Treasurer. (Res. No. 82-8, § 4, 3-9-82).



Sec. 2-11  Clerk-Treasurer to Oversee Ordinance Violations Bureau.



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the
Violations Clerk and shall be Administrator of the Ordinance Violations
Bureau.



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer and her staff, as her agents, shall accept
written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and payment
of civil penalties in the amount and the violation set forth in Article 13 of
Chapter 6 of this Code. (Ord. No. 89-38, § 1, 10-10-89)



Sec. 2-12 through Sec. 2-22  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. THE TOWN MANAGER.9



                         



9   I.C., §§ 36-5-5-1 through 36-5-5-9, address the Town Manager.



Sec. 2-20 through Sec. 2-22  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. DEPARTMENTS OF THE TOWN.



Division I. In General.



Sec. 2-23  Town Departments. 10



The following departments are recognized:



   1.   Department of Parks and Recreation.



      (See Sec. 2-42 through Sec. 2-45)



   2.   Department of Public Works.



      (See Sec. 2-55 through Sec. 2-58)



   3.   Department of Redevelopment.



      (See Sec. 2-61 through Sec. 2-63)



   4.   Department of Storm Water Management.



      (See Sec. 2-68 through Sec. 2-71)



   5.   Department of Waterworks.



      (See Sec. 2-75 through Sec. 2-78)



   6.   Metropolitan Police Department.



      (See Sec. 2-90 through 2-99)



   7.   Volunteer Fire Department.



      (See Sec. 2-104 and 2-105)



   8.   Dyer Development Department.



      (See p. 41, footnote 24 and Sec. 2-130, et seq.)



Each department shall carry out such duties assigned to it by applicable
State Law and duties assigned to it by the Town Council to effectively carry
out the needs and services of the Town.



                         



10   I.C., § 36-1-3-2, addresses the power to carry out the effective
operation of government as to local affairs.



Sec. 2-24  Organizational Charts.



The organizational charts depicted on the following page(s) set forth the
divisions of town government.







 







 



Sec. 2-25 through Sec. 2-41  Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Department of Parks and Recreation.11



                         



11   I.C., § 36-10-3-3, addresses the Department of Parks and Recreation.



Sec. 2-42  Department of Parks and Recreation Established.



It is in the best interest of the Town of Dyer to create a Department of
Parks and Recreation to manage and supervise the parks and recreation within
the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 83-16, Preamble, 4-12-83)



Sec. 2-43  Dyer Park and Recreation Board. 12



   (a)    There is created within the Town of Dyer, a Department of
Parks and Recreation to be known and identified as the Dyer Park and
Recreation Board. The Dyer Park and Recreation Board shall consist of four
(4) members to be appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, pursuant
to I.C. § 36-10-3-4, as amended. In addition to those members appointed by
the Town Council, the Dyer Park and Recreation Board may also consist of one
(1) or two (2) ex officio members, those being:



      (1)   a member:



         (i)   of the governing body of the school corporation
selected by that body; or



         (ii)   designated by the governing body of the library
district selected by that body; or



         (iii)   both (i) and (ii).



   (b)   All books, papers, documents and other property of the former
park and/or recreation authority shall be transferred to and become the
property of the Board. (Ord. No. 83-16, § 1, 4-12-83; Am. Ord. No. 99-15, §
1, 7-13-99)



                         



12   I.C., § 36-10-3-4, addresses Board Membership.



Sec. 2-44  Power and Duties of the Board. 13



   (a)   The members of the Dyer Park and Recreation Board shall be
appointed pursuant to the Indiana Park and Recreation Law.



   (b)   The Board shall have the duties, powers, and authority set
forth in the Indiana Park and Recreation Law, Indiana Code, Section 36-10-3-1
et seq.



                         



13   I.C., § 36-10-3-11, addresses powers of the Board.



Sec. 2-45  Park Rules and Regulations.



Chapter 5 of this Code sets for specific rules and regulations governing
parks and recreational activities in the Town of Dyer.



Sec. 2-46 through Sec. 2-54  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Department of Public Works.14



                         



14   I.C., § 36-1-2-24, defines the “Works Board” as the Town Council.



Sec. 2-55  Department of Public Works Created.



There shall be a Department of Public Works in the Town of Dyer, Lake County,
Indiana that oversees streets, sanitation, water, storm sewers and sanitary
sewers.



Sec. 2-56  Director and Duties.



The Department shall be headed by a Director of Public Works and such other
personnel deemed necessary for the efficient and effective operation of the
department.



Sec. 2-57  Public Works Regulations.



Rules and regulations governing public works are set forth in Chapter 7 of
this Code.



Sec. 2-58  Department of Public Works Non-Smoking Policy.



Smoking is prohibited from all Public Works buildings with the exception of
the Public Works office. (Res. No. 93-11, 5-11-93)



Sec. 2-59 and Sec. 2-60  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Department of Redevelopment.15



                       



15   I.C., § 36-7-14, et seq., addresses redevelopment powers.



Sec. 2-61  Department of Redevelopment Established.



The Town Council establishes the Department of Redevelopment of the Town of
Dyer. (Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 2-10-92).



Sec. 2-62  Redevelopment District.



   (a)   Pursuant to the Act all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the Town will be a taxing district to be known as the
Redevelopment District of the Town of Dyer for the purpose of levying and
collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment purposes as provided in
the Act.



   (b)   The Town Council finds and determines that all of the taxable
property within this special taxing district will be considered to be
benefitted by the redevelopment projects carried out under the Act to the
extent of the special taxes levied under the Act. (Ord. No. 92-8, § 2,
2-10-92).



Sec. 2-63  Terms of the Redevelopment Commissioners.



The original Redevelopment Commissioners appointed shall serve until the
first day of January in the second year after their appoint; thereafter, each
Commissioner shall serve for one (1) year from the first day of January until
his/her successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord. No. 92-8, § 3, 2-10-92)



Sec. 2-64 through Sec. 2-67  Reserved for Future Use.



Division V. Department of Storm Water Management.16



                       



16   I.C., § 8-1.5.5, et seq., addresses storm water management.



Sec. 2-68  Department of Storm Water Management Created.



Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5 et seq., a Department of Storm Water
Management is created for the purpose of providing for the collection,
disposal and drainage of storm and surface water and the relieving of
sanitary sewers of such water in the district. (Ord. No. 91-5, § 2, 2-12-91)



Sec. 2-69  Territory Included Within District.



The territory to be included initially in the District shall be all of that
territory included at any time within the corporate limits of the Town of
Dyer, and any territory, addition, or platted subdivision or unplatted lands
lying outside the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, which have
been taken into or which have been connected with the public sewer system of
the Town of Dyer, Indiana, in accordance with the provisions of any prior
act, and the drainage of which discharge is into or through the storm sewer
System of the Town of Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 91-5, § 3, 2-12-91)



Sec. 2-70  Board of Storm Water Management.



   (a)   The Board shall consist of three (3) Directors to be appointed
by the Town Council, not more than two (2) of whom may be of the same
political party. The term of the first Director shall end on December 31,
1991; the term of the second Director shall end on December 31, 1992; and the
term of the third Director shall end on December 31, 1993. Thereafter all
terms will be for a period of three (3) year.



   (b)   The members of the Board shall be compensated for their
services as set forth annually in the salary ordinance for the Town of Dyer.



   (c)   Should a vacancy occur on the Board, that vacancy shall be
filled by the Town Council within sixty (60) days from the date the vacancy
occurred.  The Town Council shall appoint one of its own members to fill the
vacancy during any interim period of time The Town Council may by simple
majority vote to remove a Director at any time when, in the judgement of the
Town Council, it is for the best interest of the Department of Storm Water
Management. (Ord. No. 91-5, § 4, 2-12-91)



Sec. 2-71  Special Taxing District.



Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5, there is created a special taxing
district which shall include all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, as identified and set
out hereinabove in Sec. 2-65. (Ord. No. 91-5, § 5, 2-12-91).



Sec. 2-72 through Sec. 2-74  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VI. Department of Waterworks.17



                       



17   I.C., § 8-1.5-4, addresses the operation of a waterworks facility.



Sec. 2-75  Department of Waterworks Created.



There is created a Department of Waterworks to be known as the Town of Dyer
Department of Waterworks ("the Department"). (Ord. No. 91-17, § 2, 7-9-91).



Sec. 2-76  Board of Directors.



   (a)   The Department shall be governed by a body to be known as the
Board of Directors of the Town of Dyer Department of Waterworks (the
"Board"). The Board shall consist of three (3) Directors (the "Directors")
who shall be appointed by the President of the Town Council. Not more than
two (2) Directors may be of the same political party.



   (b)   The term of the first Director shall end on December 31, 1992;
the term of the second Director shall end on December 31, 1993; and the term
of the third Director shall end on December 31, 1994. Thereafter all terms
will be for a period of four (4) years.



   (c)   The members of the Board shall be compensated for their
services set forth annually in the salary ordinance for the Town of Dyer.
Should a vacancy occur on the Board, that vacancy shall be filled by a
majority of the Town Council within sixty (60) days from the date the vacancy
occurred.



   (d)   Each Director shall give a bond, which shall be fixed by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer and subject to the Clerk-Treasurer's
approval.



   (e)   The majority of the Town Council may remove a Director at any
time when, in the Council's judgment, it is for the best interest of the
Waterworks. (Ord. No. 91-17, § 2, 7-9-91)



Sec. 2-77  Powers and Duties.



The Board created herein shale have all of the powers and duties prescribed
by Indiana Code, §§ 8-1.5-3-4 and 8-1.5-4-4 as they exist on the date of
passage of Ordinance No. 91-17 and as amended hereafter. (Ord. No. 91-17, §
4, 7-9-91).



Sec. 2-78  Waterworks Regulations.



Rules and regulations governing the Waterworks are set forth in Chapter 9 of
this Code.



Sec. 2-79 through Sec. 2-81  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Other Support Services.



Sec. 2-82  Engineering Services.



A Town Engineer or consulting engineering services may be retained by the
Town to perform such duties and responsibilities established by the Town
Council.



Sec. 2-83  Legal Services. 18



A Town Attorney or an attorney hired on a contractual basis may be retained
by the Town to perform such duties and responsibilities established by the
Town Council.



                       



18   I.C., § 36-4-6-24, authorizes the Town Council to hire or contract
attorney(s).



Sec. 2-84 through Sec. 2-89  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VIII. Metropolitan Police Department.19



                       



19   I.C., §§ 36-8-9-1 through 36-8-9-6, address the Board of
Metropolitan Police Commissioners.



Sec. 2-90  Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners Established. 20



There is established a Board of Police Commissioners for the Town of Dyer,
Indiana, to consist of  five (5) Commissioners previously appointed to such
Board by the Town Council and an additional two (2) Commissioners to be
appointed by the Town Council pursuant to the provisions of Indiana Code, §
36-8-9-3(b). The Commissioners must be of good moral character and legal
residents of the Town. The additional Commissioners may not be members of the
same political party. Each Commissioner appointed hereunder is subject to
removal by the Town Council for any cause that the Town Council considers
sufficient. (Ord. No. 792, 6-17-71; Am. Ord. No. 98-25, 12-29-98).



                       



20   I.C., § 36-8-9-6, addresses regulations addressing police
departments.



Sec. 2-91  Terms and Qualifications of Commissioners.



The appointment, term, oath, and bond of the Commissioners shall be as
prescribed by Indiana Code, § 36-8-9-3; provided, however, that the
additional two (2) Commissioners to be appointed pursuant to the terms of
this amendment shall be one (1) year and two (2) years, beginning January 1,
1991. Upon the expiration of each of the terms of the last two (2)
Commissioners appointed pursuant to this amendment, each such Commissioner
shall thereafter be appointed to serve for a term of three (3) years. (Ord.
No. 823, 6-13-72).



Sec. 2-92  Board's Powers and Duties Regarding Town Police Department. 21



   (a)   The Board of Police Commissioners shall, subject to the
approval of the Town Council, appoint as many persons as necessary to serve
in the Town Police Department. One person shall be appointed to serve as the
Chief of Police. No more than one-half (1/2) of the persons appointed may be
members of the same political party.



   (b)   The Board shall, subject to the approval of the Town Council,
appoint such other employees as are necessary to carry on the work of the
Police Department. All persons appointed must be of good moral character and
shall serve only during good behavior.



   (c)   The Board may make general and special rules and regulations
for the government and discipline of the Police Department and make special
and general orders to the Department through the Chief of Police, who is the
executive head of the Department.



                       



21   I.C., § 36-8-9-4, addresses the Board's powers and duties.



Sec. 2-93  Appointment, Compensation, Tenure of the Chief of Police.



   (a)   The Town Council shall appoint a Chief of Police and shall fix
his compensation annually by Ordinance adopted pursuant to Indiana Code, §
36-8-3-3.



   (b)   The Chief of Police shall serve at the pleasure of the Town
Council.



Sec. 2-94  Powers and Duties of Sworn Police Officers.



All sworn police officers shall have those powers and duties as set forth in
Indiana Code, § 36-8-3-6.



Sec. 2-95  Adoption of Rules and Regulations Governing the Police Department.



   (a)   The actions of the Police Commissioners of the Metropolitan
Police Department of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, in adopting the
rules and regulations governing said department are acknowledged. (Res. No.
906, 7-9-74)



   (b)   Said rules and regulations are on file in the Metropolitan
Police Department and Clerk-Treasurer's Office, and are available for public
inspection during regular business hours.



Sec. 2-96  Application Fee for Police Department Applicants.



   (a)   Persons submitting applications for employment openings on the
Dyer Police Department shall pay to the Town of Dyer, the sum of Twenty
Dollars ($20.00) to cover a portion of the administrative and testing cost
relevant to processing the Employment Application.



   (b)   The administrative fee of Twenty Dollars ($20.00) shall be
collected by the Clerk-Treasurer and deposited to the Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund. (Ord. No. 88-39, 5-10-88; Am. Ord. No. 96-29,
12-10-96; Am. Ord. No. 99-17, 7-13-99)



Sec. 2-97  Police Department Correspondence.



The Police Department shall receive, date, document, and distribute all
correspondence addressed to the Metropolitan Police Commission, Police
Department or Police Chief. (Res. No. 82-8, § 3, 3-9-82)



Sec. 2-98  Law Enforcement Records.



Procedures addressing Law Enforcement Records are set forth in Section 3-35
of this Code.



Sec. 2-99  Police Reserves.



The Town may authorize Police reserves pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-8-3-20.



Sec. 2-100 through 2-103  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IX. Volunteer Fire Department.



Sec. 2-104  Volunteer Fire Department Established.



The Town of Dyer has established a Volunteer Fire Department pursuant to
Indiana Law, whose members are compensated by the Town of Dyer for responding
to fire calls. (Ord. No. 89-8, 2-14-89)



Sec. 2-105  Town Employees Who Act as Volunteer Firefighters.



Employees of the Town of Dyer who are also volunteer firefighters shall not
be paid compensation by the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department for responding to
calls during the employee's regular hours of employment. The employee of the
Town who responds to a fire call during his or her regular hours of
employment shall be considered an employee of the Dyer Volunteer Fire
Department during the period of response for purposes of worker's
compensation insurance, and for all other purposes, except that he or she
shall not be paid as a volunteer fireman. (Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 2-14-89)



Sec. 2-106  Logging Procedures.



The time the initial incident report is received and logged by the Dyer
Police Department shall determine if the employee is employed by the Town
during his regular hours of employment and subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance. This determination shall be conclusive regardless of the length of
time expended to clear the fire call. (Ord. No. 89-8, 2, 2-14-89)



Sec. 2-107  Volunteer Fire Department Ambulance Service.



   (a)    There is hereby established the Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire
Department Emergency Ambulance Service. Further, the duties and
responsibilities for the Town Volunteer Fire Department Emergency Ambulance
Service shall be assigned and delegated to the Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire
Department.



   (b)   Prompt Ambulance Service, Inc., presently conducts the billing
services, free of charge, on behalf of, and for the benefit of, the Town
Volunteer Fire Department Ambulance Service and the Town, and shall hereby be
authorized to continue to conduct same. Said billing service shall continue
to bill and collect all charges made for emergency medical and ambulance
services rendered by the Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire Department Emergency
Ambulance Service, consistent with the rules and regulations of the State of
Indiana Board of Accounts. One-third (1/3) of all monies so collected shall
be deposited into the Town CCD Fund, which shall include the line item,
“Ambulance Replacement.” In the event that an amount collected for
ambulance services is not evenly divisible by three (3), then the amount
deposited into the CCD Fund shall be rounded up to the next nearest whole
dollar amount. The remaining two-thirds (2/3) of all monies so collected
shall be deposited into an “Ambulance Budget,” which is to be established
within the Town General Fund. Said Ambulance Budget shall contain the
following line items: 1) Ambulance Insurance and 2) Ambulance Supplies and
Equipment.



   (c)   The rates charged by the Town of Dyer, for ambulance services
provided by the Town of Dyer Emergency Ambulance Service shall be in
accordance with and equal to the rates charged for said services by Prompt
Ambulance Service, Inc., as its billing service, and shall commence upon the
passage and adoption of this Ordinance 2001-14.



   (d)   The Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire Department Emergency Ambulance
Service shall provide the following emergency ambulance services:



      1.   Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulance transport services to
persons who are residents of the Town of Dyer;



      2.   Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulance transport services to
persons who do not reside within the Town of Dyer;



      3.   Ambulance non-transport services, which shall be defined
as any situation in which the ambulance is dispatched to a specific location
and the patient receives treatment at the scene, but transport is not
required or the patient refuses to be transported;



      4.   The Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire Department Emergency
Ambulance Service shall provide only emergency transport services, and shall
not provide any non-emergency transport services.



   (e)   The policy of the Town of Dyer shall be that when the Town of
Dyer Volunteer Fire Department Emergency Ambulance Service renders services
to persons, such persons shall be transported only to St. Margaret Mercy
Hospital in Dyer, Indiana or Munster Community Hospital in Munster, Indiana.
In the event of a life-threatening situation, the Emergency Medical
Technician in charge may transport the patient to a hospital not listed above.



   (f)   The Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire Department Emergency Ambulance
Service shall not use its equipment for the transportation of deceased
persons. Patient transfers to or from any hospital or other heath care
facility shall not be rendered by the Town of Dyer Volunteer Fire Department
Emergency Ambulance Service.



   (g)   Any conscious person eighteen (18) years of age or older shall
have the right to refuse ambulance service, however, any such person refusing
ambulance service shall sign a “refusal of service form.” In the event
that a person refuses said service and also refuses to sign a “refusal of
service form,” said form shall be signed on behalf of said person by any
law enforcement officer present at the time said refusal is made. If a law
enforcement officer is not available at the scene, the refusal form may be
signed by a member of the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department.



(Ord. No. 2001-14, §§ 1 - 7, 8-21-01)



Sec. 2-108 through Sec. 2-112  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER AGENCIES.



Division 1. Miscellaneous Entities.



Sec. 2-113  Board of Sanitary Commissioners.



   (a)   The number of Commissioners on the Dyer Board of Sanitary
Commissioners shall be reduced from five (5) Commissioners to three (3)
Commissioners. (Ord. No. 91-39, § 1, 1-1-92; Am. Ord. No. 2007-14, 8-15-07)



   (b)   The terms of all Commissioners appointed pursuant to this
Ordinance shall expire on December 31, 1995. (Ord. No. 91-39, § 2, 1-1-92)



Sec. 2-114  Dyer Redevelopment Commission.



The Department will be controlled by a Board of five (5) members known as the
Dyer Redevelopment Commission. Three (3) of the members shall be appointed by
the Municipal Executive, the President of the Town Council, and two (2)
members shall be appointed by the Town Council. (Ord. No. 92-8, § 1, 2-10-92)



Sec. 2-115  Dyer Historical Society Established.



The Dyer Historical Society is created and established in the Town of Dyer,
Lake County, Indiana. (Res. No. 84-4, 2-14-84)



Sec. 2-116  Dyer Community Foundation.



   (a)   Membership.  Effective January 1, 2010, the membership of the
Town of Dyer Community Foundation (hereinafter referred to as the
"Foundation") shall consist of eleven (11) members who shall be residents of
the Town of Dyer. The Town Council shall appoint all members of the
Foundation. Each appointment shall be for a three (3)-year term. All members
of the Foundation shall be voting members and their positions shall be
non-political.



   (b)   Organization and Structure. The Foundation shall meet on a
monthly basis beginning the month after the organizational meeting of the
Town Council held in January of each calendar year. At its first monthly
meeting, the Foundation shall elect one (1) of its voting members to serve in
each of the following positions:



      1.   President;



      2.   Vice President;



      3.   Recording Secretary; and



      4.   Treasurer.



The voting members elected to each of the above-described positions shall
serve from the date of their election until election and qualification of
their respective successors.



The Foundation is authorized to adopt additional rules and regulations, as
are reasonable, appropriate and necessary for the conduct of the Foundation's
business and affairs. The Foundation shall be generally governed by the
latest edition of "Robert's Rules of Order.''



The Foundation shall hold regular and special meetings at such times as it
may determine upon proper notice as it may fix, either by resolution on in
accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations, as adopted,
and consistent with all applicable state and local laws or ordinances.



   (c)   Duties.  The Foundation is charged with organizing,
coordinating and assisting in raising gifts and donations and determining the
use of the same for the benefit of the residents of the Town of Dyer.



   (d)   Reports. The Foundation shall prepare and submit to the Town
Council for review, minutes of its regular and special meetings. In addition,
the Town Council may request preparation of additional reports.



   (e)   Disposition of Funds.  The Foundation may establish such
accounts as it deems necessary to receive, invest, and disburse funds for and
on behalf of the Foundation.  The Foundation may also establish an operating
account to pay for expenses incurred as a result of the activities of the
Foundation. Funds received by the Foundation may be deposited with the Legacy
Foundation for use in accordance with the Endowment Agreement between the
Town of Dyer and the Legacy Foundation, if so determined by the Town of Dyer
Community Foundation. All investment and disbursement of funds received by
the Foundation shall be made with the approval of the Foundation.



   (f)   Applicable Law.  The Foundation shall comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances, including, but not
limited to, the provisions of the Indiana Code commonly known as the "Indiana
Open Door Law" and the "Indiana Access to Public Information and Records"
laws, and shall record and publish minutes of its meetings.



   (g)   No Compensation For Services.  The members of the Foundation
shall not receive compensation for their service, but shall be reimbursed for
authorized reasonable expenses actually incurred or paid.  (Res. No.
2009-19, 11-18-09)



Sec. 2-117  Quad-Town Forum.



   (a)   The Quad-Town Forum is established to encourage economic
strength and general development within the Quad-Town area. It includes the
towns of Dyer, Schererville, St. John and Highland.



   (b)   The Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana,
shall take all appropriate and legal measures to enter into a Joint
Interlocal Cooperation Agreement with the Towns of Highland, St. John and
Schererville, to purchase and utilize supplies, equipment and services for
the mutual benefit of the four (4) participating communities, at shared
costs. (Res. No. 94-2, § 1, 1-11-94)



   (c)   The President of the Town Council is authorized and permitted
to enter into a Joint Interlocal Cooperation Agreement for the purchase and
utilization of equipment, supplies and services for the mutual benefit of the
Towns of Dyer, Highland, Schererville and St. John, at shared costs, pursuant
to the applicable provisions of Indiana Code, § 36-1-7-1, et seq., as
amended from time to time; further, the Town Clerk- Treasurer is authorized
to attest the execution of said agreement by the President of the Town
Council. (Res. No. 94-2, § 2, 1-11- 94)



   (d)   A copy of the proposed Joint Interlocal Cooperation Agreement
between the Towns of Dyer, Highland, Schererville and St. John shall be kept
on file in the Office of the Clerk- Treasurer, and shall be available for
public inspection during regular business hours. (Res. No. 94-2, § 3,
1-11-94)



Sec. 2-118  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 2-119  Dyer Town Hall Building Corporation. 22



   (a)   It is determined to be proper and in the public interest to
approve the incorporation of the non-profit corporation known and designated
as the Dyer Town Hall Building Corporation for the purpose of financing,
constructing, and equipping a Town Hall and Police Station facility to be
leased to the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 86-50, § 1, 11-11-86)



   (b)   The Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws of Dyer Town Hall
Building Corporation, presented to the Town Council are approved. (Ord. No.
86-50, § 2, 11-11-86)



   (c)   Providing for the financing, construction, and equipping of a
Town Hall and Police Station facility by the Dyer Town Hall Building
Corporation is in the public interest of the citizens of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana, and it is a proper public purpose for which Town Council agrees to
cooperate with the Dyer Town Hall Building Corporation and to assist it in
fulfilling the requirements of all agencies of the federal, state, city, and
town governments.



(Ord. No. 86-50, § 3, 11-11-86)



   (d)   Upon the Dyer Town Hall Building Corporation being duly
organized to conduct business, it may issue, sell, and deliver its bonds,
pursuant to the applicable laws of the State of Indiana, may encumber any
real property or equipment acquired by it for the purpose of financing the
construction and equipping of a Town Hall and Police Station facility or
facilities and may enter into contracts for the sale of the bonds and the
construction and acquisition of a fully equipped Town Hall and Police Station
facility or facilities. (Ord. No. 86-50, § 7, 11-11-86)



                               



22 Editor's Note:  Section 4-6 of this Ordinance remains in effect and is
available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 2-120  Dyer Emergency Preparedness Committee. 23



The Dyer Town Council recognizes the Dyer Emergency Preparedness Committee as
an important element of the Community in helping to implement any Emergency
Preparedness Plan established by an Executive Order. This Committee, under
the appropriate direction of Dyer Town officials, will activate their command
control personnel and precede to effectively assist the officials of the Town
of Dyer in their effort to coordinate all Town agencies. (Res. No. 93-2,
2-8-93)



                               



23 I.C., § 10-4-1-23, addresses "local disaster emergencies", and I.C., §
36-1-7-3, addresses interlocal cooperation agreements.



Sec. 2-121  Dyer Recycling Committee.



   (a)   There is created a Dyer Recycling Committee for the purpose of
studying and evaluating effective use of landfill areas and protection of the
environment. (Res. No. 93-10, 5-11-93)



   (b)   The Board of Directors of the Dyer Recycling Committee shall
consist of a Town Council Member, two (2) Town employees and seven (7)
citizen members.  Upon resignation of a Director, the Town Council shall
appoint a successor. Terms will commence upon appointment and will terminate
upon resignation of the member.



(Res. No. 93-10, 5-11-93; Res. No. 95-1, 1-1-95)



Sec. 2-122  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 2-123  Criminal Background Investigations.



   (a)   Limited Criminal Background Investigations Required. Any
person who is a Public Official in the Town of Dyer shall be required to
submit to a limited criminal background investigation as a condition of
appointment to any Town Board and/or Commission pursuant to the provisions of
I.C. 5-2-5-5(a), as amended from time to time.



   (b)   “Public Official” Defined.  “Public Official” shall
mean any person who is appointed to any Town Board or Commission including,
but not limited to, the Redevelopment Commission, the Sanitary Board, the
Board of Stormwater Management, the Park Board, the Plan Commission, the
Board of Zoning Appeals and the Recycling Committee. This definition
specifically exempts persons who are appointed to Town Boards and/or
Commissions who are also state, county or town elected officials. The term
"Public Official" shall, at all times, be construed consistent with the
provisions and definitions of I.C. 5-2-5-5, et. seq., as amended from time to
time.



   (c)   Purpose.  As a unit of local government and a municipal
employer, the Town of Dyer strives to provide a safe, comfortable and
efficient work environment for its employees to facilitate achievement of the
Town's public service missions. As a municipality, the Town of Dyer is
charged with the responsibility of implementing necessary, advisable and
appropriate policies to protect the Town's employees, elected officials and
appointees, as well as the residents of the Town of Dyer from workplace
violence, theft of Town property, misuse and/or abuse of Town equipment and
resources, to protect and preserve the integrity of the Town's Boards and
Commissions, to protect the persons serving upon said Town Boards and
Commissions and to foster a favorable and supportive public perception of how
the Town carries out its public service missions through those Town Boards
and Commissions. The purpose of requiring public officials to submit to a
limited criminal background investigation is preventative in nature and shall
be conducted for the sole purpose of protecting all Town employees, officials
and appointees, as well as the residents of the Town of Dyer from the
within-described circumstances.



   (d)   Procedure. At the time of a individual's submission of an
application/request for appointment to a particular Town Board or Commission,
said individual shall request from appropriate and designated Town
representatives, and shall be provided with, an “authorization to obtain
limited criminal history form” (hereinafter referred to as the
“authorization form”). An applicant may elect to execute, at his/her sole
discretion, or not execute, the “authorization form”. However, unless the
Town is in receipt and possession of an applicant's “authorization form”,
the applicant will not be further considered for appointment to any Town
Board or Commission in the Town of Dyer.



      1.   Upon execution of the authorization form by an applicant,
the Town's duly-designated representative shall notify the appropriate and
authorized law enforcement agency(ies) to conduct a limited criminal
background investigation upon the applicant. A “limited criminal background
investigation” is defined as:



         information with respect to any arrest, indictment,
information or other formal criminal charge, which includes a disposition.
However, information about any arrests, indictment, information, or other
formal criminal proceedings which occurred less than one (1) year before the
date of a request shall be considered a limited criminal history even if no
disposition has been entered.



      2.   The law enforcement agency(ies) shall edit information so
that the only information released for inspection is information which:



         a.   has been requested; and



         b.   is limited criminal history information.



   (e)   Upon the completion of the limited criminal background
investigation, appropriate and authorized Town Officials, or their duly
designated representative(s), shall evaluate the information contained
therein. An applicant who has been convicted of any felony crime will not be
appointed to any Town Board or Commission within the Town of Dyer. An
applicant who has been convicted of any misdemeanor crime may remain eligible
for appointment to a Town Board or Commission in the Town of Dyer. However,
whether such an applicant will remain eligible for appointment to a Town
Board or Commission, or not, shall be at the sole discretion of the Town
Council. Infractions and ordinance violations shall not prohibit an applicant
from seeking appointment to a Town Board or Commission, unless such
infractions or ordinance violations cause the applicant to be considered a
habitual offender under applicable State law.



(Ord. No. 2002-26, 10-15-02)



Sec. 2-124  Town of Dyer Youth Council.



The Town of Dyer Youth Council is hereby established by the Town Council. The
Town Council will appoint a Youth Council Steering Committee, which will
conduct Youth Council organizational meetings. Thereafter, the Youth Council
shall report its activities to the Dyer Town Council on a monthly basis. The
Town Council shall designate one Town Council member to serve as a liaison
and advisor to the town of Dyer Youth Council.



(Ord. No. 2003-25, 11-18-03)



Sec. 2-125 Town of Dyer Enhancement Team.



   (a)   There is hereby created the Town of Dyer Enhancement Team.



   (b)   The Town of Dyer Enhancement Team shall oversee, coordinate
and assist in carrying out community enhancement projects for the benefit of
the residents of the Town of Dyer.



   (c)   The rules and regulations of the Town of Dyer Enhancement Team
which shall govern the operation and functions of said Team are set forth in
Exhibit A to Resolution 2007-09 and incorporated herein by reference.  (Res.
No. 2007-09, 5-16-07)



Sec. 2-126 through Sec. 2-129 Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Dyer Development Commission. 24



                               



24 I.C., § 36-7-12-1, et seq., addresses economic development.



Sec. 2-130  Dyer Development Commission Created. 25



A Department of Development of Dyer is created which shall be under the
control of a Commission to be known as the "Dyer Development Commission."



(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 5-14-74)



                               



25 Editor's Note: The Dyer Development Commission is also known as the
Economic Development Commission.



Sec. 2-131  Commission Membership.



   (a)   The Commissioners of such Department of Development under the
control of such Dyer Development Commission shall be appointed by the
President of the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, as follows:



      One (1) of the members so appointed shall be selected by the
President of the Town Council; one (1) shall be nominated by the County
Council of Lee County, Indiana, and one (1) shall be nominated by the Town
Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana. Such Commissioners shall take office
upon their appointment and their terms shall run the following number of
years from January 1 following such original appointment: The Commissioner
selected by the President of the Town Council - three (3) years; the
Commissioner nominated by the Town Council - two (2) years; and the
Commissioner nominated by the Lake County Council - one (1) year. (Ord. No.
900, § 3, 5-14-74)



   (b)   The President of the Town Council shall appoint two (2)
additional Commissioners whose term shall commence upon the appointment and
shall run for the following number of years from January 1 following such
appointment:



      One for three (3) years and one for one (1) year and that further
appointments shall be on the same terms and conditions as provided for
original appointments following notice by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town as
provided for in this Division.



(Ord. No. 981, 12-29-75)



Sec. 2-132  Commissioners, Disclosure of Interests.



A commissioner shall disclose any pecuniary interest in any employment,
financing agreement or other contract made under the provisions of this
Article or the provisions of Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182, before any
action by the Commission on it, and shall not vote on any such matter. Any
property required for the purposes of this chapter in which a commissioner
has a pecuniary interest may be acquired only by gift or condemnation.



(Ord. No. 900, §VII, 5-14-79)



Sec. 2-133  Commission's Duty to Investigate Need, Reports.



It shall be the duty of the Commission to investigate, study and survey the
need for additional job opportunities, industrial diversification, and
pollution control facilities in the municipality and to recommend action to
improve or promote job opportunities, industrial diversification, and
availability of pollution control facilities in the municipality. The
commissioner shall report in writing to the President of the Town Council of
the Town of Dyer, Indiana and the director of the Indiana Department of
Commerce at least once a year.



(Ord. No. 900, §VIII, 5-14-79)



Sec. 2-134  Powers of Municipality and Commission.



In addition to any other powers which it may have, the Town of Dyer, Indiana
and/or the Dyer Development Commission shall have the following powers:



   (a)   To enter into agreements concerning, and to acquire by any
lawful means, land or interests in land and personal property needed for the
purposes of this Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182.



   (b)   To exercise its power of eminent domain to acquire unimproved
land or unoccupied facilities and the land relating thereto for the purposes
of this Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182.



   (c)   To purchase, lease as lessee, construct, remodel, rebuild,
enlarge, or substantially improve facilities, including machinery and
equipment.



   (d)   To lease facilities to users or developers with or without an
option to purchase.



   (e)   To sell facilities to users or developers for consideration
which may be paid in installments or otherwise.



   (f)   To make direct loans to users or developers for the cost of
construction of facilities, in which event the bonds shall be secured by the
pledge of one (1) or more notes, debentures, bonds or other secured or
unsecured debt obligations of the user.



   (g)   To enter into agreements with users or developers to allow
such users or developers to wholly or partially construct facilities to be
acquired by the of Dyer, Indiana or Dyer Development Commission.



   (h)   To issue bonds pursuant to the provisions of this Article or
Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182 to accomplish the purposes of this Article
or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182 and to secure the payment of the bonds
as provided in this Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182. Nothing in
this Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182 shall authorize the
financing of pollution control facilities which have been financed,
constructed and placed in use by any person, firm, partnership, trust,
association or corporation prior to the adoption of a resolution by the Town
Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, with respect to such facilities.
Nothing in this Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182 shall authorize
the financing of economic development facilities which have been constructed
and placed in use prior to the adoption of a resolution by the Dyer
Development Commission with respect to such facilities. Nothing in this
Article or Indiana Acts 1973, Public Law 182 shall authorize the financing
of  facilities for a developer unless the agreement between the developer
and the user is fully disclosed to, and approved by, the Dyer Development
Commission or the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 900,
§ IX, 5-14-79)



Sec. 2-135  Special Tax, Use of Proceeds, Transfer of Funds.



The Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana may levy a special tax to pay
the costs of operation of its economic development commission, but such funds
shall not be used to pay any of the costs attributable to the acquisition and
leasing or sale of facilities except for advancements to be reimbursed from
bond proceeds. (Ord. No. 900, § X, 5-14-79)



Sec. 2-136 through Sec. 2-139  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



Division I. Americans With Disabilities (ADA)26



                           



26    The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 is located at USC 12101
et seq., Public Law 101-3361.



Sec. 2-140  Town Policy.



The express policy of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, shall be to not
exclude qualified individuals with disabilities from participation in or
benefitting from the services, programs, or activities of the Town. It is the
further policy of the Town of Dyer not to discriminate against a qualified
individual with a disability in the Town's job application procedures, that
is, in the hiring, advancement or discharge of employees, employee
compensation, job training, and all other terms, conditions and privileges of
employment with the Town. (Res. No. 92-5, § 2, 2-10-92).



Sec. 2-141  ADA Coordinator.



   (a)   The Town shall designate by appropriate Resolution the
individual charged with coordinating the activities of the Town of Dyer, to
carry out its responsibilities under the applicable law. (Res. No. 92-5, §
3, 2-10-92) (Res. No. 92-36, 11-10-92)



   (b)   The Town Council Coordinator shall carry out such duties until
further action is taken by the Town Council. (Res. No. 92-36, 11-10-92)



Sec. 2-142 through Sec. 2-144  Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Deferred Compensation.



Sec. 2-145  Deferred Compensation Plan Established.



The Town Council established the Town of Dyer Deferred Compensation Plan for
the voluntary participation of all eligible town employees and elected
officials. (Res. 91-22, § 1, 12-10-91).



Sec. 2-146  Role of Clerk-Treasurer.



The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to execute for the Town, individual
participation agreements with each said employee requesting same, and to act
as the "Administrator" of the Plan representing the Town, and to execute such
agreements and contracts as are necessary to implement the Program. It is
implicitly understood that other than the incidental expenses of collecting
and disbursing in employee's deferrals and other minor administrative
matters, that there is to be no cost to the Town for the Program. (Res. No.
91-22, § 2, 12-10-91).



Sec. 2-147 through Sec. 2-149  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Benefits Under Indiana State Laws.



Sec. 2-150  Workers' Compensation, Occupational Diseases, and Employers'
Liability. 27



   (a)   The Town of Dyer desires to combine with other governmental
entities for the purpose of paying and administering obligations to their
employees and dependents under the Indiana Workers' Compensation Act (Indiana
Code, §§ 22-3-2 through 22-3-7), the Indiana Occupational Diseases Act
(Indiana Code, § 22-3-8) and the Indiana Employers' Liability Act (Indiana
Code 22-3-9).



   (b)   The Town Council Presidents is authorized to execute such
documents as may be necessary.



   (c)   The Fiscal Officer of the Town of Dyer is authorized to pay or
cause to be paid any and all amounts required subject to prior appropriation
by the Town Council. (Res. No. 92-2, 2-10-92)



                           



27   I.C., §§ 36-1-7 and 23-7-1.1, authorize such action.



Sec. 2-151  Public Employees' Retirement Fund (PERF).



   (a)   The Town of Dyer elects to become a participant in the Public
Employees' Retirement Fund as established by the Acts of 1945, Chapter 340
and all Acts amendatory and supplemental thereto.



   (b)   The Town of Dyer agrees to make the required contributions
under the Public Employees' Retirement Fund Act which is the Acts of 1945,
Chapter 340, and all Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto,
including specifically the Acts of 1955, Chapter 329, commonly designated as
"The Indiana Public Employees' Social Security Integration and Supplemental
Retirement Benefits Act."



   (c)   The following positions are covered for regular full-time
employees who are scheduled to work on the average of thirty-two (32) hours
per week or more during the calendar year and for certain other employees
hired prior to January 1, 1996.



   Regular Full-Time Employees



      Clerk-Treasurer



      Chief Deputy Clerk-Treasurer



      Director of Public Works



      Superintendent of Wastewater Treatment Plant



      Computer Programmer



      Staff Engineer



      Zoning Administrator



      Code Enforcement Officer



      Police Radio Dispatchers



      Police Secretary



      Police Clerk



      Deputy Clerk - Clerk-Treasurer's Office



      Clerk (all departments)



      Secretary (all departments)



      Custodian



      Meter Maintenance Man



      Maintenance Man (all classes)



      Foreman



      Shop Mechanic



      Pump Station Mechanic



      Laborer



      Senior Lab Technician - Wastewater Treatment Plant (all classes)



      Lab Technician - Wastewater Treatment Plant (all classes)



      Wastewater Treatment Plant Mechanic (all classes)



      Operations Maintenance Man - Wastewater Treatment Plant (all
classes)



      Operations Coordinator - Wastewater Treatment Plant (all classes)



      Director of Park Maintenance



   Employees Hired Prior to January 1, 1996



      Police Crossing Guards



      ( Note:  Crossing Guards hired on or after January 1, 1996 will
not be covered by



             the Fund)



   (d)   It is declared that none of the classifications or positions
specified in paragraph (c) herein are compensated on a fee basis or on an
emergency nature, or in a part-time category.



   (e)   The active participating membership of the Town of Dyer shall
begin on January 1, 1979.  (Res. No. 78-54, § 1-5, 11-14-78; Res. No.
95-47, 12-21-95)



Sec. 2-152 through Sec. 2-157  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Family and Medical Leave Act Personnel Policy.



Sec. 2-158  Employee Eligibility.



Family/Medical Leave of Absence (FMLA Leave) is available to employees who
have been employed by the Town of dyer for at least one (1) year prior to the
date on which FMLA Leave is to commence, and who have worked at least 1,250
hours during the 12 months immediately preceding the date on which FMLA leave
is to commence. (Res. No. 93-20, § I, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-159  Definitions.



The terms of this Article shall have the following meanings:



   1.   Health Care Provider: a licensed physician, dentist,
optometrist, podiatrist, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist,
respiratory care practitioner, occupational therapist or psychologist.



   2.   New Child FMLA Leave: to care for the employee's son or
daughter after the birth of that son or daughter.



   3.   Family FMLA Leave: to care for the employee's spouse, son,
daughter or parent who has a serious health condition which is defined as an
injury, illness or physical or mental condition that requires inpatient
hospital care or continuing treatment by a health care provider.



   4.   Employee Medical FMLA Leave: to care for the employee's own
condition defined as a serious health condition which renders the employee
unable to perform his or her job.



   5.   Spouse means a husband or wife as defined by Indiana law.



   6.   Parent means a biological parent or an individual who stands or
stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee was a child. This
term does not include parents-in-law.



   7.   Son or Daughter means a biological, adopted, or foster child, a
stepchild, a legal ward, or a child of a person standing in loco parentis,
who is either under age 18, or age 18 or older and incapable of selfcare
because of mental or physical disability. (Res. No. 93-20, § II, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-160  FMLA Leave Availability.



An eligible employee is entitled to FMLA Leave as follows:



   a.   New Child FMLA Leave - for the birth of a child or the
placement with the employee of a child for adoption or foster care:



      1.   FMLA Leave may be taken prior to the actual birth or
placement as circumstances may require.



      2.   An eligible employee's entitlement to FMLA Leave expires
twelve (12) months after the birth or placement.



      3.   In the event that the parents of a son or daughter are
both Town employees, they shall be entitled to a combined total of twelve
(12) weeks New Child FMLA.



   b.   Family FMLA Leave - to care for the employee's seriously-ill
spouse, child, or parent. FMLA Leave is not available to care for unmarried
domestic partners.



   c.   Employee Medical FMLA Leave - due to a serious health condition
that makes the employee unable to perform his or her job functions. (Res. No.
93-20, § III, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-161  Notice and Certification Requirements.



   a.   In cases of foreseeable medical FMLA Leave, employees shall be
required to provide thirty (30) days advance FMLA Leave notice and medical
certification. FMLA Leave shall be denied if these requirements are not met.
A medical certification shall also be required to support an employee's
request to return to work.



   b.   In cases of Family FMLA Leave, the Town shall also require a
certification from a health care provider that the employee is needed to care
for the family member.



   c.   The Town shall also require periodic reports from an employee
on FMLA Leave regarding the employee's status and intent to return to work.
(Res. No. 93-20, § IV, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-162  Implementation of FMLA Leave Benefits.



   a.   An eligible employee is entitled to take up to twelve (12)
weeks of unpaid FMLA Leave per 12-month period, measured backward from the
date FMLA Leave is used.



   b.   An employee who has taken FMLA is entitled to be restored to
the same or an equivalent position upon his/her return to work at the end of
the FMLA Leave period, except in the case of key employees. The Town may deny
restoration of a key employee to that employee's position if necessary to
prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the Town's operations.
The Town will notify employees of their status as key employees if it
believes there is a possibility that the employee will not be restored at the
end of the leave period, upon which notification the employee may return to
work.



   c.   Employees seeking FMLA Leave for any purpose will be first
required to exhaust all available accrued sick leave and vacation leave.



      Thereafter:



      1.   New Child FMLA Leave - the employee shall be eligible for
the balance of the twelve (12) weeks FMLA Leave on an unpaid basis. During
the balance of the twelve (12) weeks, the Town will pay its share and
employee will pay the employee's share of the employee's health insurance
premiums.



      2.   Family FMLA Leave - the employee shall be eligible for
the balance of the twelve (12) weeks FMLA Leave on an unpaid basis. During
the balance of the twelve (12) weeks, the Town will pay its share and
employee will pay the employee's share of the employee's health insurance
premiums.



      3.   Employee Medical FMLA - Upon exhaustion of all the
employee's sick and vacation days, the balance of the twelve (12) weeks FMLA
Leave will be exhausted through the use of short term disability payments
under the Town's Medical Benefits Plan. During the balance of the twelve (12)
weeks, the Town will pay its share and the employee will pay the employee's
share of the employee's health insurance premiums. Upon the exhaustion of the
twelve (12) weeks, the employee may extend health insurance coverage under
COBRA. (Res. No. 93-20, § V, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-163  Employment Protection/Limitations.



   a.   The use of FMLA Leave will not result in the loss of any
employment benefits (except accrued sick and vacation leave, as provided
herein) that accrued prior to the start of the FMLA Leave.



   b.   Sick leave benefits shall not accrue during the FMLA Leave. Any
vacation leave that accrues during FMLA Leave shall, at that time, be taken
as a part of the approved FMLA Leave.



   c.   Employees have no greater right to restoration or continuation
of benefits that if the employee had been continuously employed during the
FMLA Leave period.



   d.   If an employee fails to return to work after the employee's
FMLA Leave entitlement has expired, the Town may recover health insurance
premiums it paid for maintaining the employee's health insurance benefits
during any period of unpaid FMLA Leave.



This policy is subject to and is to be interpreted consistent with 29 CFR
Part 825.



A request for leave of absence for sickness, disability, or for sabbatical
purposes as addressed in Indiana Code § 36-8-6-1, et seq., shall not be
affected by the terms of this policy, and past practices and procedures
governing this state-authorized leave shall continue in full force and
effect. (Res. No. 93-20, § VI, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-164  Effective Date.



This policy shall be effective from and after August 5, 1993: provided,
however, that for any employee governed by a collective bargaining agreement
in effect on August 5, 1993, this policy takes effect upon the earlier
termination of that collective bargaining agreement or February 5, 1994.
(Res. No. 93-20, § VII, 8-10-93)



Sec. 2-165 and Sec. 2-166  Reserved for Future Use.



Division V. Miscellaneous Regulations.



Sec. 2-167  Town Pay Periods.



   (a)   The following method of payment for Town employees, Fire and
Police Department personnel and Town officials is established:



      1.   All employees, personnel and Town officials shall be paid
every two (2) weeks.



      2.   All Town employees, personnel and officials shall be paid
every other Friday for an eighty (80) hour period which shall expire on the
Friday preceding said payday. (Ord. No. 908, 8-13-74)



Sec. 2-168  Mileage Allowance.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer shall pay a mileage fee per mile for the use
of personal vehicles and expenses incurred by Town personnel and elected
officials relative to Town business, provided, however, that approval and
authorization of such trips shall be made in advance by the Town Council and
the Clerk-Treasurer and that no claim for such mileage shall be paid without
prior authorization. (Ord. No. 83-50, 12-13-83)



   (b)   The mileage allowance shall be fixed at a rate set forth by
prevailing Federal standards for such rates of reimbursement and upon
compliance with all regulations set forth by the Indiana State Board of
Accounts.



   (c)   This ordinance shall take effect January 1, 1994. (Ord. No.
93-19, 12-8-93)



Sec. 2-169  Purchasing Regulations.



   (a)   Designation of Agent.  The Town of Dyer, hereinafter
“Purchasing Agency,” through its Town Council, hereby appoints and
designates the Town Clerk-Treasurer as its Purchasing Agent, hereinafter
“Purchasing Agent.”



   (b)   Purchases in Excess of Seventy-Five Thousand Dollars
($75,000.00).  All purchases of supplies, materials, and/or equipment in
excess of Seventy-Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00) must be awarded through
the competitive bid process as prescribed in I.C. 5-22-7, as amended from
time to time.



   (c)   Purchases in excess of Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000.00) but less than Seventy- Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00). 



      1.   When the Purchasing Agent makes a written determination
that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the Town of Dyer, the Purchasing Agent may award a contract
using the procedures provided in I.C. 5-22-9, as amended from time to time,
instead of the competitive sealed bidding procedure set forth I.C. 5-22-7.



      2.   The Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies under this
Section by inviting quotes from at least three (3) person known to deal in
the lines or classes of supplies to be purchased. The Purchasing Agent shall
mail an invitation for a quote from the persons referenced above at least
seven (7) days before the time fixed for receiving quotes. In the event that
the Purchasing Agent receives a satisfactory quote, the Purchasing Agent
shall award a contract to the lowest responsible and responsive offeror for
each line of class of supplies required. However, nothing in this Section
precludes the Purchasing Agent from rejecting all quotes submitted. In the
event that the Purchasing Agent does not receive a quote from a responsible
and responsive offeror, the Purchasing Agent may purchase the supplies under
I.C. 5-22-10-10, as amended from time to time.



   (d)   Purchases less than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000.00).  A Purchasing Agent may purchase supplies under this Section
by inviting quotes from at least two (2) quote persons known to deal in the
lines or classes of supplies to be purchased. The Purchasing Agent shall mail
an invitation for quotes to persons described above at least seven (7) days
before the time fixed for receiving the quotes. In the event the Purchasing
Agent receives a satisfactory quote, the Purchasing Agent shall award a
contract to the lowest and responsible and responsive offeror for each line
or class of supplies required. However, nothing in this Section precludes the
Purchasing Agent from rejecting all quotes. In the event that the Purchasing
Agent does not receive a quote from a responsible and responsive offeror, the
Purchasing Agent may purchase the similar supplies under I.C. 5-22-10-10, as
amended from time to time.



   (e)   Special Purchases.



      1.   The Purchasing Agent may make a Special Purchase, as
prescribed in I.C. 5-22-10, as amended from time to time.



      2.   The Purchasing Agent must keep a record on file in the
Clerk-Treasurer’s Office of all Special Purchases. The contract file for a
special purchases must contain a written determination of the basis for: (1)
the Special Purchase; and (2) the selection of the contractor. The Purchasing
Agency shall maintain a record listing all contracts made under this Section
for a minimum of five (5) years. The record must contain the following
information: (1) each contractor's name; (2) the amount and type of each
contract; and (3) a description of the supplies purchased under each
contract. These contract records for a Special Purchase are subject to annual
audit by the State of Indiana Board of Accounts.



   (f)   Protection of Offers; Status of Documents as Public Records. 
The Clerk-Treasurer's Office shall be the repository for all request(s) for
proposals and bids.



      1.   Protection of Offers Prior to Opening.  The Purchasing
Agent shall retain all offers received prior to the date and time at which
offers will be opened. The Purchasing Agent shall prevent disclosure of the
contents prior to the opening of the offers.



      2.   Unobstructed Evaluation of Offer.  After the offers have
been opened, the Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for maintaining the
offers in such a manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the person
or persons responsible for evaluating the offers.



      3.   Public Records, Status of Bids.  Bids submitted in
response to an invitation for bids must be available for public inspection
and copying after the time of the bid opening.



      4.   Register of Proposals.  The Purchasing Agent shall
prepare a register of proposals for each request for proposals issued which
shall contain information concerning the proposals available for public
inspection and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed. Copying fees may
apply.



   (g)   Discussions With Offerors Responding to a Request for
Proposals (Purchases of $25,000.00 and below only).  The Purchasing Agent
may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers may be obtained from,
responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for a contract award.



   (h)   Evidence of Financial Responsibility.



      1.   Purchases less than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000.00).  The Purchasing Agent may not require evidence of financial
responsibility when the estimated cost of a purchase is less than Twenty-Five
Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00).



      2.   Purchases between Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
($25,000.00) and Seventy-Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00).  The
solicitation may include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of
financial responsibility. The Purchasing Agent and the Town Manager will
determine whether evidence is necessary. In the event that evidence of
financial responsibility is required, the solicitation must indicate the kind
of evidence that will be acceptable. If a bond or certified check is
required, it may not exceed ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of the
purchase.



   (i)   Modification and Termination of Contracts.



      1.   Price Adjustments.  The Purchasing Agent may include
provisions to permit price adjustments in a purchase contract. Inclusions of
said provisions must conform to the rules set forth in I.C. 5-22-20-1, as
amended from time to time. Adjustments in price under provisions established
by I.C. 5-22-20-1, must be computed in one (1) of the following ways:



         a.    Price adjustment must be computed by agreement on
a fixed price adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance,
or as soon after the beginning of performance as practicable;



         b.   Price adjustments must be computed by unit prices
specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



         c.   Price adjustments must be computed by costs
attributable to the events or situations under such classes with adjustment
of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed
upon;



         d.   Price adjustments must be computed in such a manner
as the contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or



         e.   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price
adjustments must be computed by a unilateral determination by the
governmental body of the costs attributed to the events or situation under
such clauses with adjustments for profit or fee, all as computed by the
governmental body in accordance with applicable rules adopted by the
governmental body.



      2.   Adjustments in Time of Performance.  The Purchasing
Agent may include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments
for time of performance under the Contract.



      3.   Unilateral Rights of the Town.  The Purchasing Agent may
include in the purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral right
of the Town to order changes in the work within the scope of the contract or
to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.



      4.   Quantity Variations.  The Purchasing Agent may include
in a purchase contract provisions dealing with variations between the
estimated quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.



   (j)   All remaining provisions of applicable law for public
purchasing under current law, as the same may be amended from time to time,
shall be followed and utilized by the Town of Dyer for Public Purchasing of
Supplies, Materials and Equipment.



(Ord. No. 2001-11, §§ 2 - 11, 5-15-01)



Sec. 2-170  Establishing Reverse Auction Procedures.



   (a)   Use of Third Party to Conduct Reverse Auctions.



      1.   The purchasing agent is hereby authorized to use a third
party to conduct reverse auctions on behalf of the Town for the purchase of
supplies.  The third party that will conduct the reverse auction must have
prior experience in conducting reverse auctions on behalf of local
governments.



      2.   The purchasing agent shall obtain a copy of the
procedures established by the third party to conduct the reverse auction on
behalf of the Town and present those procedures to the Town Council for
adoption and inclusion in its applicable procedures prior to participating in
any reverse auction conducted by the third party.



   (b)   Transmission of Notices, Solicitations and Specifications.



      1.   Notices.  The purchasing agent shall give notice of a
reverse auction by:



         a.   Publishing notice of the invitation to bid two (2)
times, at least one (1) week apart, with the second publication at least
seven (7) days before the commencement of the reverse auction in accordance
with I.C. 5-22-7-5, I.C. 5-22-18, et. seq., and I.C. 5-3-1, et. seq., all as
amended from time to time;



         b.   Posting the invitation on the Town's website; and



         c.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agent, by posting, or permitting to have posted,
the invitation on the third party's website.



(Note: Posting an invitation to bid on any website requires compliance with
I.C. 522-3-4, as amended from time to time.)



(Note: The purchasing agent may also give notice of a reverse auction by
electronic mail and/or facsimile transmissions.)



      2.   Solicitations and Specifications.  The purchasing agent
shall transmit solicitations and specifications:



         a.   In accordance with the invitation to bid,
identifying a designated location where, during regular business hours, the
invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained;



         b.   Making them available on the Town's website or
providing information on the website identifying a designated location where,
during regular business hours, the invitation to bid may be inspected and
copied or copies may be obtained;



         c.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agency, by making them available on the third
party's website.



(Note: Posting an invitation to bid on a website requires compliance with
I.C. 5-223-4, as amended from time to time.)



   (c)   Pre-Qualification of Bidders.



      1.   All bidders desiring to participate in a reverse auction
must be prequalified by submitting materials to ensure that they meet the
specifications identified by the buyer as to the types of supplies to be
offered for purchase no later than twenty-four (24) hours before the time of
the commencement of the reverse auction, as provided in the invitation to bid.



      2.   The pre-qualification process shall be used to determine
whether the bidder is responsible and responsive, as provided in I.C.
5-22-7.5, et. seq., as amended from time to time, whether any bidding or
purchasing preferences exist, and whether the bidder has submitted evidence
of financial responsibility, as required by the purchasing agent.  In order
to assist the purchasing agent in pre-qualifying bidders, the bidder must
submit, in accordance with the invitation to bid, all documentation and other
information relating to the supplies being offered for purchase, except for
price, and any other information that may assist the purchasing agent in
making its determination.  Such documentation shall include evidence of
financial responsibility or a certified check, as specified in the bid.



      3.   In determining whether a bidder is responsible, the
purchasing agent may consider the following factors:



         a.   The ability and capacity of the bidder to provide
the supplies;



         b.   The integrity, character and reputation of the
bidder; and



         c.   The competency and experience of the bidder.



      4.   In determining whether a bidder is responsive, the
purchasing agent may consider the following factors:



         a.   Whether the bidder has submitted information
demonstrating that his/her/its offer for supplies conforms to the
specifications in all material respects;



         b.   Whether the bidder has submitted documentation that
complies specifically with the solicitation and instructions to bidders; and



         c.   Whether the bidder has complied with all applicable
statutes, ordinances, resolutions and/or rules pertaining to the award of a
public contract.



      5.   The determination that a bidder is not responsive or not
responsible must be made in writing.



      6.   Pre-qualification of bidders must be done by the
purchasing agent or an authorized representative of the purchasing agent in
the presence of one (1) or more witnesses and must be completed no later than
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the reverse auction
bidding period.



      7.   The purchasing agent shall notify any bidder determined
to be not pre-qualified in writing, by facsimile or electronic mail (as
requested by the bidder) and shall exclude the bidder so notified from
participation in the reverse auction.



      8.   The purchasing agent's determination that a bidder is not
prequalified is limited to the reverse auction for which the request for
prequalification was received.



   (d)   Contents of Invitation to Bid.  The invitation to bid must
include all of the following:



      1.   A purchase description;



      2.   A statement that the bids will be accepted by means of a
reverse auction process;



      3.   A description of all contractual terms and conditions
that apply to the purchase, including the requirement of a noncollusion
affirmation by the successful bidder;



      4.   The criteria that will be used by the purchasing agent to
prequalify bidder to determine whether a bidder is responsive and responsible;



      5.   The information and other documentation required to be
submitted for pre-qualification, including a certified check or other
evidence of financial responsibility;



      6.   The location and manner in which bidders must submit
information for pre-qualification, the deadline for submission of such
information, and the deadline by which the Board will determine whether is
pre-qualified;



      7.   The location, including any websites, at which the
invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or copies obtained, including,
if a third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the Town, the
procedures to be used by the third party to conduct the reverse auction;



      8.   A statement as to whether a third party is conducting the
reverse auction on behalf of the Town;



      9.   A statement indicating that offers submitted by
pre-qualified bidders will only be received through the Town's secure website
or, if a third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the Town,
through the third party's secure website;



      10.   The date and time at which the reverse auction bidding
period will begin and the approximate length of time for which the reverse
auction will be conducted, allowing for automatic extensions based upon
resulting competitive activity;



      11.   The deadline by which pre-qualified bidders must submit
an initial price to a secure website for the purposes of establishing a
bidder's participation and initial ranking at the commencement of the reverse
auction bidding period;



      12.   A statement explaining that the bidding period during
which the reverse auction is conducted may be extended based upon competitive
activity, at pre-determined periods determined by the purchasing agency;



      13.   A statement identifying the circumstances under which
the reverse auction may be postponed, paused, rescheduled or cancelled;



      14.   The place and approximate time at which, following the
close of the bidding period, offers will be reviewed publicly by an
authorized representative of the purchasing agent in the presence of one (1)
or more witnesses;



      15.   A statement that the third party conducting the reverse
auction on behalf of the Town will collect a service charge from the
successful bidder for its participation in the reverse auction;



      16.   The name, address and telephone number of a
representative of the purchasing agent who can provide additional information
related to the reverse auction;



      17.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on
behalf of the Town, the name, address and telephone number of a
representative of the third party who can provide additional information
related to the reverse auction, including the mandatory training required of
all prequalified bidders as a condition of participating in the reverse
auction; and



      18.   The conditions under which the invitation to bid may be
cancelled or postponed in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-1, as amended from
time to time.



   (e)   Receiving Offers.



      1.   The purchasing agent shall receive offers only from
bidders who have been pre-qualified, in accordance with the invitation to bid.



      2.   If a third party conducts the reverse auction on behalf
of the Town, all pre-qualified bidders must receive training provided by the
third party in order to participate in the reverse auction.



      3.   Prior to receiving electronic offers, the purchasing
agent must find that:



         a.   The invitation for bid for the reverse auction
indicates the procedure for transmitting the electronic offer; and



         b.   The electronic system on which the offer is
received has a security feature that protects the content of an electronic
offer with the same degree of protection as the content of an offer that is
not transmitted by electronic means.



      4.   In accordance with the invitation to bid, offers
submitted by pre-qualified bidders will only be received:



         a.   Through the Town's secure website; or



         b.   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the Town, through the third party's secure website.



   (f)   Reverse Auction Bidding Period.



      1.   For each reverse auction, the purchasing agent must
establish an initial bidding period during which bidders may submit prices
for which the supplies being offered may be purchased.  The initial bidding
period shall not be less than one (1) hour.  The purchasing agent may
automatically extend the reverse auction bidding period for additional
pre-determined periods based upon competitive activity.



      2.   During the bidding period for the reverse auction,
information available for public display is limited to the ranking, price and
name of bidders of each price bid relative to all other prices bid.



      3.   The dollar amounts of the prices bid by bidders shall not
be disclosed to the bidders until the close of the bidding period.



      4.   All information received, obtained or retained during a
reverse auction remains confidential and may not be disclosed until after the
close of the reverse auction bidding period.



   (g)   Opening Offers.



      1.   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-5, as amended from time to
time, offers will be deemed to be opened when a computer generated record of
the information contained in all bids received from pre-qualified responsive
and responsible bidders is reviewed publicly at the close of the bidding
period for the reverse auction in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses
at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids by the purchasing
agent (or his/her authorized representative).



      2.   The purchasing agent, and any of his/her agents or
employees, are prohibited from displaying for public viewing the amount of
each initial bid price until the close of the initial bidding period for the
reverse auction.  The purchasing agent is required to protect the identity
of a bidder and the prices which have been submitted by each bidder until the
initial bid has been placed until the reverse auction begins, at which time
bids will be deemed opened.



   (h)   Contract Award.



      1.   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-8, as amended from time to
time, the purchasing agent must award a contract for the purchase of supplies
with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder.



      2.   If the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, the
purchasing agent must indicate the reasons for the award in writing.



   (i)   Purchase Orders and Payments.



      1.   A fully executed purchase order must be filed with the
Town Clerk Treasurer within thirty (30) days after the award of the contract
for a purchase of supplies through a reverse auction in accordance with I.C.
5-22-18-5, as amended from time to time.



      2.   Payments for supplies purchased in a reverse auction
shall be made only after receiving properly submitted claims in accordance
with I.C. 5-11-10, et seq. and I.C. 36-5-4, et seq., both as amended from
time to time.



   (j)   Documentation.  The purchasing agent shall be required to
maintain adequate documentation regarding its reverse auctions so that the
transactions may be audited as provided by applicable law.  The purchasing
agent shall maintain an indexed file of specifications prepared by or under
the authority of the purchasing agent for each reverse auction in which the
Town participates.



(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1, 11-16-04)



Sec. 2-171  Credit Cards.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, by and through the
Office of the Town Manager, is hereby authorized to obtain and issue credit
cards for the payment of expenses and/or purchases on behalf of the Town of
Dyer, Indiana.



   (b)   The authorized individuals who may use the Town issued credit
cards are members of the Town Council, the Clerk-Treasurer, the Town Manager,
all administrative heads of departments, and such other individuals as
authorized by the Town Manager.



   (c)   The use of said credit cards is subject to the following
guidelines:



      1.   The issuance and monitoring of the use of said credit
cards is hereby delegated to the Town Manager, or his duly authorized agent;



      2.   When the purpose for which the credit card has been
accomplished and/or the card is no longer necessary to be used, said card
shall be returned to the Office of the Town Manager;



      3.   No interest, carrying charges, or penalties shall be
incurred by, or imposed upon, the Town of Dyer due to late payments;



      4.   Any and all invoices filed in connection with the use of
credit cards shall be itemized before being approved and paid. (Ord. No.
2009-06, 6-  -09)



Division VI. Code of Standards of Conduct-Federal Funding.



Sec. 2-172  Conduct Code Adopted.



The following is a written code of conduct which shall govern the performance
of employees, officers or agents of the Town of Dyer engaged in the award and
administration of contracts supported by Federal funds. (Res. No. 85-7, § 1,
8-13-85)



Sec. 2-173  Standards of Conduct.



The standards of conduct for said employees, officers or agents are as
follows:



   (a)   No employee, officer or agent of the Town shall participate in
selection, or in the award or administration of a contract supported by
Federal funds if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved.



   (b)   Such a conflict would arise when:



      (i)   The employee, officer or agent;



      (ii)   Any member of his or her immediate family;



      (iii) His or her partner; or



      (iv)   An organization which employs, or is about to employ,
any of the above, has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for
award.



   (c)   The employees, officers or agents shall neither solicit nor
accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors,
potential contractors, or parties to subagreements. (Res. No. 85-7, § 2,
8-13-85)



Sec. 2-174  Conflicts.



It is established that where the interest of an employee, officer or agent is
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, such interest shall be considered not
substantial; and where a gift is an unsolicited item of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) or less, it shall be considered of nominal intrinsic value; and in
each instance no conflict shall arise.



(Res. No. 85-7, § 3, 8-13-85)



Sec. 2-175  Violations.



   (a)   In the event that an employee, officer or agent of the Town
violates this written Code of conduct, such person shall receive notice of
the alleged violation, an opportunity for hearing if requested, and upon a
finding of violation shall receive disciplinary action of either recordation,
suspension or dismissal.



   (b)   In the event that a contractor, or its agents, or any person
acting on their behalf, shall offer or give a gratuity, favor or anything of
monetary value to an employee, officer or agent of the Town of Dyer, the
Council shall provide a notice of the alleged violation, an opportunity for
hearing if requested, and upon the finding of violation the Council shall
have the right to terminate said contract and shall be free from any
obligation to pay any sums of money whatsoever thereunder. (Res. No. 85-7, §
4, 8-13-85)



Sec. 2-176 and Sec. 2-177  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Personnel Policies.



Sec. 2-178  Personnel Policies Included by Reference.



The 1994 Personnel Policy Manual for the Town of Dyer, Indiana, which became
effective January 1, 1994, and the Town of Dyer Employee Handbook, are
incorporated herein by reference with copies of the same being available for
public inspection in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer during regular
business hours.



(Res. No. 94-1, 4-12-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-06, 5-16-00; Am. Ord. No. 2001-21,
9-18-01)



Sec. 2-179  Extraordinary Situations.



   (a)   In extraordinary situations in which the application of the
terms and conditions of the Personnel Policy Manual will work a hardship upon
an employee, the Clerk-Treasurer, in the case of employees of the Clerk-
Treasurer's office; or the Dyer Town Council, by unanimous consent for all
other Town employees, may allow a  variance  from  any  measure  covered
in the Dyer Personnel Policy Manual other than those required by the laws of
the United States of America or the State of Indiana.



   (b)   The variance must be requested by the employee with specific
details outlining the request and the reasons therefor.  The Clerk-Treasurer
or the Town Council must consider the request and respond to the request in
thirty (30) days or less.



   (c)   The response of the Town Council or the Clerk-Treasurer will
then be reduced to writing with a copy given to the employee and a copy
placed in the Master Personnel File in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.



   (d)   No appeal shall be allowed for this decision.



(Res. No. 95-57, 12-12-95)



ARTICLE 6. FUNDS ESTABLISHED.



Sec. 2-180  Special Non-Reverting Park Activities Operating Fund.



   (a)   The special non-reverting park activities operating fund shall
receive monies from people in anticipated payment for Park Department
sponsored activities.



   (b)   The monies in this account shall in fact be spent on the
activities for which the monies are received by this fund.



   (c)   In the event this fund runs a surplus balance after the above
referred to activity payments, said surplus balance can be then spent for
Park Department office supplies.



(Ord. No. 91-34, § 1 § 3, 12-10-91)



Sec. 2-181  Public Safety Income Tax Fund.



There is hereby created the Town of Dyer Public Safety Income Tax Fund
pursuant to I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-25 to provide money for all purposes and uses
authorized by said statute.



(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1, 12-12-13)



Sec. 2-182  Employee Comprehensive Medical Insurance Fund.



The proceeds of the insurance refund received from and after January 1, 1995,
shall be deposited into the “Employee Comprehensive Medical Insurance
Fund” and shall only be spent to provide for life, disability and medical
insurance benefits to Town employees.



(Res. No. 92-15, 4-14-92; Res. No. 95-56, 12-12-95)



Sec. 2-183  Building and/or Remodeling Fire Fighting and Police Radio
Equipment Fund. 28



   (a)   It is necessary to establish a cumulative building and
equipment fund for the erection of fire stations and/or the erection of
additions to and the remodeling of the present buildings used to



house fire fighting equipment and for the purchase of fire fighting equipment
and police radio equipment.



(Ord. No. 816, § 1, 2-8-72)



   (b)   There is established a cumulative building and equipment fund
for the erection of fire stations and/or the erection of additions to and the
remodeling of the present buildings used to house fire fighting equipment,
and for the purchase of fire fighting equipment and police radio equipment
for the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 816, § 2, 2-8-72).



   (c)   In order to provide for said cumulative building and equipment
fund, the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, there shall
be a levy annually after the approval of such fund, of a tax on all taxable
property in the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, of not more than ten
cents ($0.10) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed valuation of
property in the taxing district of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 816, § 3, 2-8-72)



   (d)   The revenue derived from such taxation shall be held in a
special fund to be known as the “Building and/or Remodeling Fire Fighting
and Police Radio Equipment Fund.” (Ord. No. 816, § 4, 2-8-72)



                           



28   Editor's Note:  Ord. No. 91-22, passed on August 26, 1991,
establishes the maximum levy for this fund in 1992.



Sec. 2-184  Cumulative Capital Development Fund. 29



   (a)   There is re-established a Dyer Cumulative Capital Development
Fund. (Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 3-9-93)



   (b)   An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed and the
revenues from the levy will be retained the Dyer Cumulative Capital
Development Fund. (Ord. No. 93-4, § 2, 3-9-93)



   (c)   The maximum rate of levy under paragraph (b) will not exceed:
$(0.12 per one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation. (Ord. No. 93-4,
§ 3, 3-9-93)



   (d)   The Dyer Cumulative Capital Development Fund is reestablished
for the years 1994, 1995 and 1996. (Ord. No. 93-4, § 4, 3-9-93)



   (e)   The funds accumulated in the Dyer Cumulative Capital
Development Fund will be used for Capital Improvements as described in
Indiana Code § 36-9-16-3. (Ord. No. 93-4, § 5, 3-9- 93)



   (f)   Notwithstanding paragraph (d), funds accumulated the Dyer
Cumulative Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than the purposes
stated in paragraph (d), if the purpose is to protect the public health,
welfare or safety in an emergency situation which demands immediate action.
Money may be spent under the authority of this Section only after the Town
Council President issues a declaration that the public health, welfare or
safety is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of money in the
fund. (Ord. No. 93-4, § 6, 3-9-93)



                           



29   I.C., §§ 36-9-16-1 through 36-9-16-6, address Cumulative Capital
Improvement Funds.



Sec. 2-185  Subdivision Professional Distribution.



All monies collected under the provisions of Section 10-119 of the Dyer Town
Code and classified as “Subdivision Inspection Fees” shall be distributed
as follows: One-half (½) to be deposited into the Subdivision Professional
Fees Fund, and the remaining one-half (½) to be deposited into the Motor
Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH).  (Ord.  No.  94-3,  3-8-94; Am. Ord.  No. 
2000-40,  § 1,  12-19-00)



Sec. 2-186  Debt Service Fund.



   (a)   There is established a Debt Service Fund for the Town of Dyer,
Indiana. (Ord. No. 86-29, § 1, 8-12-86)



   (b)   The Town Council may include in the annual budget of the Town
of Dyer an item and an appropriation for funding this Debt Service Fund.
However, nothing contained in this Section shall be construed as an
obligation on the part of the Town Council to make an appropriation for said
Fund. (Ord. No. 86-29, § 2, 8-12-86)



   (c)   The funds accumulated in the Debt Service Fund established
shall be used for purposes of acquiring land and constructing a new Town Hall
and Police Department including the purchase of land and site improvement
and/or the leasing of appropriate facilities for use as a Town Hall and
Police Department, or a combination thereof. (Ord. No. 86-29, § 3, 8-12-86).



   (d)   Funds placed in the Debt Service Fund established may not be
withdrawn except for the purposes set forth herein, so long as this ordinance
remains in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 86-29, § 4, 8-12-86).



Sec. 2-187  Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund. 30



   (a)   There is established a fund known as the “Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund” for the purpose of purchases made by the Dyer,
Indiana Police Department for equipment, supplies, continuing education, and
law enforcement training for the Police Department.



   (b)   This fund shall be comprised of fees collected by the Dyer
Police Department from the following activities:



      1.   Vehicle Inspections.



      2.   Accident Reports.



      3.   Hand gun licenses and transfers.



      4.   Proceeds from the sale of confiscated weapons.



      5.   Fingerprinting fee.  (Am. Ord. No. 96-29, 12-10-96)



      6.   Alarm monitoring system services.  (Am. Ord. No. 99-25,
12-28-99)



   (c)   Before any money from this fund is spent, same must be first
appropriated according to State Statute. (Ord. No. 93-22, 12-8-93)



   (d)   The funds accumulated in the Local Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund established shall be used for the purpose of continuing
education and training of law enforcement officers employed by the Town of
Dyer. All expenditures must comply with the terms and provisions of the
Statute by the authority of which the Fund is created, and must be approved
by the Chief of Police. (Ord. No. 87-15, § 3, 6-9-87).



   (e)   The funds placed in the Local Law Enforcement Continuing
Education Fund may not be withdrawn except for the purposed set forth herein,
so long as this ordinance remains in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 87-15,
§ 4, 6-9-87).



                           



30   I.C., §§ 9-29-4-2, 9-29-11-1, 35-47-2-3, 33-19-8-4 and 33-6-3-4,
address deposits into a Continuing Education Fund effective July 1, 1993.



Sec. 2-188  Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund.



All revenues collected pursuant to Ord. No. 80-68 set forth in Sections 9-201
through 9-204 of this Code shall be deemed to be the revenues of the Solid
Waste Disposal Facilities, and shall be maintained in a separate fund to be
known as the “Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund”. (Ord. No. 80-68, §
2, 12-9-81)



Sec. 2-189  Metropolitan Police Pension Fund.



   (a)   The Constitution and Bylaws of the Metropolitan Police Pension
Fund are approved.



   (b)   Copies of said documents are on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and open for public inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. No. 78-28, 7-11-78).



Sec. 2-190  Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH).



   (a)   Funds from the Street Fund are transferred to the credit of
the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund. (Res. No. 683, 12-28-67).



   (b)   This fund shall receive state funds and be used for
expenditures authorized by Indiana Code, § 8-14-1-1, et seq.



Sec. 2-191  Local Road and Street Fund (LRS).



The Local Road and Street Fund (LRS) is established for the purpose of
receiving applicable State funds and for expenditures permitted by statute.
(I.C., § 8-14-2-1, et seq.)



Sec. 2-192  Police Department Incident Report Account.



   (a)   There are established fees which may be collected by the Dyer
Metropolitan Police Department for certain reports, photographs, and video
tapes, and such fees shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Five dollars ($5.00) for the first page of an Incident
Report and three dollars ($3.00) for each page thereafter.



      (2)   Three dollars ($3.00) for each photograph or copy
thereof furnished by the Police Department.



      (3)   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a video tape or copy thereof
furnished by the Police Department.



   (b)   Fees collected pursuant to this Section shall be deposited in
the Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.



(Am. Ord. No. 96-29, 12-10-96)



Sec. 2-193  In Re Forfeiture Fund.



This fund is created pursuant to the ordinance established procedures for the
disposition of seized property and cash from civil forfeiture activities
which are set forth in Sections 3-42 through Sec. 3-45 of this Code. (Ord.
No. 91-26, § 4, 10-8-91).



Sec. 2-194  Racketeering Forfeiture Fund.



This fund is created pursuant to the ordinance established procedures for the
disposition of seized property and cash from civil forfeiture activities
which are set forth in Sections 3-42 through Sec. 3-45 of this Code. (Ord.
No. 91-26, § 4, 10-8-91).



Sec. 2-195  Federal Equitable Sharing Program Fund.



This fund is created pursuant to the ordinance established procedures for the
disposition of seized property and cash from civil forfeiture activities
which are set forth in Sections 3-42 through Section 3-45 of this Code. (Ord.
No. 91-26, § 4, 10-8-91).



Sec. 2-196  Cumulative Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund.



   (a)   The Town Council did by Ordinance No. 816 provide a Cumulative
Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund for purchase of firefighting equipment
and police radio equipment pursuant to Indiana Code, § 6-1.1-18-4.



   (b)   Ordinance No. 816 did establish a ten cents ($.10) tax rate on
each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed valuation beginning in year
1972, payable in year 1973 and continuing indefinitely thereafter.



   (c)   A provision of Ordinance No. 816 sets the maximum levy for the
Cumulative Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund to increase as the assessed
valuation of the Town increases.



   (d)   The Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana,
sets the maximum levy for the Cumulative Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund
to be fixed in an amount of approximately twenty thousand ($20,000) dollars
for the 1996 budget year. (Ord. No. 93-13, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 95-29, 11-14-95)



Sec. 2-197  Miscellaneous Funds Continued.



The following funds are continued in effect. Each shall be funded and
operated in accordance with all statutory requirements:



   Abandoned Vehicle Fund



   1989 Calumet Avenue Engineering Fund



   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (Cigarette Taxes I.C., § 36-9-16-1)



   Economic Development Revitalization Fund



   General Fund



   Impact Fees Fund



   Innkeeper's Tax Fund



   Law Enforcement Grant Fund



   Law Enforcement Training Fund



   Parks and Recreation Fund



   Parks Non-Reverting Capital Fund



   Sheffield Avenue Road Escrow Fund



   Solid Waste Refuse Disposal Fund



   State Recycling Grant Fund



   Waterworks Construction Fund



   Waterworks Debt Service Reserve Fund



   Waterworks Improvement Fund



Sec. 2-198  Park and Recreation Department Funds.



   The following funds are created and shall be under the control of the
Dyer Park and Recreation Department:



      (1)   Bike Path Fund (non-reverting capital fund).



      (2)   Dyer Community Network Fund (general non-reverting
operating fund).



      (3)   Tri-Town Players Fund (non-reverting operating fund).



(Ord. No. 96-15, 8-13-96)



      (4)   Park Escrow Fund (general non-reverting operating fund).



(Ord. No. 96-18, 9-10-96)



Sec. 2-199  Casino Gaming Revenue Fund.



   (A)   There is established a Casino Gaming Revenue Fund for the town.



   (B)   All casino gaming revenues received by the town shall be
deposited into the Casino Gaming Revenue Fund.



   (C)   The Casino Gaming Revenue Fund shall be perpetual until
terminated by subsequent ordinance. Upon termination of the Casino Gaming
Revenue Fund, all balance left therein shall be deposited into the General
Fund of the town.



   (D)   The monies deposited into the Casino Gaming Revenue Fund shall
be spent only upon roads, streets, and infrastructure improvements located
within the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 97-18, passed 7-8-97)



Sec. 2-200  Alphabetical Listing of Funds.



   DYER TOWN FUNDS



NAME   CODE SECTION



Amtrak Fund   Sec. 2-206



Building and/or Remodeling Fund   Sec. 2-183



Cumulative Capital Development Fund   Sec. 2-184



Casino Gaming Revenue Fund   Sec. 2-199



Cumulative Fire and Police Radio Equipment Fund   Sec. 2-196



Debt Service Fund     Sec. 2-186



Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase II Project Construction Fund   Sec. 2-205



Dyer Recycling Fund         Sec. 2-181



Economic Development Fund   Sec. 2-209



Employee Comprehensive Medical Insurance Fund   Sec. 2-182



Federal Equitable Sharing Program Fund   Sec. 2-195



Health & Employee Benefit Insurance Non-Reverting Fund   Sec. 2-209.4



In Re Forfeiture Fund   Sec. 2-193



Law Enforcement Aid and Confidential Petty Cash Fund   Sec. 2-201



Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund   Sec. 2-187



Leaking Underground Storage Tank Soil Remediation Fund   Sec. 2-204



Local Option Income Tax Special Distribution Fund   Sec. 2-209.2



Local Road and Street Fund (LRS)   Sec. 2-191



Main Street TIF Fund   Sec. 2-209.3



Metropolitan Police Pension Fund   Sec. 2-189



Miscellaneous Funds   Sec. 2-197



   Abandoned Vehicle Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund



      (Cigarette Taxes I.C. 36-9-16-1)   Sec. 2-197



   Economic Development Revitalization Fund   Sec. 2-197



   General Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Impact Fees Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Innkeeper's Tax Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Law Enforcement Grant Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Law Enforcement Training Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Parks and Recreation Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Parks Non-Reverting Capital Fund   Sec. 2-107



   Sheffield Avenue Road Escrow Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Solid Waste Refuse Disposal Fund   Sec. 2-197



   State Recycling Grant Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Waterworks Construction Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Waterworks Debt Service Reserve Fund   Sec. 2-197



   Waterworks Improvement Fund   Sec. 2-197



Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH)   Sec. 2-190



Multi-Peril Insurance Fund   Sec. 2-209.5



Municipal Surtax Fund   Sec. 2-250



Municipal Wheel Tax Fund   Sec. 2-250



Parks and Recreation Department Funds   Sec. 2-198



      Bike Path Fund   Sec. 2-198



      Dyer Community Network Fund   Sec. 2-198



      Park Escrow Fund   Sec. 2-198



      Tri-Town Players Fund   Sec. 2-198



Partnership for a Drug Free Lake County Fund   Sec. 2-203



Police Department Incident Report Account   Sec. 2-192



Police Department Special Revenue Fund   Sec. 2-207



Racketeering Forfeiture Fund   Sec. 2-194



Rainy Day Fund   Sec. 2-209.1



Rental Housing Inspection Fund   Sec. 2-208



Special Non-Park Activities Operating Fund   Sec. 2-180



Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund   Sec. 2-188



Subdivision Professional Fees Fund   Sec. 2-185



Town Hall Building and Maintenance Capital Improvement Non-Reverting
Fund   Sec. 2-202



Sec. 2-201   Law Enforcement Aid and Confidential Petty Cash Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established a law enforcement aid program for
the Town of Dyer Metropolitan Police Department.



   (b)   There is further hereby established a Law Enforcement
Aid/Confidential Petty Cash Fund, which shall be known as the Confidential
Petty Cash Fund, pursuant to the procedures set forth in I.C. 36-1-8-3, as
amended from time to time. The Confidential Petty Cash Fund shall be
established with a balance of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), which balance
shall be maintained during the time of the existence of said Fund. Further,
the expenditure for the establishment of the Confidential Petty Cash shall be
through a line item transfer from the General Fund in the Town Police
Department budget in conformance and compliance with applicable procedures
set forth by the State of Indiana Board of Accounts.



(Ord. No. 99-16, 7-13-99)



Sec. 2-202   Special Town Hall Building Maintenance and Capital
Improvement Non-Reverting Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established for the Town of Dyer, Indiana, a
Special Dyer Town Hall Building Maintenance and Capital Improvement
Non-Reverting Fund for purposes of establishing a maintenance and capital
improvement funding source for said Dyer Town Hall and related structures at
One Town Square, Dyer, Indiana, and all other public buildings, facilities,
and real estate owned by the Town of Dyer pursuant to the provisions of
Indiana Code 36-1-3-1, et seq., as amended from time to time.



   (b)   The established Special Dyer Town Hall Building Maintenance
and Capital Improvement Non-Reverting Fund shall be funded from casino gaming
funds paid to the town, and from such other funds authorized by law, as
directed by the Town Council, upon receipt of same. It is not the intention
of this enabling ordinance, nor the requirement that all casino gaming funds,
or such other funds as authorized by law, be deposited into said Special Dyer
Town Hall Building Maintenance and Capital Improvement Non-Reverting Fund
established hereby, but only funds as are directed by the Town Council upon
receipt thereof.



   (c)   The funds deposited into the Special Dyer Town Hall Building
Maintenance and Capital Improvement Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Town Council. Funds collected and
deposited into the Special Non-Reverting Fund established hereby shall be
utilized solely for maintenance and/or capital improvements to the Dyer Town
Hall and all related structures and improvements on the real property upon
which the Dyer Town Hall is located at One Town Square, Dyer, Indiana, and
all other public buildings, facilities, and real estate owned by the Town of
Dyer, after review and approval by the Town Council. Said funds are to be
used as indicated, and as authorized and approved by the Town Council.



   (d)   The established Special Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall continue as a Non-Reverting Fund until repealed by subsequent ordinance
of the town. The fund balance in the Special Dyer Town Hall Building
Maintenance and Capital Improvement Non-Reverting Fund established hereby
shall be non-reverting at each calendar-year end. In the event that the
Special Non-Reverting Fund is terminated by repeal or amendatory ordinance,
the funds contained therein at the time of termination of the Non-Reverting
Fund by repeal or ordinance shall be deposited into the General Fund of the
Town.



(Ord. No. 2000-02, 2-15-00; Am. Ord. No. 2016-20, 9-8-16)



Sec. 2-203   Partnership for a Drug Free Lake County Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the Town of Dyer Partnership for a
Drug Free Lake County Fund.



   (b)   All revenues received by the Town from the Fund shall be spent
only as authorized by the approved guidelines of the Fund.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Fund shall be spent only as
authorized by the approved guidelines of the Partnership for a Drug Free Lake
County Program.



(Ord. No. 2001-24, 10-16-01)



Sec. 2-204   Leaking Underground Storage Tank Soil Remediation Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the Town of Dyer Leaking
Underground Storage Tank Soil Remediation Fund.



   (b)   All revenues received by the Town of Dyer from IDEM for the
soil remediation program pertaining to the property located on Edmund Drive
in the town shall be deposited in the Fund.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Fund shall be spent on costs
related to the restoration and remediation of the site.



(Ord. No. 2001-25, 10-16-01)



Sec. 2-205  Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase II Project Construction Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the “Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase
II Project Construction Fund.”



   (b)   Any monies contributed by the Dyer Town Council, the Town of
Dyer Department of Water Works, the Town of Dyer Department of Storm Water
Management and/or the Town of Dyer Sanitary Board of Directors for payment of
costs incurred in connection with the Berens-Monaldi Phase II Construction
Project shall be deposited into the “Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase II Project
Construction Fund,” as well as any and all other monies that are
specifically identified to be used in connection with said Berens-Monaldo
Phase II Construction Project and its purposes.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the “Dyer Berens-Monaldi Phase II
Project Construction Fund” shall be spent only on costs incurred in
connection with the Berens-Monaldi Phase II Construction Project, as approved
and authorized by the Town Council.



(Ord. No. 2004-10, 4-13-04)



Sec. 2-206 Amtrak Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the Town of Dyer Amtrak Fund which
shall be a Special Revenue Fund under the rules, regulations, and
requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as
amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   Any monies received from the Amtrak Railway shall be deposited
into the Town of Dyer Amtrak Fund.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Town of Dyer Amtrak Fund shall
be utilized and expended only for the purpose of maintenance of the Amtrak
Station.



(Ord. No. 2009-03, 3-18-09)



Sec. 2-207  Police Department Special Revenue Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the Town of Dyer Police Department
Special Revenue Fund which shall be a special revenue fund under the rules,
regulations, and requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the
Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as well as the administrative
rules and requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   Any monies received from the Fingerprint Service Fee, Towing
Release Service Fee, and the Infraction Deferral Program be deposited into
the Town of Dyer Police Department Special Revenue Fund.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Town of Dyer Police Department
Special Revenue Fund shall be utilized and expended only for the purposes of
public safety and public safety related matters, including salaries and/or
bonus payments to Police Officers.



   (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is authorized and directed to
take all appropriate and required steps to establish the Police Department
Special Revenue Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law,
as amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2010-10, 11-3-10)



Sec. 2-208  Rental Housing Inspection Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the Rental Housing Inspection Fund
which shall be a fund under the rules, regulations, and requirements of
applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to
time, as well as the administrative rules and requirements of the Indiana
State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   Any monies received from the rental registration fees on or
after May 11, 2011, shall be deposited into the Rental Housing Inspection
Fund.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Rental Housing Inspection Fund
shall be utilized and expended only for the purpose of reimbursing the costs
reasonably related to the costs of maintaining such a program.



   (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is authorized and directed to
take all appropriate and required steps to establish said Rental Housing
Inspection Fund in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2011-07, 9-8-11)



Sec. 2-209  Economic Development Income Tax Fund.



There is hereby created the Town of Dyer Economic Development Income Tax Fund
pursuant to I.C. 6-3.5-7-1 et seq. to provide money for all purposes and uses
authorized by said statutes, and in accordance with the Town of Dyer Capital
Improvement Fund as amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1, 12-12-13)



Sec. 2-209.1  Rainy Day Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby authorized, created and established a fund of
the Town of Dyer, to be called the Rainy Day Fund, pursuant to I.C.
36-1-8-5.1 et seq.



   (b)   The Rainy Day Fund is established for the purpose of
accumulating funds to provide resources to support lawful purposes of the
municipality, including meeting exigencies as herein may be defined and such
other purposes permitted by I.C. 36-1-8-5.1 and as are identified in this
section.



   (c)   The sources of funding for the Rainy Day Fund may include the
following:



      2.   Interest earned from the investment of moneys on deposit
to the credit of the fund, provided such investments are conducted pursuant
to I.C. 5-13-9 et seq.;



      3.   An appropriation in the annual budget in the several
funds of the municipality as may be identified and approved by the Town
Council, and then transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, subject to the provision
of I.C. 36-l-8-5.1(d);



      4.   Unreserved, undesignated fund balances which may be
identified in the several funds of the municipality, as maybe approved by the
Town Council, and then transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, subject to the
provision of I.C. 36-l-8-5.1(d).



   (d)   The Rainy Day Fund is subject to the same appropriation
process as other funds of the municipality that receive tax money.



   (e)   In any fiscal year, the Town Council may transfer not more
than ten percent (10%) of the town's total annual budget for that fiscal
year, adopted under I.C. 6-1.1-17, to the Rainy Day Fund as authorized by
I.C. 36-1-8-5.1.



   (f)   The Rainy Day Fund is established and remains in effect until
such time as the fund is repealed or rescinded by action of the Town Council.



   (g)   In addition to uses of said fund permitted by I.C. 36-1-8-5.1,
expenditures from the Rainy Day Fund may be used for the following purposes:



      1.   All lawful purposes for which a town may expend funds
pursuant to the statutes of the State of Indiana;



      2.   The operation of the town and its various departments
when the town does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs,
including, but not limited to salaries, wages, costs of services, supplies,
equipment, capital improvements, repairs, and similar expenditures.



      3.   Such funding as may be determined reasonable and
necessary by the Town Council for the uses and purposes for which funds from
the General Fund, the County Option Income Tax, and County Economic
Development Income Tax may otherwise be expended.



   (h)   Expenditures from the Rainy Day Fund may be made only upon
appropriation by the fiscal body for the purpose for which the fund is
specifically established, in the manner provided by statute for making other
appropriations and shall be disbursed only on approved accounts payable
vouchers allowed by the legislative body, all pursuant to I.C. 5-11-10 and
I.C. 36-5-4.



   (i)   Money in the Rainy Day Fund may be invested provided that the
yields from the purchase and sale of any such investments shall be deposited
with the fund pursuant to I.C. 5-13-9.



   (j)   All unused and unencumbered cash on deposit to the credit of
the Rainy Day Fund does not revert to the town General Fund or to any other
fund but shall remain with the Rainy Day Fund until such time as an ordinance
is passed and adopted regarding its disposition.



(Ord. No. 2014-16, 11-13-14)



Sec. 2-209.2  Local Option Income Tax Special Distribution Fund.



There is hereby created the Town of Dyer Local Option Income Tax Special
Distribution Fund pursuant to I.C. 6-3.6-9-17 et seq. to provide money for
all purposes and uses authorized by said statutes and specifically that
seventy-five percent (75%) of said funds be used for infrastructure
improvements and the remaining twenty-five percent (25%) for any lawful
purpose.



(Ord. No. 2016-11, 5-12-16)



Sec. 2-209.3  Main Street TIF Fund.



   (a)   There is hereby established the “Main Street TIF Fund”
which shall be a fund under the rules, regulations, and requirements of
applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to
time, as well as the administrative rules and requirements of the Indiana
State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   Any TIF monies received from taxes paid by the Main Street
Development shall be deposited into the Main Street TIF Fund.



   (c)   Monies deposited into the Main Street TIF Fund shall be
utilized and expended only for the purposes set forth in the agreement
between the Town of Dyer, the Town of Dyer Redevelopment Commission, and Main
Street.



   (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Main Street TIF Fund in
conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time to
time.



(Ord. 2017-16, 12-14-17)



Sec. 2-209.4  Health & Employee Benefit Insurance Non-Reverting Fund.



   (a)   There is established the Health & Employee Benefit Insurance
Non-Reverting Fund which shall be a fund under the rules, regulations, and
requirements of applicable Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as
amended from time to time, as well as the administrative rules and
requirements of the Indiana State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   Any monies received for health and employee benefit insurance
from the following funds shall be deposited into the Health & Employee
Benefit Insurance Non-Reverting Fund:



      1.   General



      2.   MVH



      3.   Parks Operating and Activity



      4.   Storm Water Operating



      5.   Water Operating



      6.   Sanitary Operating



      7.   Solid Waste Operating



      8.   Redevelopment Operating



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Health & Employee Benefit
Insurance Non-Reverting Fund shall be utilized and expended for payment of
all employee related insurance costs including, but not limited to, the
employees’ share of health, dental, vision, hearing, life, short and long
term disability premiums, consultant fees for the Agent of Record, and all
other related administrative expenses.



   (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish the Health & Employee Benefit
Insurance Non-Reverting Fund in conformance and compliance with all
applicable law, as amended from time to time.



   (e)   The Health & Employee Benefit Insurance Non-Reverting Fund
shall continue as a non-reverting fund until repealed by subsequent ordinance
of the town. The fund balance in the Health & Employee Benefit Insurance
Non-Reverting Fund shall be non-reverting at each calendar year end. In the
event this non-reverting fund is terminated by repeal or amendatory
ordinance, the funds contained therein at the time of termination of the
non-reverting fund by repeal or ordinance shall be deposited into the General
Fund of the town.



(Ord. 2017-17, 12-14-17)



Sec. 2-209.5 Multi-Peril Insurance Fund.



   (a)   There is established the Multi-Peril Insurance Fund which
shall be a fund under the rules, regulations, and requirements of applicable
Indiana law, including the Indiana Code, as amended from time to time, as
well as the administrative rules and requirements of the Indiana State Board
of Accounts.



   (b)   Any monies received for Multi-Peril Insurance from the
following funds shall be deposited into the Multi-Peril Insurance Fund:



      1.   General MVH



      2.   Parks Operating & Activity



      3.   Storm Water Operating



      4.   Water Operating



      5.   Sanitary Operating



      6.   Solid Waste Operating



      7.   Redevelopment Operating.



   (c)   The monies deposited into the Multi-Peril Insurance Fund shall
be utilized and expended for the payment of all expenses related to
Multi-Peril Insurance including payment of insurance premiums, insurance
deductibles, legal expenses related to insurance claims and matters, bonds
and related expenses.



   (d)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized and directed to take all
appropriate and required steps to establish said Multi-Peril Insurance Fund
in conformance and compliance with all applicable law, as amended from time
to time.



(Ord. 2017-18, 12-14-17)



ARTICLE 7. TOWN MEMBERSHIPS AND AGREEMENTS.31



                           



31   I.C., § 36-1-3-2, authorizes powers for the effective operation of
government.



Sec. 2-210  Town Memberships Authorized.



The Town Council is authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the
General Fund or from other funds to provide membership for the Town of Dyer
and the elected and appointed officials and members of the municipality's
boards, commissions, and departments in local, regional, state, and national
associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature, which have as
their purpose the betterment and improvement of municipal operations.



The Town Council is further authorized to budget and appropriate funds to pay
the expenses of duly authorized representatives to attend the meetings and
functions of organizations to which the municipality belongs.



(Ord. No. 82-10, 4-13-82).



Sec. 2-211  Interlocal Government Agreements and Mutual Aid Agreements.



The Town is authorized pursuant to Indiana Code, §§ 36-1-7-1 through
36-1-7-12, as may be amended from time to time, to enter into joint
agreements for the purchase or exchange of property and services with other
governmental bodies through appropriate ordinance or resolution of the Town
Council.



Sec. 2-212 through Sec. 2-219  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



Sec. 2-220  Ordinance Violations Bureau Established.



There is established an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the Town of Dyer
pursuant to Indiana Code, § 33-6-3-1, et seq., as amended, for collection of
fines for violations of ordinances hereafter described, or added hereto at a
subsequent date, or adopted subsequent to enactment of this ordinance with a
fine of  one hundred dollars ($100.00). The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and
shall serve as the Violations Clerk, and shall be Administrator of the
Bureau. The Clerk-Treasurer and his or her staff, as his or her agents, shall
accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations, and
payment of civil penalties in the amount and the violation as provided below.
(Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89; Am. Ord. No. 99-13, 7-13-99)



Sec. 2-221  Schedule of Code Provisions and Violations.



The following schedule of Indiana State Statues, Dyer Town Code provisions
and Ordinances shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Ordinance
Violation Bureau, and shall be subject to a civil penalty as prescribed, to
wit:



   (a)   Indiana State Statutes.



   Indiana Code §   Code Provisions   Fine



   14-1-3.5-14      Snowmobiles and off-road vehicles   $100.00



   36-8-2-4      Public Nuisance   100.00



   3-16-4-2      Curfew violation   100.00



   36-1-3-9(a)      Snow removal   100.00



   36-5-2-9(a)      Firearms   100.00



   36-5-2-9(c)      Muffler violation   100.00



   36-5-2-9(d)      Fireworks discharge   100.00



   36-5-2-9(f)      Loitering   100.00



   36-5-2-9(g)      Hunting in Town Limits   100.00



   36-5-2-9(h)      Discharge of bullet or projectile   100.00



   36-5-2-9(i)      Littering   100.00



   36-5-2-9(j)      Maintenance of undomesticated animal   100.00



   36-5-2-9(k)      Sale or manufacture of fireworks   100.00



   36-5-2-9(l)      Swimming pools   100.00



   36-5-2-9(m)      Animal control   100.00



   36-8-2-4(b)      Burning   100.00



   36-8-2-4(c)      Garbage Disposal   100.00



   36-8-2-6      Animal control and licensing   100.00



   36-8-2-10(a)      Traveling shows   100.00



   36-8-2-10(b)      Public purpose permit   100.00



   36-8-2-10(c)      Licensing of contractors and
subcontractor   100.00



   36-8-2-11(a)      Licensing of peddlers and transient
merchants   100.00



   36-9-6-6(b)      Sidewalk construction   100.00



   (b)   Dyer Town Ordinances.



   Original Ord. No.   Subject Matter   New Code No.   Fine



   No. 83-46      Zoning Ordinance   10-119   100.00



   No. 81-30      Regulation of Sprinkling   6-29-6-30   100.00



   No. 84-23      Railroad Cars      100.00



   No. 85-4      Alarms System/False Alarms   6-34 et. seq.
   100.00



   No. 85-18      Obstruction of Public Way      100.00



   No. 88-1      Building Code   7-50 et. seq.    100.00



   No. 88-30      Motorized Bicycles   8-1 et. seq.    100.00



   No. 89-24      Location of Dumpsters   6-139   100.00



   No. 89-28      Weight limit   8-175   100.00



   No. 85-49      Electronic Games   4-70 et. seq.    100.00



   (c)   Dyer Traffic Code - 8-120 et. seq.



      1.   All moving violations not exceeding 15 miles per hour
over the posted speed limit which do not take place on secondary artery
streets.   $25.00



      2.   All moving violations exceeding 16 miles per hour over
the posted speed limit but not exceeding 25 miles per hour over the posted
speed limit which do not take place on secondary artery streets.   $35.00



      3.   All moving violations exceeding 25 miles per hour over
the posted speed limit which do not take place on secondary artery
streets.   $50.00



      4.   All moving violations exceeding the posted speed limit
which take place on secondary streets.   $50.00



      5.   All moving violations not involving exceeding the posted
speed limit, except moving violations in a construction area   $27.50



      6.   All moving violations occurring in a construction
area   $500.00



      7.   All handicap and fire lane violations   $50.00



      8.   All other parking violations   $25.00



      9.   Seatbelt violation   $25.00



(Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89; Am. Ord. No. 97-15, 8-12-97; Am. Ord. No. 99-13,
7-13-99; Am. Ord. No. 2001-18, § 2, 8-21-01)



Sec. 2-222  Civil Penalties.



The provisions of the Dyer Town Code and Ordinances referred to herein, are
amended to provide and declare the civil penalty scheduled herein to be the
specific civil penalty for the violation of said code provision and
ordinance. This ordinance repeals all Dyer Town Code and Ordinance provisions
inconsistent herewith. All other provisions of the Dyer Town Code not
affected by this ordinance remain in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 89-38,
10-10-89)



Sec. 2-223  Court Proceedings.



A person charged with an ordinance or code violation under this ordinance is
entitled to a trial before a court as provided by law, unless the person
waives the right to trial and enters an admission of the violation with the
Violations Clerk. Upon such an admission, the Clerk shall assess and receive
from the violator the amount prescribed by the schedule of civil penalties
established herein. Payment of civil penalties may be made in person or by
mail to the Ordinance Violations Bureau. If a person charged with a violation
under this ordinance wants to exercise the right to trial, the person shall
appear before the Violations Clerk and deny the violation or enter a written
denial with the Clerk.



If a person:



   (1)   denies an ordinance or code violation under this ordinance;



   (2)   fails to satisfy a civil penalty assessed by the Violations
Clerk after having entered an admission of violation; or



   (3)   fails to deny or admit the violation under this ordinance;



the Clerk shall report this fact to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer and the
Town Attorney for prosecution. Proceedings in court against the person shall
then be initiated for the alleged ordinance violation. All sums collected by
the Violations Clerk as civil penalties for ordinance violations shall be
accounted for and paid to the General Fund of the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No.
89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 2-224 through Sec. 2-229 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 9. TOWN POLICIES.



Sec. 2-230  Uncollectible accounts receivable.



   The following shall constitute the bad debt/uncollectible account
receivable write-off policies and procedures for the Town of Dyer:



   (a)   In the event that accounts receivable under this section, as
amended from time to time, are not paid within the time fixed by the Town of
Dyer (hereafter "the Town") or a Town Agency or Department, the same shall be
deemed delinquent. A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the
account receivable shall attach as delinquent fees.



   (b)   As used herein, the term FINAL ACCOUNT shall have the
following meaning: A delinquent account receivable for which the Town or Town
Agency or Department has reasonably and diligently attempted collection, but
in which such collection remains unsuccessful.



   (c)   The Town or Town Agency or Department shall prepare a
semi-annual schedule of final accounts. The semi-annual schedule shall
consist of the following.



      (1)   all final accounts which are at least one hundred twenty
(120) days delinquent; and



      (2)   which the Town or Town Agency or Department has
determined to be uncollectible.



   (d)   The Town or Town Agency or Department shall generate a
statement setting forth the efforts that have been made to collect final
accounts and a statement that such efforts have been unsuccessful.



   (e)   The Town or Town Agency or Department shall produce a
statement, including the reasons therefore, that the Town or Town Agency or
Department believes it is economically not feasible to pursue collection
measures for the specified final account.



   (f)   The semi-annual schedule described in subsection (c)
hereinabove, the statement described in subsection (d) hereinabove, and the
statement described in subsection (e) hereinabove, shall be submitted to the
Town Council, which by resolution may declare said accounts listed as
uncollectible and may authorize the Town or Town Agency or Department to
cease further collection procedures and expense the amounts outstanding on
the accounts as bad debts.



   (g)   The Town or the Town Agency or Department may attempt to
recover the amount of the bad debt in a civil action against the debtor.



(Ord. No. 2003-16, 9-16-03)



Sec. 2-231  Fixed Asset Capitalization Policy.



   (a)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or
requires a different meaning, namely:



      (1)   Capital assets.



         a.   Land, land improvements, including monuments,
buildings, building improvements, construction in progress, machinery and
equipment, vehicles and infrastructure. All land will be capitalized but not
depreciated. All items with a useful life of more than one (1) year, and
having a unit cost of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall be
capitalized (including acquisitions by lease-purchase agreements or donated
items). A capital asset meeting the criteria will be reported and depreciated
in the government-wide financial statements.



         b.   Assets that are not capitalized (items having a
unit cost of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)) are expensed in the
year of acquisition. An inventory will be kept on all computers and other
equipment with a capitalized cost of less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). Exceptions are:



            1.   Items costing less than the above-described
limits which are permanently installed as a part of the cost of original
construction or installation of a larger building or equipment unit will be
included in the cost of the larger unit;



            2.   Modular equipment added subsequent to
original equipment construction of a larger building or equipment unit which
may be put together to form larger units costing more than the prescribed
limits will be charged to capital assets even though the cost of individual
items is less than such limits; and



            3.   Cabinets, shelving, bookcases and similar
items added subsequent to original construction, which are custom-made for a
specific place and adaptable elsewhere will be capitalized.



NOTE: Purchases made using grant funds must comply with grant requirements or
the above procedures, whichever is most restrictive.



      (2)   Capital Outlays.  Expenditures which benefit both the
current and future fiscal periods. This includes costs of acquiring land or
structures, construction or improvement of buildings, structures or other
fixed assets and equipment purchases having an appreciable and calculable
period of usefulness. These are expenditures resulting in the acquisition of
or addition to the Town's general fixed assets.



      (3)   Enterprise Funds.  Those funds used to account for
operation that are financed and operated in a manner similar to private
business enterprise where the intent of the Town Council is that the costs
(expenses, including depreciation) of providing goods or services to the
general public on a continuing basis be financed or recovered primarily
through user charges or where the Town Council has decided that periodic
determination of revenues earned, expenses incurred, and/or net income is
appropriate for capital maintenance, public policy, management control,
accountability and other purposes.  The Enterprise Fund of the Town of Dyer,
Lake County, Indiana, shall include the municipally-owned sewage and
stormwater utilities. Operation of the utilities shall require Enterprise
Fund accounting and reporting.



      (4)   Fixed Assets.  Tangible assets of a durable nature
employed in the operating activities of the Town and that are relatively
permanent and are needed for the production and sale of goods or services are
termed property, plant and equipment or fixed assets.



      (5)   Historical Cost.  The cash equivalent price exchanged
for goods or services at the date of acquisition. Land, buildings, equipment
and most inventories are common examples of items recognized under the
Historical Cost attribute.



      (6)   Tangible Assets.  Assets that can be observed by one
(1) or more of the physical senses. These assets may be seen and touched and,
in some environments, heard and smelled.



   (b)   Specific capitalization provisions.



      (1)   Land.



         a.   Land is defined as specified land, lots, parcels,
or acreage. The Town will capitalize all land purchases, regardless of cost.
Exceptions to land capitalization are land purchased outright, as easements,
or right-of-way for infrastructure. Examples of infrastructure include roads
and streets, street lighting systems, curbs, parking meters, street signs,
viaducts, wharfs and storm water collection.



         b.   Original cost of land will include the full value
given to the seller, including relocation, legal services incidental to the
purchase (including title work and legal opinion), appraisal and negotiation
fees, surveying and costs for preparing the land for its intended purpose
(including contractors and/or Town employees (salary and benefits), such as
demolishing buildings, excavating, clean up and/or inspection. Land is not
depreciated under generally accepted accounting principles.



         c.   A department will record donated land at fair
market value on the date of transfer plus any associated costs.



         d.   Purchases made using Federal or State funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



      (2)   Machinery and Equipment. The definition of machinery and
equipment is an apparatus, tool or conglomeration of pieces to form a tool.
The tool will stand alone and not become a part of a basic structure or
building. This category also includes any other asset or type of physical
property not otherwise classified in this policy.



         a.   The Town will capitalize and tag items with an
individual value equal to or greater than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).  Machinery combined with other machinery to form one (1) unit
with a total value greater than the above-mentioned limit will be one (1)
unit.



         b.   Shipping charges, consultant fees, and any other
costs directly associated with the purchase, delivery, or setup, (including
contractors and/or Town employees (salary and benefits)), which make such
equipment operable for its intended use and purpose will be capitalized.



         c.   Improvement or renovations to existing machinery
and equipment will be capitalized only if the result of the change meets all
of the following conditions:



            1.   Total costs exceed five thousand dollars
($5,000.00);



            2.   The useful life is extended two (2) or more
years;



            3.   The total cost will be greater then the
current book value and less than the fair market value.



         d.   Salvage value of machinery or equipment will be
determined on an asset-by-asset basis. Depreciation will be calculated at
year-end.



      (3)   Buildings. A department will capitalize buildings at
full cost with no subcategories for tracking the cost of attachments.
Examples of attachments are roofs, heating, cooling, lighting or sprinkler
systems, or any part of the basic building. The department will include the
cost of items designed or purchased exclusively for the building. All
structures designed and erected to house equipment services or functions are
included, such as systems, services, and fixtures within the buildings, and
attachments such as porches, stairs, fire escapes, canopies, areaways,
lighting fixtures, flagpoles, and all other units that serve the building.



         a.   Plumbing systems, lighting systems, heating,
cooling, ventilating and air handling systems, alarm systems, sound systems,
surveillance systems, passenger and freight elevators, escalators, built-in
casework, walk-in coolers and freezers, fixed shelving, and other fixed
equipment are included with the building, if owned. Communication antennas
and/or towers are not included as buildings. These are parts of the equipment
units that they serve.



         b.   A department's new building will be capitalized
only if it meets the following conditions:



            1.   The total cost exceeds five thousand dollars
($5,000.00); and



            2.   The useful life is greater than two (2) years.



         c.   A department improving or renovating an existing
building will capitalize only if the result meets all of the following
conditions:



            1.   The total cost exceeds five thousand dollars
($5,000.00); and



            2.   The useful life is extended two (2) years or
more; and



            3.   The total cost will be greater than the
current book value and less than the fair market value.



         d.   Capital building costs will include preparation of
land for the building, architectural and engineering fees, bond issuance
fees, interest cost (while under construction), accounting costs if material,
any costs directly attributable to the construction of a building.



         e.   A department will record donated buildings at fair
market value on the date of transfer with any associated costs.



         f.   Purchases made using Federal or State funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



      (4)   Improvements Other than Buildings.  These assets are
defined as improvements to land for better enjoyment, attached or not easily
removed, and which will have a life expectancy of greater than two (2) years.
Examples are walkways, parking areas and drives, golf cart paths, fencing,
retaining walls, pools, outside fountains, planters, underground sprinkler
systems, water supply mains, collection sewers, wells, dams, intake pipes,
manholes, fire hydrants and other similar items. Improvements do not include
roads, streets, or assets that are of value only to the public. Roads or
drives upon Town owned land that provide support to Town facilities are
assets. A sidewalk down the road for public enjoyment is an infrastructure
improvement and is not capitalized. However, sidewalks installed upon the
Town owned land for use by the public and for the support of Town facilities
are capital assets.



         a.   The Town will capitalize new improvements, other
than buildings, only if the same meet the following conditions:



            1.   The total cost exceeds five thousand dollars
($5,000.00); and



            2.   The useful life is greater than two (2) years.



         b.   A department will capitalize improvements or
renovations to existing improvements other than buildings only if the result
meets the following conditions:



            1.   The total cost exceeds five thousand dollars
($5,000.00); and



            2.   The asset's useful life is extended two (2)
years or more; and



            3.   The total cost will be greater than the
current book value and less than the fair market value.



         c.   A department's donated improvements, other than
buildings, will be recorded at fair market value on the date of transfer with
any associated costs.



         d.   Purchases made using Federal or State funding will
follow the source funding policies and above procedures.



      (5)   Recording and Accounting. The Town and its various
departments shall classify capital expenditures as capital outlays within the
fund from which the expenditure was made in accordance with the Chart of
Accounts of the Cities and Towns Accounting Manual. The cost of the property,
plant and equipment includes all expenditures necessary to put the asset into
position and ready for use. For purposes of recording fixed assets of the
Town and its departments, the valuation of assets shall be based on
historical costs, or where the historical cost is indeterminable, by
estimation for those assets in existence.



         a.   The Town's municipally-owned utilities shall record
acquisition of fixed assets in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. When an asset is purchased for cash, the acquisition is simply
recorded at the amount of cash paid, including all outlays relating to its
purchase and preparation for use. Assets may be acquired under a number of
other arrangements including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:



            1.   Regular purchases.



            2.   Acquisition under capital lease (see below).



            3.   Assets acquired for a lump-sum purchase.



            4.   Purchase on deferred payment contract.



            5.   Acquisition by resolution/ condemnation.



            6.   Acquisition by exchange of non-monetary
assets.



            7.   Acquisition by issuance of securities.



            8.   Acquisition by self-construction.



            9.   Acquisition by donation, contribution or
discovery.



            10.   Acquisition by outside contractor.



            11.   Addition to an existing asset.



            12.   Acquisition by transfer from another
department.



            13.   Acquisition by annexation.



         b.   Leased equipment should be capitalized if the lease
meets any one (1) of the following criteria:



            1.   The lease transfers ownership of the property
to the lessee by the end of the lease term; or



            2.   The lease contains a bargain purchase option;
or



            3.   The lease term is equal to seventy-five
percent (75%) of the estimated economic life of the leased property; or



            4.   The present value of the minimum lease
payments at the inception of the lease, excluding executory costs, equals at
least ninety percent (90%) of the fair market value of the leased property.



         c.   Leases that do not meet any of the above criteria
should be recorded as an operating lease and reported in the notes of the
financial statements.



         d.   Some of these arrangements present special problems
relating to the cost to be recorded. For example, in utility accounting,
interest during a period of construction has been long recognized as a part
of the asset cost. Reference to an Intermediate Accounting Manual will
illustrate the recording of acquisition of assets under the aforementioned
acquisition arrangements. For purposes of recording fixed assets of the
utilities, the valuation of assets shall be based on historical cost.



         e.   For the purposes of this policy, as amended from
time to time, an Asset Register (prescribed Form 211, a copy of which is
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit "A") shall be
maintained by the Town Clerk-Treasurer to provide a detailed record of the
capital assets of the Town of Dyer.



      (6)   Safeguarding of Assets. The following accounting
controls are hereby authorized to be designed, implemented and followed by
all departments, officials, employees and agents of the Town to provide
reasonable assurances that the Town's assets are safeguarded for the benefit
of the Town and its residents, namely:



         a.   Capital expenditures made by the Town, its various
departments and utilities, shall be in accordance with management's
authorization, as documented in the minutes.



         b.   Transactions of the utilities shall be recorded as
necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles.



         c.   Adequate detail records shall be maintained to
assure accountability for Town and utility-owned assets.



         d.   Access to assets shall be permitted in accordance
with management's authorization.



         e.   The recorded accountability assets be compared with
the existing assets at least every two (2) years, and appropriate action
shall be taken with respect to any discrepancies.



      (7)   Composite/Group Network. A network of assets is composed
of all assets that provide a particular type of service for government. A
subsystem of a network of assets is composed of all assets that make a
similar portion or segment of a network of assets.



         a.   Composite depreciation refers to calculation of
depreciation for a collection of similar assets. A single composite rate is
applied annually to the acquisition cost of the collection as a whole. At
year-end, an adjustment will be made to the total cost to account for any
additions/disposals throughout the year. The accumulated depreciation
associated with it will also be adjusted. A gain or loss will never be
reported on the asset when using the composite method. A full year's
depreciation will be taken when the asset is placed in service and no
depreciation will be recorded in the year it is sold or disposed of.
Dissimilar assets will be grouped by useful lives.



         b.   To determine the appropriate depreciation rate for
the composite rate, divide 1 by the number of years the assets are
depreciated. For instance, a group of assets with a twenty-five (25) year
life will be depreciated at four percent (4%) each year (1/25).



         c.   The following is a list of asset groups and useful
lives that will be used for depreciation purposes:



            Street Lights:    35 years



            Traffic Signals:    25 years



            Flood Walls/Gates:    50 years



            Roads:



               Cement:    10 years



               Gravel :    15 years



               Concrete:    30 years



               Asphalt Concrete:    20 years



               Brick or Stone:   50 years



            SEWER:



            Buildings and Improvements:    50 years



            Sewer Lines:    50 years



            Combined Sewer Overflow:    50 years



            Lift Station:    50 years



            Treatment Plant/ Equipment:   10 years



            Office Equipment:   5 years



            Miscellaneous Operating Equipment:   5 years



            Vehicles:   5 years



      8.   Asset Transfers and Dispositions. Property should not be
transferred, turned in for auction, or disposed of without prior approval of
the department head. A vehicle/equipment outprocessing checklist should be
sent to the Clerk-Treasurer's Office in all cases. This form is a dual
purpose form for transfer (defined as any movement of an asset by virtue of
change in location, either by account, department, building, floor, or room)
or retirement (disposal) of property.



         a.   The main points to be remembered when using this
form are:



            1.   Always provide sufficient detail to properly
identify the asset and, most



importantly, include the asset's tag/identification number;



            2.   Be accurate and do not overlook any of the
required entries;



            3.   Write legibly;



            4.   Complete each column for every asset listed
on the form;



            5.   Enter information on correct rows, depending
on whether an asset is being transferred or deleted;



            6.   Have Department Head sign the form; and



            7.   Return the form to the Clerk-Treasurer's
Office.



         b.   If an asset is stolen, the Department Head should
immediately notify the Police Department and the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (9)    Periodic Inventories. A physical inventory of all
capital assets (any item over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00)) will be
conducted in each department on or about December 31st of each calendar year.
Department heads will be accountable for the capital asset inventory charged
to their respective departments by verifying a list of their capital assets
at year-end.



      (10)   Responsibilities of Clerk-Treasurer's Office. The
Clerk-Treasurer will ensure that accounting for capital assets is being
exercised by establishing a capital asset inventory, both initially and
periodically in subsequent years. The Clerk-Treasurer will further ensure
that the capital asset report will be updated annually to reflect additions,
retirements and transfers, and to reflect the new, annual capital asset
balance for financial reporting purposes and the annual and accumulated
depreciation calculation.



      (11)   Responsibilities of Department Heads.  It is the
responsibility of the department heads to act as, or designate, a steward for
each asset covered by this policy. The steward will become the focal point
for questions regarding the availability, condition and usage of the asset,
as well as the contact person during the physical inventory process.



         a.   The steward shall record the receipt of the asset,
examine the asset to make sure that no damage was incurred during shipment
and make sure that the asset was received in working order.



         b.   The steward is also responsible for arranging for
the necessary preventative maintenance and any needed repairs to keep the
asset in working condition. It is necessary to have a responsible person
available for questions that arise during a physical inventory or when
someone wants to borrow the asset.  The steward ensures that the asset is
used for the purpose for which it was acquired and that there is no personal
or unauthorized use. In addition, the steward should report any property
damage or theft.



(Ord. No. 2003-27, 11-16-03)



Sec. 2-232  Bidding Practices and Submission Requirements.



   (a)   Bid Submission Requirements.  Contractors proposing to submit
bids on any Town of Dyer ("Town") project estimated to be at least two
hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or more shall, prior to the opening of
bids, submit a statement made under oath and subject to perjury laws, on a
form designated by the Town which shall include:



      (1)   A copy of a print-out of the Indiana Secretary of
State's on-line records for the bidder dated within sixty (60) days of the
submission of said document showing that the bidder is in existence, current
with the Indiana Secretary of State's Business Entity Reports, and eligible
for a certificate of good standing. If the bidder is au individual, sole
proprietor or partnership, this subsection shall not apply;



      (2)   A list identifying all former business names;



      (3)   Any determinations by a court or governmental agency for
violations of federal, state, or local laws including, but not limited to,
violations of contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws,
environmental laws, the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), or federal
Davis-Bacon and related Acts;



      (4)   A statement on staffing capabilities, including labor
sources;



      (5)   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship and training
programs, applicable to the work to be performed on the project, which are
approved by and registered with the United States Department of Labor's
Office of Apprenticeship, or its successor organization. The required
evidence includes a copy of all applicable apprenticeship certificates or
standards for these training programs;



      (6)   A copy of a written plan for employee drug testing that:



         (i)   covers all employees of the bidder who will
perform work on the public works project; and



         (ii)   meets, or exceeds, the requirements set forth in
I.C. 4-13-18-5 or I.C. 4-13-18-6;



      (7)   The name and description of the management experience of
each of the bidder's project managers and superintendents that bidder intends
to assign to work on the project;



      (8)   Proof of any professional or trade license required by
law for any trade or specialty area in which bidder is seeking a contract
award; and disclosure of any suspension or revocation within the previous
five (5) years of any professional or trade license held by the company, or
of any director, officer or manager employed by the bidder;



      (9)   Evidence that the contractor is utilizing a surety
company which is on the United States Department of Treasury's Listing of
Approved Sureties;



      (10)   A written statement of any federal, state or local tax
liens or tax delinquencies owed to any federal, state or local taxing body in
the last five (5) years;



      (11)   A statement that individuals who will perform work on
the public works project on behalf of the bidder will be properly classified
as either:



         (i)   an employee; or



         (ii)   an independent contractor, under all applicable
state and federal laws and local ordinances; and



      (12)   A list of projects of similar size and scope of work
that the bidder has performed in the State of Indiana within three (3) years
prior to the date on which the bid is due.



The Town reserves the right to demand supplemental information from the
bidder, additional verification of any of the information provided by the
bidder, and may also conduct random inquiries of the bidder's current and
prior customers.



   (b)   Post-Bid Submissions from Subcontractors.



      (1)   All bidders shall provide a written list that discloses
the name, address, and type of work for each first-tier subcontractor from
whom the bidder has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the
public works project, including individuals performing work as independent
contractors, within five (5) business days after the date the bids are due.



      (2)   In addition, each such first-tier subcontractor shall be
required to adhere to the requirements of division (a) above as though it
were bidding directly to the Town, except that first-tier subcontractors
shall submit the required information (including the name, address, and type
of work for each of their first-tier subcontractors) to the successful bidder
no later than five (5) business days after the subcontractor's first day of
work on the public works project and the bidder shall then forward said
information to the Town. Payment shall be withheld from any first-tier
subcontractor who fails to timely submit said information until such
information is submitted and approved by the Town.



      (3)   Upon request, the Town may require any second and
lower-tier subcontractors to provide the required information (including
name, address, type of work on the project and the name of the higher-tier
subcontractor). Payments shall be withheld from any second or lower-tiered
contractor who fails to timely submit this information until this information
is submitted and approved by the Town. Additionally, the Town may require the
successful bidder and relevant subcontractor to remove the second or
lower-tier subcontractor from the project and replace it with a responsive
and responsible subcontractor.



      (4)   Failure of a subcontractor to submit the required
information shall not disqualify the successful bidder from performing work
on the project and shall not constitute a contractual default and/or breach
by the successful bidder. However, the Town may withhold all payments
otherwise due for work performed by a subcontractor, until the subcontractor
submits the required information and the Town approves such information. The
Town may also require that successful bidder to remove the subcontractor to
the project and replace it with a responsive and responsible subcontractor.



      (5)   The disclosure of a subcontractor ("disclosed
subcontractor") by a bidder or a subcontractor shall not create any rights in
the disclosed subcontractor. Thus, a bidder and/or subcontractor may
substitute another subcontractor ("substitute subcontractor") for a disclosed
subcontractor by giving the Town written notice of the name, address, and
type of work of the substitute subcontractor. The substitute subcontractor is
subject to all of the obligations of a subcontractor under this ordinance.



   (c)   Validity of Pre-Qualification Classification.



      (1)   Upon designation by the Town that a contractor's or
subcontractor's submission in anticipation of a bid is complete and timely,
and upon any further consideration deemed necessary by the Town, the
contractor or subcontractor may be pre-qualified for future Town public works
projects. A contractor's classification as "qualified" shall exempt the
contractor or sub-contractor from the comprehensive submission requirements
contained herein for a period of twelve (12) months. Thereafter, contractors
or subcontractors who are pre-qualified must submit a complete application
for continuation of "pre-qualified" standing, on a form provided by the Town,
(also referred to as the "short form") by December 31 for the upcoming
calendar year. Failure by any pre-qualified contractor or subcontractor to
timely submit its complete application for continuation of "pre-qualified"
standing shall result in automatic removal of the designation, effective
January 1 of the upcoming year. However, the "removed" contractor or
subcontractor shall still be permitted to bid on Town public works projects.



      (2)   Any material changes to the contractor's status, at any
time, shall be reported in writing within ten (10) days of its occurrence to
the Town. The pre-qualification designation is solely within the discretion
of the Town and the Town specifically reserves the right to change or revoke
the designation for a stated written reason(s).



      (3)   Denial of pre-qualification shall be in writing and
shall be forwarded to the contractor within seven (7) working days of such
decision. Any contractor denied or losing pre-qualification status may
request reconsideration of the decision by submitting such request in writing
to the Town within five (5) business days of receipt of notice of denial.



   (d)   Incomplete Submissions by Bidders.  It is the sole
responsibility of the potential bidder to comply with all submission
requirements applicable to the bidder in division (a) above by no later than
the public bid opening date and time. Post-bid submissions must be submitted
in accordance with division (b) above. Submissions deemed inadequate,
incomplete, or untimely by the Town may result in the automatic
disqualification of the bid.



   (e)   Responsive and Responsible Bidder Determination.  The Town,
after review of complete and timely submissions, shall, in its sole
discretion, after taking into account all information in the submission
requirements, determine whether a bidder is responsive and responsible. The
Town specifically reserves the right to utilize all information provided in
the contractor or subcontractor's submission or any information obtained by
the Town through its own independent verification of the information provided
by the contractor.



   (f)   Certified Payroll.



      (1)   For projects in which the cost is at least two hundred
thousand dollars ($200,000.00), the successful bidder and all subcontractors
working on a public works project shall submit a certified payroll report
utilizing the federal form now known as a WH-347 which must be prepared on a
weekly basis and submitted to the Town within ten (10) calendar days after
the end of each week in which the bidder or subcontractor performed its work
on the public works project. These certified payroll reports shall identify
the job title and craft of each employee on the project, e.g. journeyman
electrician or apprentice electrician. In the event any contractor or
subcontractor uses independent contractors to perform work on the project,
such individual must be identified on the WH-347 form with the same
information as is required for employees.



      (2)   The Town may withhold payment due for work performed by
a bidder if the bidder fails to timely submit its certified payroll reports
until such time as such certified payroll reports are submitted. The Town may
also withhold payment due for work performed by a subcontractor if the
subcontractor fails to timely submit its certified payroll reports until such
time as such certified payroll reports are submitted. The Town shall not
withhold payment to a bidder for work performed by the bidder or for work
performed by subcontractors who have submitted their certified payroll
reports, because one (1) or more other subcontractors failed to timely submit
their certified payroll reports.



   (g)   Public Records.  All information submitted by a bidder or a
subcontractor pursuant to this Ordinance, including certified payrolls, are
public records subject to review pursuant to the Indiana Access to Public
Records law (I.C. 5-14-3).



   (h)   Penalties for False, Deceptive, or Fraudulent
Statements/Information.  Any bidder that willfully makes, or willfully
causes to be made, a false, deceptive or fraudulent statement, or willfully
submits false, deceptive or fraudulent information in connection with any
submission made to the Town shall be disqualified from bidding on all Town
projects for a period of three (3) years.



(Ord. No. 2016-08, 6-23-16)



Sec. 2-233  Internal Control Policies.



   (a)   The Town hereby adopts the Internal Control Policy attached to
Ordinance No. 2016-07 as Exhibit A and it is incorporated by reference as if
fully set forth herein.



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer and Town Administrator are directed to
ensure that all personnel receive training concerning the internal control
procedures adopted and approved herein prior to June 30, 2016.



   (c)   The Town hereby adopts a materiality threshold of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for purposes of internal control procedures adopted and
approved herein.



(Ord. No. 2016-07, 5-12-16)



Sec. 2-234 through Sec. 2-249 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 10. TAXATION.



Sec. 2-250  Municipal Motor Vehicle License Excise Wheel Surtax and
Municipal Wheel Tax.



   (a)   Municipal Motor Vehicle License Excise Wheel Surtax.



      (1)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby created a Municipal
Surtax Fund, which shall be a non-reverting fund. Revenues received from the
Department of Motor Vehicles from taxes imposed under this section shall be
deposited into the Fund.



      (2)   Tax rates. Effective January 1, 2017, and in accordance
with I.C. 6-3.5-10-2(c) of the Excise Tax Act, being I.C. 6-3.5-10 et seq.
(the "Act"), the surtax shall be imposed at the following rates:



         a.   passenger vehicles: $25 per year;



         b.   motorcycles: $25 per year;



         c.    trucks with a declared gross weight that does not
exceed eleven thousand (11,000) pounds: $25 per year;



         d.   motor-driven cycles: $25 per year.



      (3)   Vehicle Definitions. The definitions set forth in the
Act shall apply to this section.



      (4)   Uses of Fund. Funds in the Municipal Surtax Fund may be
used for one (1) or more of the following purposes:



         a.   to construct, reconstruct, repair, or maintain
streets and roads under the Town's jurisdiction;



         b.   for the Town's contribution to obtain a grant from
the local road and bridge matching grant fond pursuant to I.C. 8-23-30.



      (5)   Transportation Asset Management Plan. The Town
Administrator shall prepare a Transportation Asset Management Plan, approved
by the Indiana Department of Transportation, as required by I.C.
6-3.5-10-2(e) and I.C. 6-3.5-11-2(c) and submit a copy of such plan to the
Town Council on or before August 1 of each year.



      (6)   Accounting of Fund. On or before August 1 of each year,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall provide the Town Council an estimate of the surtax
revenues to be received by the Town under this section during the next
calendar year. The Town shall include the estimated sutax revenues in the
Town's budget estimate for the calendar year.



   (b)   Municipal Wheel Tax.



      (1)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby created a Municipal
Wheel Tax Fund, which shall be a non-reverting fund. Revenues received from
the Department of Motor Vehicles from taxes imposed under this section shall
be deposited into the Fund.



      (2)   Tax Rates. Effective January 1, 2017, and in accordance
with I.C. 6-3.5-11-2(d) of the Excise Tax Act, being I.C. 6-3.5-10 et seq.
(the "Act"), the wheel tax shall be imposed on the following non-exempt
vehicles at the following rates:



         a.   buses: $40 per year;



         b.   recreational vehicles: $40 per year;



         c.   semitrailers: $40 per year;



         d.    tractors: $40 per year;



         e.   trailers: $40 per year;



         f.   trucks: $40 per year.



      (3)   Vehicle Definitions. The definitions set forth in the
Act shall apply to this section.



      (4)   Uses of Fund. Funds in the Municipal Wheel Tax Fund may
be used for one (1) or more of the following purposes:



         a.   to construct, reconstruct, repair, or maintain
streets and roads under the Town's jurisdiction;



         b.   as a contribution to an authority established under
I.C. 36-7-23;



         c.    for the Town's contribution to obtain a grant from
the local road and bridge matching grant fund under I.C. 8-23-30.



      (5)   Transportation Asset Management Plan. The Town
Administrator shall prepare a Transportation Asset Management Plan as
required in division (a) above.



      (6)   Accounting of Fund. On or before August 1 of each year,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall provide the Town Council an estimate of the wheel
tax revenues to be received by the Town under this section during the next
calendar year. The Town shall include the estimated wheel tax revenues in the
Town's budget estimate for the calendar year.



(Ord. No. 2016-16, 6-23-16)



Sec. 2-251 through Sec. 2-259 Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 3
TOWN LEGISLATIVE AND JUDICIAL BRANCHES.



ARTICLE 1. TOWN COUNCIL.



Sec. 3-1   Five (5) Member Council.



Sec. 3-2   Election of Council Members.



Sec. 3-3   Five Wards.



Sec. 3-4   Selection of Council President and Vice President.



Sec. 3-5   Quorum.



Sec. 3-6   When Majority Vote Required.



Sec. 3-7   When Three-Fifths (3/5) Vote Required.



Sec. 3-8   Town Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Break Ties.



Sec. 3-9   When Ordinance Takes Effect.



Sec. 3-10   Regular and Special Meetings of the Town Council.



Sec. 3-11   Powers of the Town Council.



Sec. 3-12   Order of Business at Town Council Meetings.



Sec. 3-13   Rules of Order.



Sec. 3-14   Compensation of the Town Council.



Sec. 3-15   Ordinances Which Amend the Town Code.



Sec. 3-16   Council Filing Deadline.



Sec. 3-17   Readings of Ordinances and Resolutions.



Sec. 3-18 through 3-29 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2.  REGULATIONS ADDRESSING ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.



Sec. 3-30   Definitions



Sec. 3-31   Right To Inspect And Copy.



Sec. 3-32   Mandatory Exceptions



Sec. 3-33   Discretionary Records



Sec. 3-34   Procedure for Production of Discretionary Records.



Sec. 3-35   Law Enforcement Records.



Sec. 3-36   Copying Fee.



Sec. 3-37   Denial of Disclosure and Remedies.



Sec. 3-38 through Sec. 3-41 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3.   PROCEDURES FOR THE DISPOSITION OF SEIZED PROPERTY AND CASH
FROM CIVIL FORFEITURE ACTIONS.



Sec. 3-42   Property Pursuant to a Search Warrant.



Sec. 3-43   Confiscated Weapons.



Sec. 3-44   Confiscated Property Used to Facilitate Violation of Criminal
Statute.



Sec. 3-45   Commingling Monies Prohibited.



Sec. 3-46 through Sec. 3-55 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4.  TOWN COURT.



Sec. 3-56   Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1. TOWN COUNCIL. 1



                       



1   I.C., §§ 36-5-2-1 through 36-5-2-11, address the Town legislative
body and executive.



Sec. 3-1  Five (5) Member Council. 2



The Town Council of the Town of Dyer shall be five (5) in number and shall be
elected by the voters at large.



(Ord. No. 89-42, § 1, 11-16-89)



                       



2   I.C., § 36-5-2-2, addresses the Town Council.



Sec. 3-2  Election of Council Members. 3



The Council Members from wards 2, 4, and 5 shall be elected in 1990 and each
four (4) years thereafter.  The Council Members from Wards 1 and 3 shall be
elected in 1991 and each four (4) years thereafter.



(Ord. No. 89-42, § 1, 11-16-89)



                       



3   I.C., § 36-5-2-5, addresses legislative districts.



Sec. 3-3  Five Wards. 4



   (a)   The Town of Dyer is redistricted into the following five (5)
Wards:



   Ward No. 1:



      Beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Calumet Avenue,
also being the Northeast corner of Section 1, Township 3 5 North, Range 10
West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Main Street also being
the North line of said Section 1, a distance of4488 feet to the Northwest
comer of said Section 1;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 1, a
distance of 3724 feet to the centerline of Heritage Drive;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Heritage Drive, a
distance of 1220 feet;



      Thence: Southerly along Cambridge Lane, a distance of 490 feet to
the centerline of Heritage Drive;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Heritage Drive, a
distance of 613 feet to the centerline of Sheffield Avenue;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Sheffield Avenue, a
distance of 1012 feet to the centerline of 213th Street also being the South
line of said Section 1;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of 213th Street also
being the South line of said Section 1, a distance of2640 feet to the
centerline of Calumet Avenue also being the Southeast corner of said Section
1;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the East line of said Section 1, a distance of 5277 feet to the point
of beginning.



   Ward No. 2:



      Beginning at the intersection of 213th Street and Calumet Avenue,
also being the Northeast corner of Section 12, Township 35 North, Range 10
West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of 213th Street also
being the North line of said Section 12, a distance of 2,640 feet to the
centerline of Sheffield Avenue;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Sheffield Avenue, a
distance of 1,012 feet to the centerline of Heritage Drive;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Heritage Drive, a
distance of 613 feet to the centerline of Cambridge Lane;



      Thence:  Northerly along Cambridge Lane, a distance of 490 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Heritage Drive, a
distance of 1,220 feet to the West line of Section 1 of Township 35 North,
Range 10 West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 1, a
distance of 1,573 feet to the Southwest corner of said Section 1, also being
the Northwest corner of said Section 12;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 12, a
distance of 5,282 feet to the Southwest corner of said Section 12, also being
the Northwest corner of Section 13, Township 35 North, Range 10 West of the
Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 13, a
distance of 3,970 feet to the Southwest comer of Lot 13 of Dyer Estates 1st
Addition;



      Thence:  Easterly along the South boundary line of said Lot 13,
a distance of 160 feet to the centerline of Forest Park Drive;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Forest Park Drive, a
distance of 1,694 feet to the centerline of Berens Road;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Berens Road, a
distance of 1,413 feet to the centerline of Hart Street;



      Thence:  Southeasterly along the centerline of Hart Street, a
distance of 217 feet to the extended centerline of Cherry Hill Road;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Cherry Hill Road, a
distance of 1,109 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly continuing along the centerline of Cherry
Hill Road, a distance of 1,601 feet to the centerline of Hickory Drive;



      Thence:  Southeasterly along the centerline of Hickory Drive, a
distance of 510 feet to the extended intersection of the Southeast boundary
line of Lot 53 of Pheasant Hills Addition Unit Number 5;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along said extended Southeast boundary
line of Lot 53, a distance of 230 feet to the centerline of the Monon
Railroad Right-of-Way;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along said Monon Railroad Right-of-Way, a
distance of 2,565 feet to the centerline of U.S. 30;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of
1,266 feet to the centerline of Calumet Avenue also being the East line of
said Section 13;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the East line of said Section  13, a distance of 275 feet to the
Northeast corner of said Section 13 also being the Southeast corner of said
Section 12;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the East line of said Section 12, a distance of 5,278 feet to the point
of beginning,



Ward No. 3:



      Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 30 and Calumet Avenue, said
point being on the West line of Section 18, Township 35 North, Range 9 West
of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of
5,241 feet to the East line of said Section 18;



      Thence:  Southerly along the East line of said Section 18, a
distance of 4,458 feet to the centerline of 77th Avenue also being the
Southeast corner of said Section 18;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue also being
the South line of said Section 18, a distance of 5,183 feet to the Southwest
corner of said Section 18 also being the Southeast corner of Section 13,
Township 35 North, Range 10 West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Westerly continuing along the centerline of 77th Avenue
also being the South line of said Section 13, a distance of 2,641 feet to the
centerline of Hart Street;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Hart Street, a
distance of 829 feet to the centerline of Heather Lane;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Heather Lane, a
distance of 364 to the centerline of Hillside Drive;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 287 feet;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 669 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 338 feet to the centerline of Sycamore Drive;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Sycamore Drive, a
distance of 2,269 feet to the centerline of Cherry Hill Road;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the centerline of Cherry Hill Road,
a distance of 1,320 feet to the centerline of Hickory Drive;



      Thence:  Southeasterly along the centerline of Hickory Drive, a
distance of 510 feet to the extended intersection of the Northwest boundary
line of Lot 21 of Pheasant Hills Addition Unit Number 4 subdivision;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along said extended Northwest boundary
line of said Lot 21, a distance of 230 feet to the centerline of Monon
Railroad Right-of-Way;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along said Monon Railroad Right-of-Way, a
distance of 2,565 feet to the centerline of U.S. 30;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of
1,266 feet to the point of beginning.



   Ward No. 4:



      Beginning at the intersection of 77th Avenue and Hart Street,
said point being on the South line of Section 13, township 35 North, Range 10
West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Hart Street, a
distance of 829 feet to the centerline of Heather Lane;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Heather Lane, a
distance of 364 to the centerline of Hillside Drive;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 287 feet;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 669 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the centerline of Hillside Drive, a
distance of 338 feet to the centerline of Sycamore Drive;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Sycamore Drive, a
distance of 2,269 feet to the centerline of Cherry Hill Road;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Cherry Hill Road, a
distance of 1,390 feet to the centerline of Hart Street;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the centerline of Hart Street, a
distance of 217 feet to the centerline of Berens Road;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Berens Road, a
distance of 1,413 feet to the centerline of Forest Park Drive;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Forest Park Drive, a
distance of 1,694 feet to the extended intersection of the North boundary
line of Lot 39 of Chateau Woods subdivision;



      Thence:  Westerly along the extended North boundary line of said
Lot 39, a distance of 160 feet to the Northwest corner of said Lot 39 also
being on the West line of said Section 13;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 13, a
distance of 1,312 feet to the Southwest corner of said Section 13 also being
the Northwest corner of Section24, Township 35 North, Range 10 West of the
Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 24, a
distance of 1,326 feet to the Southwest corner of Autumn Chase Phase 2
subdivision;



      Thence:  Easterly along the South boundary line of said Autumn
Chase Phase 2 subdivision, a distance of 420 feet to the Northwest corner of
High Point Trails Unit 1 subdivision;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West boundary line of said High
Point Trails Unit 1 subdivision, a distance of 588 feet to the Southwest
corner of said High Point Trails Unit 1 subdivision also being the Northwest
corner of High Point Trails Unit 2 subdivision;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West boundary line of said High
Point Trails Unit 2 subdivision, a distance of 420 feet to the Southwest
corner of said High Point Trails Unit 2 subdivision also being the Northwest
corner of High Point Trails Unit 3 subdivision;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West boundary line of said High
Point Trails Unit 3 subdivision, a distance of 369 feet to the South
Right-of-Way line of 81st Avenue;



      Thence:  Westerly along the South Right-of-Way line of 81st
Avenue, a distance of 334 feet;



      Thence:  Southerly along the East Right- of-Way line of Steger
Road, a distance of539 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly along the South Right-of-Way line of Steger
Road, a distance of 80 feet to the West line of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Southerly along the West line of said Section 24, a
distance of 2,028 feet to the Southwest corner of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Easterly along the South line of said Section 24, a
distance of 697 feet to the Northwest corner of Lot 49 of Highpoint Prairie
Unit 3 subdivision;



      Thence:  Southerly along the boundary line of said Highpoint
Prairie Unit 3 subdivision, a distance of 332 feet to the Southwest corner of
Lot 47 of said of Highpoint Prairie Unit 3 subdivision;



      Thence: Easterly along the boundary line of said Highpoint
Prairie Unit 3 subdivision, a distance of 1,320 feet to the centerline of
Sheffield Avenue;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Sheffield Avenue, a
distance of 716 feet to a corner of Lot 2 of Sheffield Acres 2nd Addition
subdivision;



      Thence:  Easterly along the boundary line of said Lot 2 of
Sheffield Acres 2nd Addition subdivision, a distance of 425 feet;



      Thence:  Southerly along the boundary line of said Lot 2 of
Sheffield Acres 2nd Addition subdivision, a distance of 230 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly along the boundary line of said Lot 2 of
Sheffield Acres 2nd Addition subdivision, a distance of 51 feet;



      Thence:  Southerly along the boundary line of said Lot 2 of
Sheffield Acres 2nd Addition subdivision, a distance of 165 feet to the South
line of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Easterly along said South line of said Section 24, a
distance of 1,154 feet;



      Thence:  Northerly, a distance of 994 feet;



      Thence:  Easterly, a distance of 1,318 feet to a point on the
East line of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Northerly along said East line of said Section 24, a
distance of 330 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly, a distance of 1,317 feet;



      Thence:  Southerly a distance of 160 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly, a distance of 945 feet;



      Thence:  Southerly a distance of 345 feet;



      Thence:  Westerly, a distance of 375 feet to the centerline of
Sheffield Avenue;



      Thence:  Northerly along the centerline of Sheffield Avenue, a
distance of 1,829 feet to the centerline of 81st Avenue point also on the
South line of the North half of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of 81st Avenue also being
said South line of the North half of Section 24, a distance of 2,636 feet to
the Southeast corner of said North half of Section 24;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East line of said Section 24, a
distance of 2,650 feet to the centerline of 77th Avenue also being the
Northeast corner of said Section 24;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of 77th Avenue also being
the North line of said Section 24, a distance of 2,641 feet to the point of
beginning.



   Ward No. 5:



      Beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Calumet Avenue
also being the Northwest corner of Section 6, Township 35 North, Range 9 West
of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the West line of said Section 6, a distance of 5,277 feet to the
centerline 213th Street also being the Southwest corner of said Section 6
also being the Northwest corner of Section 7, Township 35 North, Range 9 West
of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the West line of said Section 7, a distance of 5,278 feet to the
Southwest corner of said Section 7 also being the Northwest corner of Section
18, Township 35 North, Range 9 West of the Second Principle Meridian;



      Thence:  Southerly along the centerline of Calumet Avenue also
being the West line of said Section 18, a distance of 275 feet to the
centerline of U.S. 30;



      Thence:  Easterly along the centerline of U.S. 30, a distance of
5,241 feet to the East line of said Section 18;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East line of said Section 18, a
distance of 822 feet to the Northwest corner of said Section 18 also being
the Southwest corner of said Section 7;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East line of said Section 7, a
distance of 5,291 feet to the centerline of 213th Street also being the
Northeast corner of said Section 7 also being the Southeast corner of said
Section 6;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East line of said Section 6, a
distance of 229 feet to the South boundary line of Briar Ridge Country Club
Addition, Unit 9 subdivision;



      Thence:  Easterly along said South boundary line of Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition, Unit 9 subdivision, a distance of 984 feet to the
Southeast corner of said Briar Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 9
subdivision;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 9 subdivision, a distance of 460 feet to
the Northeast corner of said Briar Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 9
subdivision;



      Thence: Northerly, a distance of 581 feet to the boundary line of
Briar Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One subdivision;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 1,218 feet;
Thence Northwesterly along the boundary line of said Briar Ridge Country Club
Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 136 feet;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club, Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 306 feet;



      Thence:  Northerly along the boundary line of said Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 193 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 288 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One subdivision, a distance of 389 feet;



      Thence:  Northerly, a distance of 212 feet to the corner of Lot
5 of Briar Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One “A” subdivision;



      Thence:  Northerly along the West boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition Unit One “A” subdivision, a distance of 610
feet to the boundary line of Springwood Condominiums Phase One subdivision;



      Thence:  Westerly along the boundary line of said Springwood
Condominiums Phase One subdivision, a distance of 170 feet;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the boundary line of said
Springwood Condominiums Phase One subdivision, a distance of 670 feet;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the boundary line of said
Springwood Condominiums Phase One subdivision, a distance of 215 feet;



      Thence:  Northerly along the boundary line of said Springwood
Condominiums Phase One subdivision, a distance of 829 feet to the North
Right-of-Way line of St. Andrews Drive;



      Thence:  Southeasterly along said North Right-of-Way line of St.
Andrews Drive, a distance of 52 feet to a corner of Briar Ridge Country Club
Addition Unit 7 Block 2 subdivision;



      Thence:  Northerly along the boundary line of said Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition Unit 7 Block 2 subdivision, a distance of 61 feet;



      Thence:  Northwesterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition Unit 7 Block 2 subdivision, a distance of 90 feet
to the boundary line of Briar Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 17
subdivision;



      Thence:  Northerly along the boundary line of said Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition, Unit 17 subdivision, a distance of 144 feet;



      Thence:  Northeasterly along the boundary line of said Briar
Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 17 subdivision line, a distance of 315 feet;



      Thence:  Easterly along the boundary line of said Briar Ridge
Country Club Addition, Unit 17 subdivision line, a distance of358 feet to a
corner of said Briar Ridge Country Club Addition, Unit 17 subdivision point
also being on the East line of said Section 6;



      Thence:  Northerly along the East line of said Section 6, a
distance of 200 feet to the centerline of Main Street also being the
Northeast corner of said Section 6;



      Thence:  Westerly along the centerline of Main Street also being
the North line of said Section 6, a distance of 5,045 feet to the point of
beginning.



(Ord. No. 92-36 § 3,12-22-92; Ord. No. 94-1, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 2001-16,
9-18-01; Ord. No. 2001-27, 10-16-01; Ord. No. 2002-27, 10-15-02; Ord. No.
2012-11, 9-13-12)



   (b)   The Ward District map is on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, available for public inspection during regular business
hours, and is incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. No. 92-36, 12-12-92; Ord. No. 9-1, 1-11-94)



   (c)   As land is annexed to the Town of Dyer by proper ordinance, it
shall be specifically assigned to a specific ward.



                       



4   I.C., § 36-5-2-4.1, pertains to the division of Towns into districts,
and I.C., § 36-5-1-10.1 pertains to the composition of districts.



Sec. 3-4  Selection of Council President and Vice President. 5



The Council shall select one (1) of its members to be its President and one
(1) of its members to be its Vice-President for a definite term, which may
not exceed such member's term of office as a member of the legislative
body.  The President of the Town Council is the Town Executive.  The
Vice-President of the Town Council shall serve as Executive in his or her
absence, sickness, inability or refusal to serve.



                       



5   I.C., § 36-5-2-7, addresses the selection of a President, and I.C.,
§ 36-5-2-2, addresses the Town Executive.



Sec. 3-5  Quorum. 6



A majority of all the elected members of the Town Council constitutes a
quorum.



                       



6   I.C., § 36-5-2-9.2, defines a quorum of the Council.



Sec. 3-6  When Majority Vote Required.



A majority vote of the Town Council is required to pass an ordinance unless a
greater vote is required by statute.  A majority vote means at least a
majority vote of all the elected members.



Sec. 3-7  When Three-Fifths (3/5) Vote Required. 7



A three-fifths (3/5) vote, with unanimous consent of the members present, is
required to pass an ordinance on the same day or at the same meeting at which
it is introduced.  A three-fifths (3/5) vote means at least a three-fifths
(3/5) vote of all the elected members.



                       



7   I.C., § 36-5-2-9.8, addresses votes of Council.



Sec. 3-8  Town Clerk-Treasurer Authorized to Break Ties. 8



The Town Clerk-Treasurer is the Clerk of the Town Council.  Whenever there
is a tie vote for any particular issue, the Clerk-Treasurer is an ex-officio
member for the purpose of casting the deciding vote to break a tie.



                       



8   I.C., § 36-5-28, authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to vote in case of a
tie.



Sec. 3-9  When Ordinance Takes Effect. 9



An ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the Town Council becomes
effective when signed by the President of the Town Council, or the
Vice-President if required, and attested to by the Clerk-Treasurer unless the
ordinance, order, or resolution by its own terms establishes the date upon
which it takes effect.  If required by statute, an adopted ordinance, order,
or resolution must be promulgated or published before it takes effect.



                           



9   I.C., § 36-5-2-10, addresses the adoption of ordinances, orders,
resolutions and their publication.



Sec. 3-10  Regular and Special Meetings of the Town Council. 10



   (a)   The regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held at the
Town Hall in the Town of Dyer on the second Tuesday of the month at 7:30 p.m.



   (b)   In all cases where a special meeting or called meeting is
called, at least forty eight (48) hours written notice shall be given to the
Town Council, Clerk-Treasurer, and the public, pursuant to Indiana Code, §
5-14-1.5.



   (c)   Special or called meetings may be called by the President of
the Council, or in his absence, sickness, inability or refusal to make such
call, by the Vice President of the Council, and in his or



her absence, sickness, inability or refusal to make such call, then by a
majority of the Council when deemed necessary.  The President and Vice
President may by verbal notice at the public meeting, when all members of the
Council are present, call a special meeting of the Council, and in all cases
where the provisions of the statutes of Indiana regulating the calling of the
special meeting do not forbid such action by prescribing differently.  In
all cases where provisions of the statute prescribe the method of the call,
the provisions must be strictly followed.



   (d)   Executive sessions shall be conducted in strict compliance
with Indiana Code, § 5-14-1.5-6.



                         



10   I.C., § 5-14-1.5-1, et seq., addresses the Indiana Open Door Law.



Sec. 3-11  Powers of the Town Council. 11



   The Council may:



   (a)   adopt Ordinances and Resolutions for the performance of
functions of the Town;



   (b)   purchase, hold, and convey any interest in property, for the
use of the Town;



   (c)   adopt and use a common seal; and



   (d)   exercise all powers that are needed for the effective
operation of local governmental affairs.



                       



11 I.C., § 36-5-2-9, sets forth the powers of the legislative body.



Sec. 3-12  Order of Business at Town Council Meetings. 12



   The following order of business shall be followed at Town Council
meetings:



   1.   Call to Order.



   2.   Pledge of Allegiance.



   3.   Roll Call.



   4.   Approval of Agenda.



   5.   Minutes.



   6.   Claims.



   7.   Announcements.



   8.   Correspondence.



   9.   Ordinances and Resolutions.



   11.   New Business.



   12.   Recycling Comments from Residents.



   13.   Citizen Input.



   14.   Adjournment.



(Ord. No. 95-18, 6-13-95)



                               



12 I.C., §§ 36-1-3-1 through 36-1-3-9, set forth "Home Rule Powers".



Sec. 3-13  Rules of Order.



   The most recent version of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern all
meetings of the Town Council, unless ordinance or statute provide otherwise.



Sec. 3-14  Compensation of the Town Council. 13



   (a)   The Town Council shall, by Ordinance, fix the compensation of
its own members.



   (b)   The compensation of an elected Town officer may not be changed
in the year for which it is fixed, nor may it be reduced below the amount
fixed for the previous year.



                               



13 I.C., § 36-5-3-2, addresses compensation for Town Council members, and
other Town Employees.



Sec. 3-15  Ordinances Which Amend the Town Code. 14



   All Ordinances which are of a general and permanent nature, and which
would amend the Town Code, shall be in the form depicted on the following
page:



                               



14 I.C., § 36-4-6-14, addresses the publication of ordinances in the Town
Code.



   Ord. No.___



   (Include the last two digits of the calendar year followed by a dash
and the chronological number of the Ordinance: Ex. 95-1)



   (Short Title)



   AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN COUNCIL OF



   THE TOWN OF DYER, INDIANA,



   AMENDING CHAPTER ______, ARTICLE______,



   SECTION(S) _____, OF THE DYER TOWN CODE



   BY THE INCLUSION/DELETION OF SECTION(S),



   ENTITLED_________________________.



Whereas, (background statements setting forth the purpose or background of
the Ordinance where appropriate)



Whereas,



Whereas



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF DYER, INDIANA, AS FOLLOWS:



Section I. Chapter _________, Article ________, Section(s) ________, of the
Dyer Town Code, is/are hereby amended to read as follows:



(set forth specific amendatory language)



Section II. All prior Ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with any
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.



Section III. This Ordinance is hereby passed and adopted at a regular meeting
of the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, this_____ day of__________,
19__.



                     By:   ___________________



                        President



Attest:                     ___________________



                        Town Council Member



                        ___________________



                        Town Council Member



                        ___________________



                        Town Council Member



_____________               ___________________



Clerk-Treasurer               Town Council Member



Sec. 3-16  Council Filing Deadline.



   All proposed ordinances or resolutions must be filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer by 3:00 pm the Friday prior to the Tuesday Council Meeting if
for a regular Council, and a minimum of one (1) regular business day before
any special Council meeting.



Sec. 3-17  Readings of Ordinances and Resolutions.



   (a) Each proposed ordinance shall be read:



      (1)   First in its entirety verbatim; and



      (2)   Second time by title only.



   (b)   Each proposed resolution shall be read in its entirety
verbatim.



Sec. 3-18 through 3-29  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. REGULATIONS ADDRESSING ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.



Sec. 3-30  Definitions.



As used in this Article, the following definitions shall apply:



   Active Records.  Records in current use which must be retained in
offices because frequent reference is neck in the conduct of day-to-day
operations.  This usually means records that are used more than once per
file drawer per month.



   Administrative Records.  The organization, budget, fiscal, personnel
and similar administrative or support operations as distinguished from
program or substantive records that relate to the primary functions.



   Appraisal.  The process of determining the value and thus the
disposition of records based upon their current administrative, legal, and
fiscal use; their evidential and informational or research value; their
arrangement; and their relationship to other records.



   Architectural Drawings.  Graphic and engineering drawings that depict
conceptual as well as precise measured information essential for the planning
and construction of static structures.



   Case File.  A folder or other file unit containing material relating
to a specific action, event, person, place, project, or other subject. 
Often referred to as a project or transaction file.



   Central Files.  The files, offices or organizational units physically
and/or functionally centralized in one.



   Classified Information.  Records or information that require, in the
interests of security or protection of individuals, safeguards against
unauthorized disclosure.



   Closed File.  A file, usually in a series, that contains documents on
which action has been completed and to which additional documents are not
likely to be added.



   Copy.  A reproduction of the contents of an original document,
prepared simultaneously or separately, usually identified by function or by
method of creation.  Copies identified by function may include action copy,
comeback copy, file or record copy, official copy and tickler copy.  Copies
identified by method of creation are those run on a copy machine such as a
Xerox.



   Correspondence.  Letters, postcards, memorandums, notes, route slips,
and any other form of addressed, written communications sent and received.



   Current Records.  Records that are active and necessary for conducting
the current business of an office and that must be in office space and
equipment.  Depending upon the type of file referred to, it may mean:  For
files in which contents are revised or reissued, current means the most
recent version.  Examples would be Administrative Regulations.  For files
such as indexes, inventories, or inspections, current means the file contents
should be added to or updated continuously.



   Custody.  The maintenance or guardianship or records and archives
that, in a strict sense, includes both physical possession (protective
responsibility), and legal title (legal responsibility).



   Disposition.  The actions taken with regard to noncurrent records
following appraisal.  The actions include transfer to a records center,
transfer to an archives reproduction on microfilm, and destruction.  The
term includes but is not synonymous with disposal, which means destruction.



   Document.  Recorded information regardless of medium or
characteristics.  Frequently used interchangeably with `records' see also
Records.



   Evidential Value.  The usefulness of records as the primary evidence
of an organization's authority, functions, organization, operations,
decisions and procedures.



   Exempt Records.  Exempt records are documents when no longer needed
for administrative or operational purposes, and do not require records
schedule authorization.  Included are: (1) inquiries and requests from the
public and answers thereto not required by law to be preserved or not
required as evidence of public or private legal right of liability. (2)
public records which are duplicated and therefore not record copies. (3)
letters of transmittal and acknowledgment, advertising, announcements.



   Fiscal Value.  The usefulness of records for information about the
financial transactions and obligations of the organization.



   Historical Value.  The usefulness of records for historical or
archival research and concerning information about persons, places, events,
structures.



   Inactive Records.  Records which are seldom referred to but which must
be retained, temporarily or permanently because of administrative, fiscal,
historical or archival value.



   Legal Value.  Records that document actions taken in the protection
and proving of legal or civil rights and obligations of individuals and the
local government.



   Maps and Charts.  Graphic representation at a reduced scale of
selected physical and cultural features of the surface of the earth.  These
may include topographical quadrangles, photomaps, and relief models.



   Noncurrent Records.  Records that are no longer required in the
conduct of current business and therefore can be transferred to a records
center or destroyed if authorized by a records schedule.



   Nonrecord Material.  Papers or other media not meeting the
requirements for records are considered nonrecord material.  These include
stock of publications, duplicate copies of record material such as reading
files, processed or published materials, catalogs, trade journals and papers
of transitory value such as drafts, worksheets, informal notes and routing
slips.  Nonrecord materials should be destroyed when no longer needed.



   Official files.  Official files of the Town are papers, photographs,
maps or other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, which have documentary or evidential value.  Such papers,
created or received in connection with the transaction of the Town's
business, are preserved as evidence of its organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, operations or other activities because of their
informational value.  Official files, also referred to as record material,
can be destroyed only according to the provisions of authorized records
disposition schedules.



   Permanent Records.  Those records of the Town that are determined
through appraisal or by approved records schedules as worthy of indefinite or
permanent preservation.  They are the records that have been designated as
having continued operation, administrative, legal or historical value.



   Public Records.  Public records mean all written books, papers,
letters, documents, photographs, tapes, microfiche, microfilm, photostats,
sound recordings, maps, other documentary materials or information in any
recording medium regardless of physical form or characteristics, including
data processing devices and computers, made or received in pursuance of law
or in connection with the transaction of public business.



   Records.  All books, papers, maps, photographs, machine-readable
materials, or other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received by the Town in the transaction of public
business, and preserved as evidence of the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the Town government.



   Site Audit Records.  Specific documents prepared by accountable
officers or financial officers to be held for audit.



   Source Documents.  Record materials that provide input for creating
other records.  A requisition becomes a source document for a purchase
order; also, input data for a machine readable system is a source document.



   Specific Authorization.  Specific authorization is the legal authority
to destroy records which are no longer Created, or to destroy records through
a particular date or under a particular circumstance.



   Working Papers.  Documents such as rough notes, calculations, or
drafts assembled or created and used in the preparation or analysis of other
documents.  Working papers are usually "nonrecord material". (Ord. No.
84-29, § 1, 7-10-84).



Sec. 3-31  Right To Inspect And Copy.



   Any person may inspect and copy the public records of the Town of Dyer
between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M., Monday through Friday, except
as provided by Sections 3-31 and 3-32 of this Article.  A request for or
copying must be in writing and shall identify with reasonable particularity
the record being requested.  Neither the Town of Dyer nor any of its
employees or agents shall have authority to deny or interfere with the
exercise of the right of access to public records.  Where the request is to
view the material only, an employee of the Town shall be present at all times
while the material is being viewed. (Ord. No. 84-29, § 2, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-32  Mandatory Exceptions.



   The following public records are excepted from Section 3-30 of this
Article and may not be disclosed by the Town of Dyer, unless access to the
records is specifically required by a state or federal statute or is ordered
by a Court under the rules of discovery:



   1.   Those declared confidential by state statute.



   2.   Those declared confidential by rule adopted by a public agency
under specific authority to classify public confidential granted to the
public agency by statute.



   3.   Those required to be kept confidential by federal law.



   4.   Records containing:



      a)   trade secrets;



      b)   confidential commercial information; or



      c)   confidential financial information;



   obtained, upon request, from a person.  However, this does not include
information that is filed with or received by a public agency pursuant to
statute.



   5.   Information concerning research (including actual research
documents) conducted under the auspices of an institution of higher
education, including information:



      a)   concerning any negotiations made with respect to the
research; and



      b)   received from another party involved in the research.



   6.   The following specific records shall not be disclosed:



      a)   Police Records:



         Crime Analysis File



         Confidential Investigations



         Informant File



         Enforcement Aid Fund Records



         Handwriting Case



         Name Files



         Crime Photos



         Interview Tapes



         Surveillance Logs



         Case Report



         Property Receipts



         Teletype Messages



         Laboratory Reports



         Evidence Vault Log



         Body Transmitter Log Book



         Consensual Telephone Monitoring



         Mug/Print Files



         Criminal History Records



         Juvenile Records



      b)   Civil investigations conducted by an attorney.



      c)   Employment Tests:



         Questions and Answers



         Employment/Promotion Tests



      d)   Test Scores:



         Training Modules



         Promotional Interview Results



         Test Questions (Final Score to be released)



      e)   Personal Notes:



         Day Books



         Personal Notes



         Desk Calendars



         Observation Guides



      f)   Administration:



         Investigative Material relating to Employees



         (Final charges to be released)



      g)   Personnel File:



         Performance File



         Merit Evaluation



         Training Reports



         Background Investigation



         Medical Records



      h)   Administration Information



         IDACS Printouts



         Telephone Credit Card Numbers



         Telephone Data Printouts



         Technical Drawings/Systems Description



         Telephone Tapes



         Radio Tapes



         Radio Log



      i)   Computer Related:



      j)   Executive Sessions:



         Personnel Matters



      k)   Intra-Agency:



         All Meetings



         Correspondence



         Firearms Discharge



         Employee Complaint File



         Special Detail File



         State Inspection



         Standard Operating Procedures



         Undercover List



      l)   Firearms Permits:



         Releasable except for Crime Information (Ord. No. 84-29 §
3, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-33  Discretionary Records.



The following public records may be made available for inspection and/or
copying at the discretion of the Town:



   1.   Investigatory records of law enforcement agencies. However,
certain law enforcement records must be made available for inspection and
copying as provided in Section 3-34 of this Article



   2.   The work product of an attorney representing (pursuant to state
employment or an appointment by a public agency): a) a public agency; b) the
state; or c) an individual.



   3.   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used
in administering a licensing examination, examination for employment, or
academic examination.



   4.   Scores of tests or license examinations if the person is
identified by name and has not consented to the release of his or her scores.



   5.   Records relating to negotiations between the department of
commerce, the employment development commission, the film commission, the
corporation for science and technology, or economic development commissions
with industrial, research, or commercial prospects while negotiations are in
progress.



   6.   Records that contain intra-agency or interagency advisory or
deliberative material that are expressions of opinion or are of a speculative
nature, and that are communicated for the purpose of decision making.



   7.   Diaries, journals, or other personal notes serving as the
functional equivalent of a diary or Journal.



   8.   Personnel files of public employees, except for: a) the name,
compensation, application for employment or appointment, job title, business
address, business telephone number, job description, education and training
background, previous work experience, or dates of first and last employment
of present or former officers or employees of the agency; b) information
relating to the status of any formal charges against the employee; and c)
information concerning disciplinary actions in which final action has been
taken and that resulted in the employee being disciplined or discharged.
However, all personnel file information shall be made available to the
affected employee or his or her representative.



   9.   Patient medical records and charts created by a provider, if
the patient gives his written consent, and minutes or records of hospital
medical staff meetings.



   10.  Administrative or technical information that would jeopardize a
record keeping or security system.



   11.  Computer programs, computer codes, computer filing systems, and
other software that are owned by the public agency or entrusted to it.



   12.  Records specifically prepared for discussion, or developed during
discussion in an executive session under Indiana Code, § 5-14-1.5-6.



   13.  The work product of the legislative service agency under
personnel rules approved by the legislative council.



   14.  The work product of individual members and the partisan staffs of
the general assembly.



   15.  The identity of a donor of a gift made to a public agency if the
donor requires non-disclosure of his identity as a condition of making the
gift.



   16.  Library records which can be used to identify any library patron.
(Ord. No 84-29, § 4, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-34  Procedure For Production of Discretionary Records.



Any person who desires to inspect a discretionary record shall file a written
request with commission, department, or person having possession of such
record, which written request shall specify with reasonable particularity the
record requested.  The person to whom the request is made, shall, within
twenty-four (24) hours, convene a committee consisting of the person in
charge of the commission or department having control of the requested record
and two (2) duly elected members of the Dyer Town Council, who shall meet
within said twenty-four (24) hour period and decide by majority rule whether
the requested record will be produced for inspection and copying. (Ord. No.
84-29, § 5, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-35  Law Enforcement Records.



Law enforcement records shall be made available for inspection and copying
only to the extent permitted by the provisions of Indiana Code, § 5-14-3-5.
(Ord. No. 84-29, § 6, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-36  Copying Fee.



Any person requesting a copy of a public record shall pay in advance to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town the actual cost of copying the record determined
to be ten cents ($0.10) per page.  If the Town does not have mechanical
means for copying a requested record, the person requesting such record shall
be entitled to inspect and manually transcribe the record.



The Town shall not charge to inspect a public record or to search for,
examine, or review a record to determine whether the record may be disclosed.
(Ord. No. 84-29, § 7, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 2003-13, 6-17-03)



Sec. 3-37  Denial of Disclosure and Remedies.



Any person who is denied disclosure of a public record shall be entitled to
pursue his or her remedies set forth in Indiana Code § 5-14-3-9 pursuant to
the provisions thereof. (Ord. No. 84-29, § 8, 7-10-84)



Sec. 3-38 through Sec. 3-41  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. PROCEDURES FOR THE DISPOSITION OF SEIZED PROPERTY AND CASH FROM
CIVIL FORFEITURE ACTIONS.



Sec. 3-42  Property Pursuant to a Search Warrant.



All items of property seized by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department as a
result of an arrest search warrant or warrantless search shall be securely
held by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department under the order of the Court
trying the case in which the seized property is involved in complete
conformity with Indiana Code, § 35-33-5-5. (Ord. No. 91-26, § 1, 10-8-91)



Sec. 3-43  Confiscated Weapons.



All firearms confiscated pursuant to law by the Dyer Metropolitan Police
Department shall be disposed of in complete accordance with the terms of
Indiana Code, § 35-47-3. (Ord. No. 91-26, § 2, 10-8-91)



Sec. 3-44  Confiscated Property Used to Facilitate Violation of Criminal
Statute.



Any real, tangible personal and intangible personal property seized by the
Dyer Metropolitan Police Department as a result of any violation enumerated
under Indiana Code, § 34-4-30.1-1 shall be disposed of in accordance with
Indiana Code §§ 34-4-30.1 and 34-4-30.5. (Ord. No. 91-26, § 3, 10-8-91)



Sec. 3-45  Commingling Monies Prohibited.



Any cash received by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department in accordance
with the provisions of Section 3-44 above, shall not be commingled in any way
with any other funds held by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department.  In
accordance therewith, there is created three separate funds for the deposit
of any such funds received such funds shall be designated as follows:  the
In Rem Forfeiture Fund, the Racketeering Forfeiture Fund, and the Federal
Equitable Sharing Program Fund The Chief of Police shall determine and
designate into which account any funds received by the Dyer Metropolitan
Police Department in accordance with the provisions of this Article shall be
deposited. (Ord. No 91-26, § 4, 10-8-91)



Sec. 3-46 through Sec. 3-35  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. TOWN COURT. 15



                       



15   I.C., § 33-10.1-1, et seq., addresses the establishment of a Town
Court.



Sec. 3-50  Reserved for Future Use. 16



                       



16   Editor's Note:  Ord. No. 94-4, passed on May 10, 1994, initially
established a Dyer Town Court.  This ordinance was subsequently appealed by
Ord. No. 94-25, which was passed on December 13, 1994.



CHAPTER 4
FEES, LICENSES AND PERMITS



ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 4-1   Authority to License.



Sec. 4-2   Applications.



Sec. 4-3   Approval Procedures.



Sec. 4-4   Duration of License, Display Required, and Inspections.



Sec. 4-5   Issuance, Revocation or Suspension.



Sec. 4-6 through Sec. 4-9 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2.  SPECIFIC FEES AND CHARGES.



   Division I.  Miscellaneous Charges.



Sec. 4-10   Fees for Copies of Incident Reports.



Sec. 4-11   Charge for Presentment of a Returned Check or Draft.



Sec. 4-12   Application Fee for Police Department Applicants.



Sec. 4-13   Copying Fee.



Sec. 4-14   Costs for Copies of Clark Dietz Maps.



Sec. 4-15   Costs for Copies of Dyer Subdivision Control Ordinance and the
Book of Standards.



Sec. 4-16   Fee for fingerprint services.



Sec. 4-17 through Sec. 4-19 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Charges Regarding Hazardous and Toxic Material Spills and
Leaks.



Sec. 4-20   Payments Due Within Thirty (30) Days.



Sec. 4-21   Service Charges for Hazardous or Toxic Spills.



Sec. 4-22 through Sec. 4-24 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III.  Carnivals and Circuses.



Sec. 4-25   Definitions.



Sec. 4-26   Permits and Fees Required.



Sec. 4-27   Permits Non-Transferable.



Sec. 4-28   Considerations Prior to Issuance of Permit.



Sec. 4-29   Revocation of Permits and Hearing Thereon.



Sec. 4-30   Appeal Procedures.



Sec. 4-31   Exceptions.



Sec. 4-32   Penalty.



Sec. 4-33 through Sec. 4-37 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV.  Schedule of Rates Governing Plumbing, House Drainage and
Sewer Works.



Sec. 4-38   Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer Fees.



Sec. 4-39   Standards.



Sec. 4-40   Impact Fees.



Sec. 4-41 through Sec. 4-44 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V.  Dyer Sales Control Ordinance.



Sec. 4-45   Statement of Policy.



Sec. 4-46   Definitions.



Sec. 4-47   Temporary Facilities for Transient Merchants.



Sec. 4-48   Door to Door Solicitation - License Required.



Sec. 4-49   Application and Issuance of License.



Sec. 4-50   License Fee.



Sec. 4-51   Free Licenses to Veterans.



Sec. 4-52   Special Provisions for Vehicles.



Sec. 4-53   Term of Licenses.



Sec. 4-54   Badge Required.



Sec. 4-55   Hours of Solicitation.



Sec. 4-56   Sidewalk Contribution Solicitation - Permit Required.



Sec. 4-57   Application of Division.



Sec. 4-58   No Street Solicitation.



Sec. 4-59   Penalty.



Sec. 4-60 through Sec. 4-63 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VI.  Regulation and Registration of Pinball Machines,
Electronic Games and Game Devices.



Sec. 4-64   Licensing of Electronic Games and Pinball Machines.



Sec. 4-65   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 4-66   Application for License



Sec. 4-67   Role of Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 4-68   License Fee.



Sec. 4-69   Installations - Number Restricted.



Sec. 4-70   Revocation and Nuisances.



Sec. 4-71   Transfer of License/Fees.



Sec. 4-72   Penalties.



Sec. 4-73 through Sec. 4-79 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Taxicab Regulations.



Sec. 4-80   Taxicab License Required.



Sec. 4-81   Application.



Sec. 4-82   Licenses.



Sec. 4-83   Rules and Regulations for Taxicab Operation.



Sec. 4-84   License Fees.



Sec. 4-85   Definitions.



Sec. 4-86   Register of Taxicabs.



Sec. 4-87   Taxi Standards.



Sec. 4-88   Rates or Fares to be Charged and Regulations Governing
Operations.



Sec. 4-89   Transfer of License Tags.



Sec. 4-90   Preference in Issuing Licenses.



Sec. 4-91   Taxicabs Licensed in Other Communities.



Sec. 4-92   Violations.



Sec. 4-93   Constitutionality.



Sec. 4-94 through Sec. 4-97 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VIII. Certificate of Registration for Contractors and
Subcontractors.



Sec. 4-98   Persons Required to Register Crafts and Trades.



Sec. 4-99   Applications.



Sec. 4-100   Persons Subject to License.



Sec. 4-101   Forms.



Sec. 4-102   Fees.



Sec. 4-103   Termination of Registration.



Sec. 4-104   Inspection.



Sec. 4-105   Revocation.



Sec. 4-106   Bonding Requirements.



Sec. 4-107   Insurance.



Sec. 4-108   Posting of Certificate of Registration.



Sec. 4-109   Schedule of Fees and Charges.



Sec. 4-110   Penalty.



Sec. 4-111 through Sec. 4-114 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IX. Park, Building and Zoning Fees.



Sec. 4-115   Park and Recreation Fees.



Sec. 4-116   Building Fees.



Sec. 4-117   Zoning and Planning Fees.



Sec. 4-118   Motor Vehicle Fees.



Sec. 4-119   Reserved for Future Use.



   Division X.  Miscellaneous Permits and Regulations.



Sec. 4-120   Liquor Retailer's Permits.



Sec. 4-121 through Sec. 4-129 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XI.  Franchise Agreements.



Sec. 4-130   Town Council Approval Required.



Sec. 4-131 through Sec. 4-139 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XII.  Tax Abatement Procedures.



Sec. 4-140   Economic Revitalization Areas.



Sec. 4-141   Administrative Charges and Fees.



Sec. 4-142 through Sec. 4-149 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XIII. Licensing Chart.



Sec. 4-150   Chart on Fees.



ARTICLE 3. CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS.



Sec. 4-151   Adoption of Rules and Regulations.



Sec. 4-152   Lake County, Indiana CATV Consortium.



Sec. 4-153   Federal Communications Commission Form 393.



Sec. 4-154   Procedure for Review of Basic Services.



Sec. 4-155   Resolution of Council Required.



Sec. 4-156   Disclosure of Information.



Sec. 4-157   Refund Procedures.



Sec. 4-158   Penalties.



Sec. 4-159   Ratification of Revised Rate Order.



Sec. 4-160 Through Sec. 4-169 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION PROGRAM.



Sec. 4-170   Purpose.



Sec. 4-171   Definitions.



Sec. 4-172   Registration.



Sec. 4-173   Certificate Required.



Sec. 4-174   Certificate.



Sec. 4-175   Certificate Revocation or Suspension.



Sec. 4-176   Exemptions.



Sec. 4-177   Violation.



Sec. 4-178 Through Sec. 4-189 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. BUSINESS LICENSES.



Sec. 4-190   Definitions.



Sec. 4-191   License required and application.



Sec. 4-192   Issuance and fee.



Sec. 4-193   Exceptions.



Sec. 4-194 Through Sec. 4-199 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 6.  CASH FOR GOLD, SCRAP DEALERS AND PAWN BROKERS



Sec. 4-200   Payment for items received by pawn shops, cash for gold
stores, and scrap metal dealers.



Sec. 4-201   Records to be kept.



ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 4-1  Authority to License. 1



The Town has the authority to impose a license fee that is reasonably related
to the administrative cost of exercising such regulating power.



                       



1   I.C., § 36-1-3-8(5), provides Towns with licensing power.



Sec. 4-2  Applications.



All applications for a permit or license under this Chapter shall be made
available by the Town Clerk-Treasurer, unless otherwise specified.



Sec. 4-3  Approval Procedures.



After examination, the Clerk-Treasurer may grant such permit or license,
unless good cause can be shown why said permit or license should not be
granted.



Sec. 4-4  Duration of License, Display Required, and Inspections. 2



   (a)   All licenses issued under this Chapter, unless specified
otherwise on the license, shall be issued for the duration of the calendar
year for which they were issued, and shall expire on December 31st.



   (b)   Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of
the licensed activity is being conducted, or if there are no premises shall
carry the license while engaged in the activity for which he or she has been
licensed, and shall exhibit it to any Town official or citizen upon request.



   (c)   The Police Department, Zoning Administrator and Building
Commissioner may inspect all places of business under license or required to
have a license.



                       



2   I.C., § 36-8-3-10, authorizes the Police Department to do inspections.



Sec. 4-5  Issuance, Revocation or Suspension. 3



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer may issue licenses or permits upon payment
of the license or permit fees and compliance with the applicable provisions
of this Code.



   (b)   Licenses and permits issued by the Town may be revoked or
suspended if the person holding the licenses and permits has violated the
terms or conditions of the license or permit or the law under which it was
issued, or has conducted the business in such a manner as to constitute a
threat to public health, safety, or general welfare of the Town citizens.



                       



3   I.C., § 36-5-6-6(6), authorizes the Clerk-Treasurer to issue licenses.



Sec. 4-6 through Sec. 4-9  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. SPECIFIC FEES AND CHARGES.



Division I. Miscellaneous Charges.4



                   



4   Editor's Note:  Ord. No. 92-13, passed April 14, 1992, which
established an assessment registration fee, was repealed by Ord. No. 94-2,
which was passed on March 8, 1994.



Sec. 4-10  Fees for Copies of Incident Reports.



   (a)   The Dyer Metropolitan Police Department is authorized to
collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for a copy of the first page of an
incident report, and three dollars ($3.00) for all subsequent pages, which
fee shall pay for the nominal costs of copying, filing and storing of said
reports.



   (b)   Any and all fees so collected shall be reported to and
accounted for by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer, Lake County,
Indiana, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Indiana State
Board of Accounts. (Ord. No. 81-32, § 2, 8-11-81)



   (c)   Fees collected pursuant to this Section shall be deposited in
the Incident Report Account addressed in Sec. 2-192 of this Code.



Sec. 4-11  Charge for Presentment of a Returned Check or Draft.



Any person or firm presenting a check or draft which is returned to the Town
of Dyer marked “unpaid” or “NSF” shall be assessed an additional sum
which shall be added to the fee or bill for which the “unpaid” check or
draft was presented.  Said charge shall be any protest fee charged to the
Town of Dyer and twenty-seven and 50/100 ($27.50) or five percent (5%) of the
face amount of the check or draft, whichever is greater, not to exceed two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. No. 84-18, 5-10-84; Ord. No.
86-24, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 95-26, 11-14-95; Ord. No. 2008-14, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-12  Application Fee for Police Department Applicants.



Application fees for Police Department applicants are addressed in Section
2-96 of this Code.



Sec. 4-13  Copying Fee.



   (a)   Any person requesting a copy of a public record shall pay in
advance to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town the actual cost of copying the
record determined to be ten cents ($0.10) per page.



   (b)   If the Town does not have mechanical means for copying a
requested record, the person requesting such record shall be entitled to
inspect and manually transcribe the record.  The Town shall not charge to
inspect a public record or to search for, examine, or review a record to
determine whether the record may be disclosed. (Ord. No. 84-29, § 7,
7-10-84; Ord. No. 2003-13, 6-17-03)



   (c)   This fee is also addressed in § 3-36 of this Code.



Sec. 4-14  Cost for Copies of Clark Dietz Maps.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer has incurred considerable expense in
contracting with Clark Dietz to provide the Town with aerial and contour maps
of the Town.



   (b)   The Town Council of the Town of Dyer is desirous of recouping
some of said expense.



   (c)   Anyone wishing to obtain a copy or copies of said maps shall
pay to the Clerk- Treasurer the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for up to
five (5) copies, and five dollars ($5.00) for each copy thereafter. A sheet
being recognized as being 24" x 36" in size and representing a certain
section of the Town of Dyer. Monies collected shall be placed in the Town
General Fund.



   (d)   This fee shall be waived in the event that the party
requesting any copy is a political subdivision. (Ord. No. 93-18, 10-12-93)



Sec. 4-15  Costs for Copies of Dyer Subdivision Control Ordinance and the
Book of Standards.



The following charges are established for each copy of the Dyer Subdivision
Control Ordinance and the Book of Standards:



      Dyer Subdivision Control Ordinance      $50.00



      Book of Standards               $50.00



(Ord. No. 95-4, 2-14-95)



Sec. 4-16  Fee for fingerprint services.



A fee in the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for fingerprint services is
hereby established, effective immediately, as a policy for and within the
Town of Dyer.  Any monies received for providing fingerprint services shall
be deposited into the Police Department Special Revenue Fund.  (Ord. No.
2007-09, 5-16-07; Am. Ord. No. 2010-12, 11-3-2010)



Sec. 4-17 through Sec. 4-19 Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Charges Regarding Hazardous and Toxic Material Spills and Leaks.



Sec. 4-20  Payments Due Within Thirty (30) Days.



Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of Dyer,
who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or toxic
materials within the Town of Dyer, and/or a vehicle fire on a state highway
or an interstate highway within the Town of Dyer, for which leaks, spills, or
fire the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department must initially respond, shall pay the
Town of Dyer within thirty (30) days as compensation and reimbursement for
providing said response services, the amount set forth herein to reimburse
the Town for all direct and indirect expenses it incurs in responding to the
call, and also including expenses incurred by the Department of Public Works
of the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 90-32, § 1, 9-11-90) 5



                               



5 Editor's Note: Ord. No. 90-32 contained a scrivener's error listing "Board
of Public Works" instead of "Department of Public Works".



Sec. 4-21  Service Charges for Hazardous or Toxic Spills.



Service charges of the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department shall be computed as
follows:



   (a)   For the initial response with fire engine, trucks, or fire
apparatus, Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00).



   (b)   For each hour or fraction thereof of on-scene assistance, One
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00).



   (c)   For expendable materials such as absorption materials, or
other agents used in cleanup operations, the actual replacement cost of those
materials.



   (d)   For collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or contaminated
materials resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and disposal at
an authorized location. (Ord. No. 90-32, § 1, 9-11-90)



Sec. 4-22 through Sec. 4-24 Reserved for Future Use.



Division III.  Carnivals and Circuses.



Sec. 4-25  Definitions.



   "Public purposes" shall mean and include any and all carnivals,
circuses, side show fairs, exhibitions, demonstrations, trade shows, or other
means of congregating groups of people together, whether for profit, charity,
or otherwise. (Ord. No. 740, § l, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-26  Permits and Fees Required.



   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation who desires to use private or
public property for the purposes hereinabove defined shall apply to the
President of the Town Council for a permit to use said property and shall
provide said President with the following information:



      (1)   If on private property, a written authorization from the
owner of the private property.



      (2)   The name and address of the applicant and the name and
address of each and every person sponsoring or otherwise having an interest
in the said temporary land use.



      (3)   The exact location where said temporary land use will be
conducted and the dates thereof.



      (4)   The name and address of the operator who intends to use
said public or private land for public purposes as herein defined and the
nature of the intended use.



      (5)   All applications for such permits shall be made a
minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the first date of the occurrence of the
intended land use.



   (b)   Each person, firm or corporation so applying for said permit
shall pay to the Town Clerk- Treasurer a permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
for each permit, which fee shall revert to the General Fund.  No fee shall
be paid to the said Clerk-Treasurer until said permit is issued and signed by
the President of the Town Council. (Ord. No. 740, § 2, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-27  Permits Non-Transferable.



No permits issued hereunder shall be transferrable. (Ord. No. 740, § 3,
9-9-69)



Sec. 4-28  Considerations Prior to Issuance of Permit.



In considering whether or not to issue said permits, the Dyer official so
issuing the same shall first procure written approval from the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, and the Chief of the Dyer Volunteer Fire
Department so as to insure that the proposed operation shall not be hazardous
to property, or endanger any person, or constitute or create traffic or
safety problems. (Ord. No. 740, § 4, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-29  Revocation of Permits and Hearing Thereon.



   (a)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this Division shall suffer the immediate revocation of such permit.  The
Town official issuing permits hereunder having reason to believe that there
is a violation of this Ordinance by any permittee shall immediately revoke in
writing the said permit.  Said written revocation of said permit shall be
served by the Town Chief of Police, or his or her designee to the permittee
and thereafter, the permittee shall not be permitted to make or conduct any
operation authorized under said revoked permit.



   (b)   Upon revocation as aforesaid, the officer of the Town of Dyer
revoking said permit shall immediately certify his or her action to the Town
Council, who shall hold a hearing not less than three (3) days after the
revocation to determine the finality of said revocation, provided that said
permittee requests said hearing. (Ord. No. 740, § 5, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-30  Appeal Procedures.



Should any Town official refuse to issue a permit, the applicant therefor,
within five (5) days after said refusal, may appeal in writing said
official's decision to the Town Council who shall hold a hearing no later
than three (3) days after said appeal is filed, to determine whether or not
the permit should be issued, provided that said applicant requests said
hearing in his/her appeal. (Ord. No. 740, § 6, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-31  Exceptions.



Nothing in this Division shall be construed so as to prohibit any person,
firm, corporation, club, fraternal organization, church, or other charitable
organizations from conducting their regular meetings and affairs, either on
public or private property, so long as no additional public use as herein
defined is contemplated or intended in said use. (Ord. No. 740, § 7, 9-9-69)



Sec. 4-32  Penalty.



Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Division
shall, be fined a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. (Ord.
No. 740, § 8, 9-9-69; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 4-33 through Sec. 4-37  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV.  Schedule of Rates Governing Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer
Work.



Sec. 4-38  Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer Fees.



Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer Fees shall be as follows:



   (1)   Permit cost shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) plus an
additional seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each sink, closet,
lavatory, bath tub, shower, drinking fountain, urinal, laundry tray,
automatic dishwasher, slop sink, sump pump, sill cock, floor drain, inside
down spout, range boiler and/or side arm heater, water heater, storage tank,
air conditioning unit requiring water connection, and humidifier requiring
water connection, plus seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each
additional outlet provided for future rough in.



   (2)   The minimum plumbing permit fee shall be seventy-five dollars
($75.00), including the administration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord.
No. 88-11, § 9[E], 3-8-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 2, 7-14-98)



   (3)   Reinspection of inspection subsequent to “red tag” shall
be at the expense of the owner or applicant at the rate of forty dollars
($40.00) for each reinspection.  Said charge shall be paid prior to
reinspection.



Sec. 4-39  Standards.



All building standards are addressed in Chapter 7 of this Code.



Sec. 4-40  Impact Fees.



All wastewater treatment and water utility infrastructure impact fees are
addressed in Chapter 9 of this Code.



Sec. 4-41 through Sec. 4-44 Reserved for Future Use.



Division V.  Dyer Sales Control Ordinance.6



                   



6   I.C., § 25-37-1-11, addresses the Town's authorization over transient
merchants.



Sec. 4-45  Statement of Policy.



It is declared to be the policy of the Town of Dyer in full recognition of
the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, and in the
furtherance of the public health, safety and general welfare to regulate
solicitation, sales and the distribution of literature by persons,
organizations, peddlers and transient merchants; to protect the citizenry
from unauthorized solicitation at their homes to provide for maximum traffic
safety on the streets and highways in the Town and to provide for the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town. (Ord. No. 92-28, §
1, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-46  Definitions. 6



The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Division shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicated a different meaning:



Peddler means any person selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange, by
sample or otherwise, any products, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or
description whatsoever, traveling by foot, vehicle or other conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, or in, about, along or upon any street,
alley, or highway, or any grounds in the municipality. The word “peddler”
shall include, but not be limited to, “hawkers” and “ice cream
vendors”.



Solicitor and/or canvasser means any person taking or attempting to take
orders for sales or products, goods, wares and merchandise of any kind or
description whatsoever, for future delivery or services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not the person has, carries or exposes
for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting
advance payment of such sales or not, traveling by foot or any type of
conveyance from place to place within the corporate limits of the Town.
“Solicitor” shall include, but not be limited to, those soliciting the
taking of photographs. “Solicitor” shall also include any person
requesting contributions for any person or organization or handing out any
literature or flyers on behalf of any person or organization.



Transient merchant means any person, whether a resident or non-resident of
the Town, who engages in a temporary business of selling or delivering goods
or products of any kind within the Town, and who, in furtherance of said
purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, for the exhibition and
sale of products, goods, wares and merchandise.  (Ord. No. 92-28, § 2,
10-13-92)



                         



6   I.C., §25-37-1-2, defines “transient merchant”.



Sec. 4-47  Temporary Facilities for Transient Merchants.



   (a)   All persons, merchants or transient merchants licensed under
the provisions of this Chapter, or subject to being licensed under the
provisions of this chapter, except peddlers or solicitors, shall conduct
their business within the town in a permanent structure enclosing an area of
not less than five hundred (500) square feet on one level.  Said structure
shall be serviced by sanitary facilities, sewers, drains, power and
utilities, including running water, and said structure shall otherwise be
built in conformity with the building Code of the Town applicable to
commercial buildings.



   (b)   No license shall be issued to a person subject to the
provisions of subsection (a) until the applicant demonstrates that the
intended use of the facilities is permitted under the applicable provisions
of the Dyer Zoning Ordinance or produces documentation from the proper Town
body that the use is a similar use or that a special exception use has been
granted. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 3, 10-13-92).



Sec. 4-48  Door to Door Solicitation—License Required.



   (a)   No person shall contact or approach any residence or place of
business within the Town with the intent or purpose of soliciting without
having a license authorizing solicitation in his possession.  No license
shall be in the possession of any person other than the one to whom it was
issued.



   (b)   No person shall occupy or use any portion of a public street,
sidewalk, park or other public property within the limits of the municipality
for the purpose of selling merchandise, or for the taking of photographs,
pictures, or motion pictures with the intent or purpose of selling, or
offering the picture for sale, without first obtaining a license.



   (c)   No person shall engage in house-to-house selling, peddling,
soliciting, canvassing, hawking, acting as a transient merchant or any
similar activity within the Town without first registering and obtaining a
license. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 4, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-49  Application and Issuance of License.



   (a)   Any person or organization required to obtain a license under
the provisions of this ordinance must file a sworn written application (in
duplicate) with the Clerk-Treasurer the application giving the following
information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant and, if a group, the names
and addresses of all persons who will be soliciting;



      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the business and
the goods to be sold;



      (3)   If employed, name and address of the employer, together
with the credentials establishing the exact relationship;



      (4)   Length of time for which the right to do business is
desired;



      (5)   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the
vehicle, together with license number or other means of identification;



      (6)   Photograph of the applicant on a valid state photo
identification card or a valid driver's license (if applicable);



      (7)   Social security number and a statement as to whether or
not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, (if applicable).



   (b)   At the time of filing application, a non-refundable fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer covering the cost of
investigation.  Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be
referred to the Chief of Police who may cause an investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for
the protection of the public.  If the applicant's character and
responsibility are found unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse
his disapproval and his reason for same on the application, returning the
application to the Clerk- Treasurer who shall notify the applicant that his
application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.



   (c)   If the applicant's character and responsibility are found to
be satisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse his approval on the
application, returning the application to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall,
upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue a license and deliver it to the
applicant.  The license shall contain the signature of the Clerk-Treasurer,
the name and address of said licensee, class of license issued and kinds of
goods to be sold thereunder, and the expiration date.  The Clerk- Treasurer
shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 5,
10-13-92)



Sec. 4-50  License Fee.



A license fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per week, or ten dollars
($10.00) per month, or fifty dollars ($50.00) per year shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer for a license required by this article.  None of the license
fees provided for by this Section shall be applied so as to occasion an undue
burden upon interstate commerce.  In any case where a license fee is
believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon
such commerce, he may apply to the Town Council for an adjustment of the fee
so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such
commerce. (Sec. 92-28, § 6, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-51  Free Licenses to Veterans. 7



The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a free license pursuant to this Division to
an approved applicant who has been a war veteran or serviceman. (Ord. No.
92-28, § 7, 10-13-92)



                           



7   I.C., § 25-37-1-14, exempts honorably discharged veterans from paying
license fees.



Sec. 4-52  Special Provisions for Vehicles.



For each vehicle used, a licensed applicant shall file a certificate of
insurance with the Clerk- Treasurer, establishing that liability insurance in
minimum amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) bodily injury and fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00) property damage is in effect.  Each vehicle so used
shall have displayed upon each side thereof, in plain print, legible at
twenty (20) feet, the name and address of owner and kind of goods for sale. 
A fee for each vehicle used in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) per month
or twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per year shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 8, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-53  Term of Licenses.



All annual licenses issued under this Division shall expire on the
thirty-first (31st) day of December in the year when issued, and all other
licenses shall expire on the date specified on the license. (Ord. No. 92-28,
§ 9, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-54  Badge Required.



Any person procuring a license under this Division shall wear a badge
conspicuously upon his person, as such badge reflects his permission and
license, such badge to be furnished by the Town and to be non-transferable.



A deposit of five dollars ($5.00) for the badge shall be required of all such
persons, the deposit being returned to the depositor upon the return of the
badge to the Clerk-Treasurer within five (5) days of expiration of said
license. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 10, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-55  Hours of Solicitations.



No house-to-house solicitor and/or canvasser shall use other than the front
door when making calls at residences, and all such soliciting and/or
canvassing shall be done between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
Solicitation or canvassing on Sundays and holidays is prohibited. (Ord. No.
92-28, § 11, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-56  Sidewalk Contribution Solicitation - Permit Required.



   (a)   No person shall solicit contributions or distribute any
literature or flyers on any sidewalk in the Town, without having first
obtained a sidewalk contribution permit.



   (b)   The Clerk-Treasurer may issue a sidewalk contribution permit
for the solicitation of contributions from the general public, or the
distribution of literature or flyers, by duly authorized persons on any
sidewalk, for the benefit of recognized charities, for fraternal and veterans
organizations and for political, civic, social, educational and religious
groups.  The permit shall expire on December 31st after the date of issuance
of that calendar year.



   (c)   It shall be unlawful at all times, except with a sidewalk
contribution permit and when so acting in compliance with this section, for
any person or organization to solicit, collect or use for any purpose any
funds so obtained on the public streets or places of the town.



   (d)   The provisions of this Section shall not apply and no permit
shall issue for the commercial sale of merchandise, unless such sale is for
the purpose of supporting the organizations refereed to in (b) herein.



   (e)   Any person or organization desiring to obtain a sidewalk
contribution permit shall make application to the Clerk-Treasurer which
application shall give the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant and, if a group, the names
and addresses of all persons who will be soliciting;



      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the organization
and the goods to be sold (if applicable);



      (3)   The dates requested for the solicitation;



      (4)   If vehicles are to be used, a description of the
vehicles, together with license numbers or other means of identification;



   (f)   All requests for sidewalk contribution permits must be
received by the Clerk-Treasurer no later than ten (10) working days prior to
the requested solicitation dates, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall have the
right, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare to grant the
permit for a date other than that requested.



   (g)   There shall be no fee for the issuance of a sidewalk
contribution.



   (h)   All persons obtaining sidewalk contribution permits under this
section shall be required to wear a visible identification tag identifying
both the individual and the organization they represent. (Ord. No. 92-28, §
12, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-57  Application of Division.



This Division shall not apply to:



   (a)   Persons representing a bona fide wholesale establishment
selling to retail merchants.



   (b)   The acts of retail merchants or their employees conducting
business in the Town of Dyer in taking orders or delivering goods in the
houses of their customers for goods or services. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 13,
10-13-92)



Sec. 4-58  No Street Solicitation.



To maintain the public health, safety, and welfare, this ordinance does not
provide for street solicitation, which shall be illegal in the Town of Dyer,
Indiana. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 14, 10-13-92)



Sec. 4-59  Penalty. 8



Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be fined
fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation payable to the Ordinance
Violation Bureau, and in a sum not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) thereafter and each day that any person shall violate any
of the provisions or Sections of this Division shall be deemed to commit a
separate offense. (Ord. No. 92-28, § 15, 10-13-92)



                         



8   I.C., § 25-37-1-9, addresses violations, and I.C., § 25-37-1-11,
addresses punishment of violators subject to the provision of I.C., § 36-1-3.



Sec. 4-60 through Sec. 4-63  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VI. Regulation and Registration of Pinball Machines,
Electronic-Games and Game Devices.



Sec. 4-64  Licensing of Electronic Games and Pinball Machines.



   (a)   Each business, arcade, tavern or other establishment which
maintains on its premises any electronic games, pinball machines or other
game devices such as may be found in an arcade, must license each such game,
machine, or device separately.



   (b)   Each such license shall contain the name of the owner of the
game, machine, or device, together with the owner's address, the date of
installation, the place of installation serial number, if any, and the
manufacturer.  The application for each license, in addition to the
preceding information, shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of Town Officials in licensing such game
devices.  The license shall be prominently displayed on the game, machine,
or device for which it is issued or shall be filed in the office of the
establishment to which the license/licenses was/were issued so that the
liense(s) can be readily available for inspection.



   (c)   The installation and/or operation of any electronic game,
machine, or gaming device without the proper license affixed, or on file,
shall be deemed to be a violation of this Division.  (Ord. No. 80-19, § 1,
4-8-80; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-65  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 4-66  Application for License.



Applications for a license required by this Division shall be made in writing
to the Town Clerk- Treasurer.  Forms for all licenses and applications
thereforth shall be prepared and kept on file by the Town Clerk-Treasurer. 
Each license issued shall terminate on the last day of the calendar year.
(Ord. No. 82-6, 3-9-82; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-67  Role of Clerk-Treasurer.



The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to all licensees a statement at the time
of the expiration of the license or licenses held by the party, one (1) month
prior to the date of such expiration, provided, that a failure to send out
such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse
the licensee from a failure to secure a new licensee or renewal hereof, nor
shall it be a defense in action for operation without a license. (Ord. No.
82-6, 3-9-82; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-68  License Fee.



For each such licensee, the licensee shall pay a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), payable at time of application.  All such fees shall be deposited
in the General Fund of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana. (Ord. No.
82-6, 3-9-82; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-69  Installations-Number Restricted.



Each business establishment, other than a business establishment whose
primary business is recreation, shall be entitled to install five (5) game
devices.  A business establishment whose primary business is recreation
shall not be limited to a certain number of gaming devices, except that no
recreational facility shall exist for the sole purpose of operating as an
arcade. (Ord. No. 85-49, a, 1-14-86; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-70  Revocation and Nuisances.



   (a)   Any and all licenses issued shall be subject to revocation by
the Clerk-Treasurer upon recommendation of the Town Council as a result of
the existence of a nuisance to customers, other  businesses,  or  the 
public resulting from the operation of gaming or amusement devices on the
licensed premises.  For purposes of this Section, a “nuisance” shall
include the violation of any provision of the Dyer Town Code or Indiana Code
pertaining to force, violence, disorderly conduct, moral turpitude, or
gambling.



   (b)   Any and all licenses issued shall be revoked by the
Clerk-Treasurer upon conviction of the licensee for any felony or misdemeanor
involving force, violence, disorderly conduct, moral turpitude, gambling, or
the terms of this Division, or other provisions of the Dyer Town Code or laws
of the State of Indiana pertaining to business operation. (Ord. No. 85-49, b,
c, 1-14-86; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-71  Transfer of License/Fees.



A licensee who desires to transfer an unrevoked license owned by him or her
to another electronic device shall be entitled to make the transfer provided
the following conditions are met:



   (a)   The machine from which the license is being transferred is
being removed from the business establishment.



   (b)   The license decal, or as much of it as can possibly be
removed, is returned to the Clerk- Treasurer.



   (c)   A transfer fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
is paid to the Clerk- Treasurer.  (Ord. No. 85-49, 1-14-86; Am. Ord. No.
2013-05, § 1, 7-8-13)



Sec. 4-72  Penalties.



Anyone found in violation of the Division shall be fined not less than
two-hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation.  (Ord. No. 85-49, 1-14-86; Am. Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1,
7-8-13)



Sec. 4-73 through Sec. 4-79  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Taxicab Regulations.9



                         



9  I.C., § 8-2.1-22-1, et seq., addresses regulations on “Transportation
of Passengers”.



Sec. 4-80  Taxicab License Required.



It shall be unlawful for any person, co-partnership or corporation to operate
a taxicab or taxicabs upon the streets or alleys of Dyer, Indiana, unless
such person, co-partnership or corporation shall first secure and hold a
license to operated such taxicab or taxicabs as hereinafter provided. (Ord.
No. 416, § 1, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-81  Application.



Any person intending to operate a taxicab upon the streets or alleys of this
Town shall first file with the Town Clerk-Treasurer his application for a
license upon forms to be supplied by the Clerk- Treasurer and such
application shall contain the following information:



   (a)   The name and address of the applicant.



   (b)   If the applicant is a co-partnership, a copy of the
co-partnership, a copy of the co- partnership agreement shall be filed
together with the full names and addresses of all the co-partners.  If the
applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be
filed and the application shall show the names and addresses of all the
officers and directions of such corporation.



   (c)   The number of taxicabs for which the applicant seeks a license.



   (d)   A complete description of each taxicab, including the make,
year of manufacture, engine number, serial number, motive power and color and
said applicant must designate the color to be used.



   (e)   Such other information as the Clerk-Treasurer may deem
necessary to show compliance with this ordinance.



   (f)   Attached to or accompanying such application shall be the
following:



An insurance policy or bond as hereinafter required: cash or certified check
for basic license fee and individual taxicab fees as hereinafter provided.



   (g)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the taxicabs
to be operated and such application shall be sworn to by the applicant. (Ord.
No. 416, § 2, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-82  Licenses.



Upon filing of an application as above provided with insurance policy or
bond, as herein described, and the cash or certified check for the full
payment of license fee, the Clerk-Treasurer shall thereupon issue to the
applicant the following:



   (a)   A license authorizing the applicant to operate a taxicab or
taxicabs upon the streets or alleys of this Town for a period of three (3)
years beginning with the date of such license.  Such license shall be
displayed in a prominent place in the taxicab for which it was issued at all
times.



   (b)   Licenses issued upon the adoption or passage of this ordinance
shall expire three years from the date of the license, and such license shall
not be transferable.



   (c)   No more taxicabs shall be licensed to operate at any one time
than one (1) taxicab for each three thousand (3,000) persons of the
population of the Town of Dyer as reflected by the last United States Census
and when that number of licenses shall be issued and outstanding the Town
Clerk- Treasurer shall refuse all other applications.



   (d)   No person shall operate a taxicab upon the streets or alleys
of this Town until such basic licenses and license for individual taxicab or
taxicabs shall have been issued and delivered.



   (e)   No person who has been convicted of a felony shall be
permitted to operate or act as a driver of a taxicab in the Town of Dyer.
(Ord. No. 416, § 3, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-83  Rules and Regulations for Taxicab Operation.



No license shall be issued for a taxicab unless it shall comply with the
following rules and regulations:



   (a)   The taxicab shall be equipped with a floor mat made of rubber,
leather, metal chain, or a similar non-absorbent washable material and shall
be easily removable.



   (b)   Every taxicab shall be equipped with an interior dome light of
sufficient candle power to illuminate the entire interior.



   (c)   No license shall be issued for any taxicab unless the name of
the owner operating the same and the number of said cab shall be painted in
letters at least two (2) inches in height in the center of the main panel of
each rear door in such taxicab. (Ord. No. 416, § 4 [a] - [c], 12-8-59)



   (d)   No taxicab license shall be issued for any vehicle that is not
in excellent mechanical condition, and if such vehicle is more than five (5)
years old immediately prior to the issuance of such license, in addition to
an annual State Safety Inspection, same will be required to have an
inspection every six (6) months by an authorized State Inspector, at the
expense of the Owner, as an extra safety precaution for public conveyance
use.  The time for the first inspection of such vehicle will be six (6)
months after the adoption of this ordinance, and each six (6) months
thereafter.  The Town will design a check list of items to be inspected
prior to such inspection. (Ord. No. 769, § 4 [d], 10-13-70)



   (e)   No taxicab license shall be issued for any vehicle unless such
vehicle shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of standard size and design
and such taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light so arranged as to
throw a continuous steady light thereon and the fact of the dial thereof
shall be visible to the passenger. The case of such taximeter shall be sealed
and its cover and gear must be intact. (Ord. No. 416, § 4 [e], 12-8-59)



   (f)   No license shall be issued for any vehicle or to any operator
until the owner of such vehicle shall file with the Town Clerk-Treasurer an
insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of Indiana.  Such policy shall provide insurance coverage for each
and every taxi cab owned and operated by the applicant with a minimum
liability of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the injury or
death of any one (1) person and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for the
injury or death of any number of persons in any single accident and a limit
of minimum liability ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage in
any one accident, regardless of whether the taxi cab was being driven by the
owner or his employee.  Provided, however, that in lieu of the above
insurance policy, the owner of any taxi cab or taxi cabs may deposit and keep
on deposit with the Town Clerk-Treasurer throughout the life of his or its
license a surety bond executed by a surety company approved by the Town
Attorney in a sum of not less than sixty-thousand dollars ($60,000.00)
payable to the Town of Dyer, and conditioned upon the payment of all
judgments for damages for the death or injury of any one person up to
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and  fifty-thousand  dollars
($50,000.00) for the death or injury of any number of  persons  in  any 
one  (1)  accident,  and  ten-thousand  dollars  ($10,000.00)  for 
damages to property in any one accident regardless of whether such judgment
shall be against the driver, operator, or owner of the taxi cab.  The form
of such bond and the surety company issuing the same must be approved by the
Town Attorney.  The insurance policy and the bond shall conform with the
statutes of the state of Indiana in reference to such policies or bonds.
(Ord. No. 656, § 4 [f], 5-9-67)



   (g)   No corporation or co-partnership shall be granted a license
under the provisions of this ordinance unless such corporation or
co-partnership are qualified to do business in the State of Indiana. (Ord.
No. 416, § 4 [g], 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-84  License Fees.



   (a)   A basic annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
year shall be paid by each licensee.  This license shall permit such owner
to operate one taxicab.  Such owner shall be permitted to operate as many
additional taxicabs as he may desire but an additional license fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) per annum shall be paid for each additional taxicab. 
Provided, however, that no license shall be issued for more taxicabs than are
provided for in Section 4-82.  Such fee shall be placed in a separate fund.



   (b)   No other fees or charges except as above set out shall be made
or paid by any license. (Ord. No. 416, § 5, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-85  Definitions.



   (a)   Definition of taxicab.  For the purpose of this ordinance the
term “taxicab” shall include all self propelled vehicles carrying
passengers for hire, such vehicles having intended seating capacity or six
(6) persons or less.



   (b)   Definition of taximeter.  Any instrument or fare-registering
device attached to a taxicab and designed and intended to mechanically
register the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the time the said
vehicle is in waiting and to indicate upon such record by figures the fare to
be charged in dollars and cents shall be termed a taximeter for the purposes
of this Division. (Ord. No. 416, § 6, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-86  Register of Taxicabs.



The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a register showing the name and address
of each person owning or operating a taxicab licensed under this ordinance
together with the license number, make, and description of such taxicab. 
Such register shall be a public record and open to inspection by the public
at all reasonable times.  Certified or authenticated copies of such records
or portions thereof shall be conclusive evidence of the contents of such
records.  The books necessary to keep such records shall be furnished and
paid for by the Town. (Ord. No. 416, § 7, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-87  Taxi Stands.



   (a)   Public taxi stands shall be provided for the use of licensed
taxicabs as herein defined and the Town Council is authorized to designate
such stands.  Such stands shall be designated alongside the curb of any
public street or alley in the Town as may be deemed proper.



   (b)   Any taxicab stand so established by the Town Council shall be
for the use of all taxicabs licensed under the terms of this ordinance and no
other vehicles whatsoever.  (Ord. No. 416, § 8, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-88  Rates or Fares to be Charged and Regulations Governing Operations.



   (a)   The charge for call shall be taxi-metered, and shall be fifty
cents ($.50) for the first three- fifths (3/5) mile, and ten cents ($.10) for
each one-fifth mile thereafter.



   (b)   The rate for the pick up and delivery of any and all packages
without passengers anywhere within the Town limits of the Town of Dyer shall
be one dollar ($1.00) plus taximeter fare from package pick up point to
delivery point. (Ord. No. 769, § 9 [a], [b], 10-13-70)



   (c)   The charge for calls from places within Dyer to places outside
the limits of Dyer shall be taxi-metered and shall be fifty cents ($.50) for
the first three-fifths (3/5) mile and ten cents ($.10) for each one-fifth
(1/5) mile thereafter. (Ord. No. 656, § 9 [c], 5-9-67)



   (d)   In all cases where there is more than one (1) passenger an
additional charge of ten cents ($.10) for each passenger shall be made.



   (e)   In the event passengers within the Town of Dyer want the
taxicab to wait, said waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is
not in motion beginning with arrival at the place to which it has been called
or time consumed while standing or waiting at the direction of the passenger;
waiting time shall be charged at the rate of ten cents ($.10) for each two
(2) minutes or fraction thereof, human no case shall said waiting time exceed
the rate of three dollars ($3.00) per hour unless said waiting time exceeds
the length of one (1) hour and in such event, an additional charge of two
dollars ($2.00) per hour shall be made.



   (f)   Any passenger upon demand and upon the payment of the fare
shall be entitled to a receipt for such fare and such receipt shall show the
name of the owner of such taxicab, the items which were paid and the date of
payment.



   (g)   Every driver of a taxicab shall have the right to demand
payment in advance of the legal fare for all hauls outside of the corporate
limits of the Town of Dyer and may refuse to transport or carry any person so
refusing to pay such fare in advance.



   (h)   No driver of a licensed taxicab shall carry any other person
than the passenger or group of passengers first employing such taxicab
without the consent of the person or persons first employing it.



   (i)   All disputes as to fares shall be determined by the officer in
charge at the police station nearest to the place where the dispute arose. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall abide with the decision of such officer.



   (j)   No driver of a taxicab shall charge or attempt to charge any
passenger a higher rate of fare than that to which he is entitled under the
provisions of this ordinance.



   (k)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or
driving a taxicab to operate or drive the same on a distance tariff or to use
or advertise in connection therewith the words “taxicab”, “taxi” or
“cab” or in soliciting trade from the public or to represent himself as
the driver, operator or owner of a taxicab unless the same is equipped with a
taximeter complying with the provisions of this ordinance.



   (l)   It shall also be unlawful for any person owning, operating or
driving a taxicab as herein defined to operate or drive such taxicab unless
the fare to be charged is determined by a standard type taximeter and no
other or different fare shall be charged to the passenger than is recorded on
the reading face of said taximeter for the trip.



   (m)   No passenger or other person shall be permitted to occupy the
front seat beside the driver unless the rear seat is occupied by two (2) or
more persons.



   (n)   Only paid passengers shall be permitted to ride in taxicabs.
(Ord. No. 416, § 9 [d]-[n], 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-89  Transfer of License Tags.



Where the operator or owner of a taxicab withdraws his taxicab from service
and substitutes a new taxicab for such taxicab so withdrawn, the license
issued to the taxicab so withdrawn shall be transferred to the new taxicab
without charge. (Ord. No. 416, § 10, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-90  Preference in Issuing Licenses.



The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall in issuing licenses for the year 1960 or
subsequent years give preference to those operators and taxicabs operating
within the Town pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 416, §
11, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-91  Taxicabs Licensed in Other Communities.



Nothing in this ordinance shall be so construed as to prevent taxicabs
regularly licensed in other cities from bringing in and depositing passengers
in Dyer where such passengers were picked up outside the corporate limits of
Dyer.  It shall be unlawful, however, for taxicabs not licensed in Dyer to
accept passengers within the corporate limits of Dyer for delivery to any
point within the Town limits.  (Ord. No. 416, § 12, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-92  Violations.



   (a)   Any person who shall operate or attempt to operate a taxicab
upon the streets of Dyer without first having secured a license to do so
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in the sum of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00).



   (b)   Conviction for violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance of any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab shall be deemed
cause for the revocation of his or its license at the direction of the Town
Council.



   (c)   The owner, driver or operator of any taxicab whose license has
been forfeited or suspended shall not solicit or accept or transport
passengers upon the streets of the Town.



Upon conviction thereof such owner driver or operator shall be fined in a sum
of not less than ten dollars ($10.00).



   (d)   Failure to comply with any other provision of this ordinance
by an operator or a driver of a taxicab shall be punishable, upon violation
thereof, by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00).



   (e)   Any owner, operator or driver of a taxicab who shall violate
any of the provisions of this ordinance or refuse to comply therewith shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during or on which such
violation or refusal to comply shall be committed or shall continue.  (Ord.
No. 416, § 13, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-93  Constitutionality.



If any parts of this Division shall be found to be unconstitutional and/or in
conflict with the laws of this State, the other parts of such ordinance shall
not be affected or impaired. (Ord. No. 416, § 14, 12-8-59)



Sec. 4-94 through Sec. 4-97  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VIII. Certificate of Registration for Contractors and
Subcontractors.10



                           



10   I.C., §22-11-3.1-3, authorizes a Town to license but restricts fees
to $100.00 and renewals to $50.00.



Sec. 4-98  Persons Required to Register Crafts & Trades.



All contractors, sub-contractors, remodelers, crafts, trades or other
persons, firms, or corporations doing business in the Town of Dyer in the
field of construction or remodeling or renovation must obtain a Certificate
of Registration from the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-99  Applications.



Applications for a Certificate of Registration required by this Division
shall be made in writing to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.  Each application
shall state the names of the contractor, or subcontractor, their occupation
or trade, the time covered and the fee to be paid.  Each application shall
contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance
of the Town Officials for the registration of such businesses or occupation.
(Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-100  Persons Subject to License.



Whenever a license is required by the State of Indiana, the County of Lake,
or any of its agencies, commissions or regulatory bodies, for the
maintenance, operation or conduct of any craft or trade connected with
construction, remodeling or renovating or for doing business or engaging in
any construction, remodeling or renovation, if by himself or through an
agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in such
business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefore, actively or
passively; or performs and/or attempts to perform any part of such business
or occupation in the town, such person shall be required to present said
license to the Town Clerk-Treasurer, at the time of application for a
Certificate of Registration hereunder. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-101  Forms.



Forms for all registrations and applications therefore, shall be prepared and
kept on file by the Town Clerk-Treasurer. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-102  Fees.



In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application is made
to the Clerk-Treasurer.  Except as otherwise provided all registration fees
shall become a part of the general fund. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-103  Termination of Registration.



Each Certificate of Registration shall terminate on the last day of the
calendar year of the Town, where no provision to the contrary is made.



The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to all registrants of the Town a
statement at the time of the expiration of the Certificate of Registration
held by the party, one (1) month prior to the date of such expiration,
provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the
registrants to receive it shall not excuse the registrant from a failure to
secure a new certificate of registration or renewal thereof, nor shall it be
a defense in action or operation without a certificate of registration. (Ord.
No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-104  Inspection.



Whenever inspection of the premises under construction or renovation is
provided for or required by ordinance, or is reasonably necessary to secure
compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it
shall be the duty of the registrant, or the person in charge of the premises
to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection,
any officer or employee of the Town, who is authorized or directed to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.



Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any ordinance or provision or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the registrant of the Town whose craft is
governed by the provisions to give any authorized officer or employee of the
Town requesting the same, sufficient samples of such material or commodity
for such analysis upon request.



In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Town Council may
revoke the Certificate of Registration of any registrant in the Town who
refused or refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized
to make such inspection or take such sample to make the inspection, or take
an adequate sample of said commodity, or who interfered with such officer or
employee while in the performance of his duty in making such inspection,
provided that no Certificate of Registration shall be revoked for such cause
unless written demand  is  made upon the  registrant or person  in charge
of the premises, in the name of the Town, stating that such inspection or
sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or to
obtain the sample. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-105  Revocation.



Any Certificate of Registration may be suspended or revoked by the Town
Council for any one (1) or more of the following reasons:



   a.   Violation by the registrant of an ordinance of the Town of Dyer.



   b.   Violation by the registrant of any law, rule or regulation of
the State of Indiana or of the United States of America, or any department or
division thereof.



   c.   Misrepresentation or falsification of statements in the
application for a Certificate of Registration.



In the event the Town Council is of the reasonable belief that the violation
by the registrant can be cured or corrected, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall
serve written notice upon the registrant setting forth the violations, and
the registrant shall not have less than five (5) days nor more than thirty
(30) days, as set by the Town Council to cure and correct the violation and
to submit evidence of the cure or correction, the Town Council may suspend or
revoke any Certificate of Registration for one or more of the reasons set
forth above. Before the suspension or revocation of any Certificate of
Registration, the Town Council may give written notice to the registrant of
the violation or violations and set forth therein a date for hearing for the
purpose of suspending or revoking said license or permits. Said hearing for
suspension or revocation shall be had not less than ten (10) days after the
personal service of the mailing of the written notice; however, in the event
the Town Council believe that immediate and irreparable harm or damage to
person or property may occur by reason of the violation, the hearing may be
had after twenty-four (24) hours following the personal service of or the
mailing of the written notice. The suspension or revocation shall be
supplementary to any other proceedings provided by this Division and shall
not stay any other enforcement provisions of this Division.



Any registrant whose Certificate of Registration has been revoked shall not
have the right to reapply for a Certificate of Registration until the
calendar year beginning after the year in which the Certificate of
Registration has been revoked.  The Town Council may deny a Certificate of
Registration to any applicant who has had a revocation of a Certificate of
Registration issued by the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-106  Bonding Requirements. 11



As used in this Section “contractor” means any person, except a licensed
architect or registered professional engineer, who in any capacity other than
as the employee of another for wages as the sole compensation, undertakes to
construct, alter, repair, move, wreck, or demolish any structure. Contractor,
within the meaning of this section, includes a subcontractor or specialty
contractor, but does not include an individual who furnishes materials or
supplies.



All contractors and subcontractors, as defined above, must comply with the
provisions of Indiana Code, 1971, §§ 17-2-88-1 through 17-2-88-6 [Now
Indiana Code, § 22-11-301-2, et seq.] and must provide evidence of
compliance to the Town Clerk-Treasurer of such compliance at the time of
application for a Certificate of Registration. Compliance shall be verified
by presenting a recorded copy of a Unified License Bond as required by
Indiana Code 1971, § 17-2-88-2. [Now Indiana Code, § 22-11-301-2 et seq.]



                           



11   I.C., §§22-11-3.1-1 through 22-11-3.1-6, address “Licensing of
contractors in Lake and Porter counties”.



Sec. 4-107  Insurance.



All contractors and subcontractors, as defined above, must provide evidence
of insurance in an amount not less than single limit coverage of $500,000 for
bodily injury and property damage.  Compliance with this requirement shall
be verified by filing with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer, a
certificate of insurance in an amount not less than single limit coverage of
$500,000 for bodily injury and property damage. (Ord. No. 87-2, 1-13-87)



Sec. 4-108  Posting of Certificate of Registration.



It shall be the duty of any person registered under this ordinance to keep a
copy of his Certificate of Registration posted in a prominent place on the
premises under construction at all times. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-109  Schedule of Fees and Charges.



Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, agent or the like
maintaining, operating or conducting any construction-trade or craft
constructing, remodeling or renovating any structure in the Town of Dyer,
Indiana, shall pay an annual license fee fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. No.
80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-110  Penalty.



Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) and suspension or revocation of its Certificate of
Registration.  Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.



Nothing herein shall limit the right of the Town of Dyer to enjoin or
restrain the maintenance, operation or conduct of any business or occupation
for which a Certificate of Registration has not been obtained in the manner
provided in this Division. (Ord. No. 80-20, § 1, 4-8-80)



Sec. 4-111 through Sec. 4-114  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IX. Park, Building and Zoning Fees.



Sec. 4-115  Park and Recreation Fees.



All park and recreation fees are set forth in Chapter 5 of this Code.



Sec. 4-116  Building Fees.



All building fees are set forth in Chapter 7 of this Code.



Sec. 4-117  Zoning and Planning Fees.



All Zoning and Planning Fees are set forth in Chapter 10 of this Code.



Sec. 4-118  Motor Vehicle Fees.



Any and all fees related to motor vehicles are set forth in Chapter 8 of this
Code.



Sec. 4-119 Reserved for Future Use.



Division X.  Miscellaneous Permits and Regulations.



Sec. 4-120  Liquor Retailer's Permits. 12



Consent be and the same is granted to the issuance by the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission of Indiana of liquor retailer's permits to applicants otherwise
duly qualified under the provisions of Chapter 226 of the Acts of Indiana,
State Legislature, Session of 1935, in respect to premises located within
said Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 157, 4-2-35).



                               



12 I.C., § 7.1-3-9-3, et seq., addresses liquor retailer's permits for small
municipalities.



Sec. 4-121  Fees for Recycling Bins.



   (a)   The initial delivery is free and absorbed in residents' solid
waste monthly fee.



   (b)   If the bin is lost or stolen, absent any negligence on the
part of the resident, the bin will be replaced free of charge.  Records of
such replacement shall be made and properly filed at the Town Council Office.



   (c)   If the second bin is lost, stolen or otherwise misplaced, the
resident must pay five dollars ($5.00) for a replacement bin. This fee will
be paid and receipted at the Clerk-Treasurer's Office and the bin shall be
picked up from the Department of Public Works.



   (d)   If the bin is damaged, other than by resident negligence, the
bin will be brought to the Department of Public Works and a replacement bin
will be granted.



(Res. No. 93-26, §§ I-IV, 10-12-93)



   (e)   These provisions are also set forth in Section 6-142 of this
Code.



Sec. 4-122 through Sec. 4-129 Reserved for Future Use.



Division XI.  Franchise Agreements. 13



                                 



13 The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (P.L. 98-549) (47 U.S.C. §
521 et seq.) governs this area.



Sec. 4-130  Town Council Approval Required.



   (a)   Because the operation of cable television systems or other
utilities in enterprises require the permission of the Town to use the public
ways, the Council has determined that it is proper and expedient to franchise
such systems.



   (b)   All such business must seek the approval of the Town Council
by the appropriate Ordinance or Resolution prior to initiating business in
the Town of Dyer.



   (c)   All fees paid to the Town shall be properly accounted for by
the Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to applicable State Board of Accounts
regulations.



Sec. 4-131 through Sec. 4-139 Reserved for Future Use.



Division XII.  Tax Abatement Procedures. 14



                                 



14 I.C. §§ 6-1.1-12.1-1 through 6-1.1-12.1-5.7, address real and personal
tax abatement procedure.



Sec. 4-140  Economic Revitalization Areas.



(Reserved)



Sec. 4-141  Administrative Charges and Fees.



   (a)   Tax abatement administrative charges and fees are hereby
established for the Town of Dyer, based on the type of tax abatement
requested as set forth in the initial statement of benefits form filed by the
applicant as follows, namely:



   REAL PROPERTY APPLICATION ONLY: (I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3)



   Application Review Fee:   $250.00



   Clerk's Office Fee:      $250.00



   Annual Review Fee:      $150.00



   NEW EQUIPMENT APPLICATION ONLY: (I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5)



   Application Review Fee:   $250.00



   Clerk's Office Fee:      $250.00



   Annual Review Fee:      $150.00



   MIXED REAL PROPERTY and NEW EQUIPMENT:



   Application Review Fee:   $350.00



   Clerk's Office Fee:      $250.00



   Annual Review Fee:      $250.00



   (b)   The designated application review fee and Clerk's Office fee
in subsection (a) above shall be submitted with the statement of benefits
form at the time the same is filed.  The Annual Review Fee shall be paid to
the Town each year with the submission of the Compliance with statement of
benefits form.



   (c)   The Clerk's Office fee is nonrefundable in the event that tax
abatement is not granted or is withdrawn by an applicant prior to approval.



   (d)   An applicant who fails to timely file a completed and accurate
annual tax abatement report shall pay a noncompliance penalty not to exceed
$2,500 as determined by the Town Council, and may be subject to termination
of further tax abatement deductions.



   (e)   Any applicant who fails to achieve the estimates set forth in
the tax abatement application, and related documentation, submitted and based
upon which the Town granted the tax abatement, shall be subject to a
noncompliance penalty of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500 for each
year the applicant fails to perform or achieve the estimates set forth in its
original application for tax abatement.



   (f)   The fees and charges contained in subsections (a), (b), and
(c) above shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer’s Office, and said fees
shall be deposited into the Town General Fund.



(Ord. No. 2002-23, 9-10-02)



Sec. 4-142 through Sec. 4-149 Reserved for Future Use.



Division XIII.  Licensing Fees.



Sec. 4-150  Chart on Fees.



 

Activity Regulation
 
Amount
 
Section of Code


Incident Reports
 
$ 5.00 1st page,

$ 3.00 thereafter
 
§ 4-10


Application Fee–

  Police Department
 
 
 
§ 2-96


Boating
 
$2.50/5.00
 
§ 5-33


Canvasser
 
$5.00/10.00/50.00
 
§ 4-50


Carnivals
 
$10.00
 
§ 4-26



 



 



Activity Regulation
 
Amount
 
Section of Code


Demonstrations
 
$10.00
 
§ 4-26


Electronic Games
 
$100.00
 
§ 4-68


Exhibitions
 
$10.00
 
§ 4-26


Fairs
 
$10.00
 
§ 4-26


Fishing
 
$2.50/5.00
 
§ 5-33


Motorized Bicycles
 
$10.00
 
§ 8-5


Motor Vehicle Inspections
 
$5.00
 
§ 8-215


NSF Check
 
$15.00 or 5%
 
§ 4-11


Park Permits
 
$3.00/15.00/30.00/50.00
 
§ 5-30


Peddlers
 
$5.00/10.00/50.00
 
§ 4-50


Pinball Machines
 
$100.00
 
§ 4-68


Plumbing Fixtures
 
$5.00 to 60.00
 
§ 4-38


Plumbing Permits
 
$60.00
 
§ 4-38


Returned Check
 
$15.00 or 5%
 
§ 4-11


Solicitor
 
$5.00/10.00/50.00
 
§ 4-50


Taxicabs
 
$10.00/25.00
 
§ 4-84


Trade Shows
 
$50.00
 
§ 4-109


Volunteer Fire Department
 
$150.00/250.00
 
§ 4-21




 



(Ord. No. 95-20, § 2, 7-11-95)



ARTICLE 3. CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS.



Sec. 4-151  Adoption of Rules and Regulations.



   (a)   The Town President and Town Council adopt the rules and
regulations set forth by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to
Section 623(b) of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. 543 [b]) for the review of the basic service tier of
cable television services and equipment necessary for the provision of such
service tier. Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal
Communications Commission are found in Exhibit A, which is on file in the
Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection during
regular business hours.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 1A, 5-10-94)



   (b)   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the basic service tier of
cable television services shall mean a separately available service tier to
which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service,
including as a minimum, but not limited to, all signals of domestic
television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber, (except a signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of
such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the
cable system) any public, educational, and governmental programming required
by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video
programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
Equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service shall be defined as
those items of associated equipment necessary for the reception of basic
cable service by a subscriber, including, but not limited to, converter
boxes, remote control units, additional outlets and installations.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 1B, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-152  Lake County, Indiana CATV Consortium. 15



   (a)   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, authorizes the Lake
County, Indiana CATV Consortium (Consortium) to provide the grantee of the
cable television franchise, the public, and interested parties with an
opportunity to be heard either through the submission of written comments to
the Consortium over a period not to exceed sixty (60) calendar days during
the period of review of basic cable rates and associated equipment, or at a
public hearing before the Consortium, upon fourteen (14) days' written notice
to the grantee of the cable television franchise of the time and place of the
public hearing provided further that said notice shall indicate that the
purpose of the public hearing is to receive the views of the grantee and
interested parties on issues pertaining to regulation of the basic service
tier of cable television services and equipment necessary to provide said
basic tier of service; and provided further that notice of said public
hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at
least ten (10) days before the date of this hearing, and provided further,
that an agenda for said hearing shall be posted in a public place at the Town
Hall at least seven (7) days prior to said hearing.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 2A, 5-10-94)



   (b)   Upon the adoption of this ordinance, the Town of Dyer shall
permit the Lake County, Indiana CATV Consortium to immediately notify the
cable operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the
Consortium intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service
tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992. Upon receipt of said notice from the
Consortium, the Cable Operator shall, within thirty (30) days, file with the
Consortium its current rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment along with any additional documentation justifying the
reasonableness of its rates.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 2B, 5-10-94)



                             



15   Editor's Note:  Res. No. 93-33 adopted December 8, 1993, authorized
an Interlocal Cooperation Agreement on CATV which is continued in full force
and effect and is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 4-153  Federal Communications Commission Form 393.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, shall permit the
Consortium to establish that the period for review of rates of the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide said basic tier of service shall be thirty (30) days from the
submission by the grantee of the cable television franchise of Federal
Communications Commission Form 393. If the Consortium indicates to the Town
of Dyer that it will take no action within thirty (30) days from the date the
cable operator files its basic cable rates with the Town, the proposed rates
will continue in effect.



   (b)   In the event that additional time for review of the Federal
Communications Commission Form 393 submitted by grantee is necessary, the
Town Council shall permit the Consortium to issue a brief written order prior
to the end of the thirty (30) day review period, with a copy of said order to
be sent by Certified United States Mail to the grantee, providing for an
additional ninety (90) day period for review of rates of the basic service
tier and the equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 3A, B, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-154  Procedure for Review of Basic Services.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, shall permit the
Consortium to establish that the period for review of the basic service tier
of cable television services and the equipment necessary to provide said
basic tier of service shall be thirty (30) days from the submission by the
grantee of information and forms prescribed by the Federal Communications
Commission for a showing of cost-of-service, as defined by the Federal
Communications Commission.



   (b)   In the event that additional time for review of the
cost-of-service showing submitted by the grantee is necessary, the Town
Council shall permit the Consortium to issue a brief written order prior to
the end of the thirty (30) day review period with a copy of said order to be
sent by Certified United States Mail to the grantee, providing for an
additional one hundred fifty (150) day period for review of rates of the
basic service tier and the equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of
service.  During the extended review period and before taking action on the
proposed rate, the Consortium shall hold at least one public hearing in which
interested citizens may express their views and record objections.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 4A, B, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-155  Resolution of Council Required.



   (a)   Upon completion of its review of the proposed rates for the
basic service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary
to provide said basic tier of service, the Consortium shall provide the Town
Council with its determinations and findings.  The Town Council shall adopt
the findings of the Consortium by formal resolution.  Said resolution shall
indicate the reasons for the decision.  Upon passage of the resolution, the
Town Council shall publish the Resolution.



   (b)   In the event that the cable operator's proposed rates exceed
the reasonable rate standard as established  by  the  Federal 
Communications  Commission  in its rules and regulations attached hereto,
the Town Council may order the rates reduced by rollbacks or refunds to
subscribers, in the manner so prescribed by the Federal Communications
Commission.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 5 A, B, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-156  Disclosure of Information.



In considering information provided by the grantee as a part of review of his
rates for the basic service tier of cable television services and the
equipment necessary to provide said basic tier of service, neither the Town
of Dyer nor the Consortium shall disclose to the public the content of any
records, forms, reports, calculations, or other documents as provided which
the grantee has indicated as being of a proprietary interest or constituting
a trade secret in nature. The duly designated municipal officer and the
Consortium administrator responsible for administration of the Indiana Open
Door Act (Indiana Code, § 5-14-3-1, et seq.) shall retain the right to
determine the validity of the grantee's claim of proprietary interest or
trade secrecy in accordance with the provisions of the Indiana Open Door Act.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 6, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-157  Refund Procedures.



The Town may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers a portion of
previously paid rates under the following circumstances:



   (a)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to
be in excess of the permitted basic cable service tier charge or above the
actual cost of equipment; or



   (b)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate
order issued by the Town.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 7, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-158  Penalties.



   Failure by the cable operator to comply with the terms and conditions
established by this Ordinance, including its attachment, shall constitute a
violation of Chapter 4 of the Town Code of the Town of Dyer (the Cable
Television Franchise Ordinance).  Said penalties for such violation are
subject to the conditions of Section 1-9 of the Town Code of the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 94-5, § 8, 5-10-94)



Sec. 4-159  Ratification of Revised Rate Order.



The revised rate order on the basic cable and equipment rates attached to
Resolution No. 95-55 as Exhibit “A” is incorporated herein by reference,
and is approved and ratified in each and every respect.



(Res. No. 95-55, 12-12-95)



Section 4-160 through Sec. 4-169  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION PROGRAM.



Sec. 4-170  Purpose.



   (a)   It is hereby declared that there exist within the Town rental
housing units, which by reason of their operation, use or occupancy affect or
are likely to affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Town.



   (b)   It is further declared that the purpose of this chapter is to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town by
requiring the registration of all rental housing units which are or shall be
in existence in the Town.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-171  Definitions.



For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   Dwelling Unit. The abode of a family or a single unit providing
complete, independent facilities for the exclusive use and enjoyment of a
family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation.



   Family. One (1) or more persons related by blood within the degree of
first cousin or related by marriage or adoption and not more than two (2)
unrelated persons living as a single housekeeping unit.



   Guest. A person who is a temporary resident (less than 25% of the time)
of a dwelling unit and does not utilize the dwelling unit as a legal address
for any purpose.



   Occupancy. Adhering to the reasonable standard of two (2) persons per
bedroom set out in United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
General Counsel Frank G. Keating's memorandum dated 3-20-1991, (Title 63 C F.
R. part 243, 12-18-1998).



   Occupant. A person occupying a dwelling unit, other than a guest, or
using the property as a legal address for any purpose.



   Person. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization,
company, limited liability company or any group acting as a unit, as well as
a natural person. References in the masculine gender include the feminine and
the neuter, in the present tense include the future and the singular include
the plural.



   Rental Housing. A term denoting any room, dwelling unit, rooming unit
or portion thereof let or intended to be let to a family or person for
compensation.



   Rooming Unit. A room or suite of rooms forming a single, separate
habitable unit to be used for living or for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking and eating purposes.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-172  Registration.



   (a)   Any owner or real property in the Town, which real property is
used as rental housing, shall be required to register all such properties on
an annual basis, by January 31 of each year.



   (b)   The registration forms shall be available at the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer, and no registration or renewal will be accepted by that
office without a showing of full liability, fire, or other insurance equal to
the value of the property insured, including the cost of demolition of the
property. Alternatively, a bond or letter of credit from a federally insured
financial institution may be filed with the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer in
an amount equal to the value of the property insured or twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00), whichever is greater, which will be used to cover the
cost of demolition if necessary.



   (c)   There shall be a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) annual fee
assessed for each dwelling or rooming unit due with the registration form.
Failure to register any or all real property utilized as rental housing shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the owner to a fine
not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per unit.



   (d)   Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate and
actionable offense. Initial registration is required within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter or within 30 days of obtaining the title to
rental housing real estate.



   (e)   There shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) late fee assessed for
each dwelling or rental/rooming unit not registered by January 31, 2009, and
January 31 of each year thereafter.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08; Am. Ord. No. 2011-05, 6-8-11)



Sec. 4-173  Certificate Required.



It shall be unlawful for any person to let to another for occupancy rental
housing without a current, unrevoked Town certificate for the rental housing
at the specific location set forth thereon.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-174  Certificate.



   (a)   The certificate shall be for a period of one (1) year, or
until the general expiration date of the then current certificate for the
dwelling or rooming unit, whichever is sooner.



   (b)   For all dwelling or rooming units located in any area of the
Town, the Town shall issue a sticker stating the unit's certification, date
of expiration and permitted occupancy. The property owner and/or manager must
prominently and continuously display the sticker on the inside of the door to
the main entrance for each dwelling or rooming unit.



   (c)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any party to
remove the sticker or for the owner and/or manager to fail to continuously
display the sticker, as provided in division (b) above, in each dwelling or
rooming unit. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate and
actionable offense.



   (d)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to permit occupancy by
more than the maximum allowed, and shall subject the owner or tenant to a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollar ($100.00) per dwelling or rooming unit.
Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate and actionable offense.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-175  Certificate Revocation or Suspension.



A certificate in force may be suspended or revoked, entirely or in part, upon
finding conditions or practices pertaining to the rental housing are in
continuing violation of the Building, Health and/or Fire Codes of the Town or
State of Indiana.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-176  Exemptions.



   (a)   A dwelling or rooming unit occupied by the owner of the
property shall be exempt from the ten dollar ($10.00) annual fee,
registration and requirement of a sticker to be displayed.



   (b)   A dwelling or rooming unit occupied by an immediate family
member of the owner of the property shall be exempt from the ten dollar
($10.00) annual fee, registration and requirement of a sticker to be
displayed, provided that the immediate family member pays no rent.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



Sec. 4-177  Violation.



   (a)   Failure to register any or all real property utilized as
rental housing shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall
subject the owner to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) per unit. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate
and actionable offense. Initial registration is required within thirty (30)
days of the effective date of this chapter or within thirty (30) days of
acquiring rental housing real estate.



   (b)   Failure to continuously display or to remove the registration
sticker shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the
owner or tenant to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
unit. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate and actionable
offense. It shall be a defense for the owner to provide evidence of his or
her compliance with this requirement.



   (c)   Occupancy by more persons than the maximum allowed in rental
dwelling or rooming unit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
shall subject the owner or tenant to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) per unit. Each day of the violation shall constitute a separate and
actionable offense. It shall be a defense for the owner if the owner provides
a written lease which sets out the names and number of occupants of a rental
dwelling or rooming unit.



   (d)   The inspectors of the Fire Department and the Dyer Code
Enforcement Officer are authorized to enforce all provisions regarding rental
property registration.



(Ord. No. 2008-10, 9-17-08)



ARTICLE 5.  BUSINESS LICENCES.



Sec. 4-190.  Definitions.



For purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   Home Operation. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit, provided
that:



      (1)   No person other than members of the family residing on
the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.



      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation
shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential
purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation.



      (3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of
the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such
home occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal
building.



      (4)   No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory
building.



      (5)   There shall be no primary sales, either wholesale or
retail, in connection with such home occupation.



      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard, except that such off-street parking shall be limited to driveways not
to exceed twenty (20) feet in width.



      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation
is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if
conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio, television or telephone receivers off the
premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises,



   Person. An individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, firm,
partnership, association, organization, trustee, joint venture, or any one of
a group acting as a unit as well as a natural person.



   Retail and Services Establishment.  Any business, office, plant or
place within the Town, whether temporary or permanent in nature, and whether
within or without a permanent structure, where services or professional
services, manufacturing, fabrication, construction, assembly or design occur
or where commodities or goods are sold or offered for sale to the public in
general or to the ultimate consumer of the commodities or goods.



(Ord. No. 2008-22, 12-17-08)



Sec. 4-191  License Required and Application.



   (a)   No person shall operate or maintain a retail, services or
other business establishment within the Town without first obtaining a
business license therefore as provided in this Article.



   (b)   An applicant for a business license issued under this Article
shall be made upon a blank form prepared and made available by the
Clerk-Treasurer and shall state the following information:



      (1)   The name, home address, phone number, and existing or
proposed business address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the owner of the
real estate upon which the business is located;



      (3)   The hours of operation for the proposed retail and
service establishment; and



      (4)   Any other information the Town of Dyer, Indiana, shall
find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this Article, and to
arrive at a fair determination of whether the terms of this Article have been
complied with by the applicant.



(Ord. No. 2008-22, 12-17-08)



Sec. 4-192  Issuance and fee.



   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a business license under this
Article when he or she finds compliance with the following rules and
regulations:



      (1)   There is no apparent danger to the health, welfare, or
safety of the people of the Town of Dyer, Indiana; and



      (2)   The requirements of this Article and all other governing
laws and ordinances have been met;



      (3)   A Town license shall be issued by the Clerk-Treasurer to
a successful applicant under this Ordinance after payment of a licensing fee
of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). The license shall be for a term of one (1)
year commencing April 1st and expiring March 31st of the following year and
shall be renewed annually. A separate license shall be required for each
business, retail and service establishment operated and maintained or to be
operated and maintained by any person or company. Any license issued under
this Article is not transferable. A business, retail or service establishment
not obtaining a license by April 1st of each year shall be required to pay
three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the license. Regardless of the date
obtained, the annual license will expire on March 31st of each year.  The
licensing fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall apply to all business
licenses applied for in the year 2009.  No increased fees shall be charged
for the late applications in the year 2009 only.  Commencing in 2010 and
thereafter, the increased fees for late applications shall apply to all late
applications.



(Ord. No. 2008-22, 12-17-08; Am. Ord. No. 2010-01, 2-3-10)



Sec. 4-193  Exceptions.



   (a)   This Article shall not apply to any person or retail
establishment required to obtain a license under any other existing ordinance
as of this date.



   (b)   This Article shall not apply to a home operation, as defined
in Sec. 4-190 herein, and which is operated in compliance with the
requirements of said definition.



(Ord. No. 2008-22, 12-17-08)



ARTICLE 6.  CASH FOR GOLD, SCRAP DEALERS AND PAWN BROKERS



Sec. 4-200.   Payment for items received by pawn shops, cash for gold
stores, and scrap metal dealers.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful in the town for any person to engage in,
carry on, or conduct the business of a pawn broker or a “Cash for Gold”
or any other purchaser of scrap metal or jewelry, if that person or business
pays cash for the merchandise or scrap metal received.



   (b)   All pawn brokers, “Cash for Gold” purchasers, and scrap
metal dealers shall pay for the items received by either business check or
in-store credit and detailed records shall be maintained of all items coming
into the business and all funds being paid out of the business.



   (c)   Any person, business, corporation, company, pawn shop, cash
for gold, or scrap metal purchaser or organization who knowingly pays cash
for merchandise or items received shall have their Town of Dyer business
registration revoked and be subject to a fine not to exceed twenty-five
hundred dollars ($2,500).  Each transaction in violation of this section is
separate offense.



(Ord. No. 2012-07, 5-10-12)



Sec. 4-201.   Records to be kept.



   (a)   Any person, entity, or business located in the town, whether a
single trade business or as a part of an unrelated business, being a pawn
broker, cash for gold business, or as a scrap metal dealer shall keep a
correct, accurate, and up to date list and detailed description in a book or
computer program, in English, for the purpose of listing and describing,
including inscriptions found on any jewelry or identifying marks, any and
every article, thing, item, valuable pieces of jewelry, metal, tool, fixture
pledged, deposited or brought in for sale or trade.



   (b)   Any person, entity, or business located in the town, whether
as a single trade business or as a part of an unrelated business, being a
pawn broker, cash for gold business, or scrap metal dealer, shall keep a
correct, accurate, and up to date photograph, either by film or on a digital
camera, showing each and every item pledged, deposited or brought in for sale
or trade.



   (c)   Any person, entity, or business located in the town, whether
as a single trade business or as a part of an unrelated business, being a
pawn broker, cash for gold business, or scrap metal dealer, shall require of
every customer making  a pledge, deposit or sale transaction, to provide a
photographic identification.  This photographic identification shall be
verified, copied, and kept with the receipt and photographs showing the date,
time and items pledged, deposited, or sold by that person and shall be made
available to the Police Department or any other federal, state, or local law
enforcement official upon request.



   (d)   Any person, business, corporation, company, pawn shop, cash
for gold, or scrap metal purchaser or organization who violates this article
for properly identifying photographing merchandise or items received, shall
have its Dyer business registration revoked and be subject to a fine not to
exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500).  Each transaction in violation
of this article is a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 2012-07, 5-10-12)



CHAPTER 5
PARKS AND RECREATION



ARTICLE 1. PARKS AND RECREATION IN GENERAL.



Sec. 5-1   Authority to Operate.



Sec. 5-2   Administration of Parks and Recreation Programs.



Sec. 5-3 Through Sec. 5-5 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 5-6   Creation of Department.



Sec. 5-7   Definitions.



Sec. 5-8   Dyer Park and Recreation Board.



Sec. 5-9   Park Superintendent.



Sec. 5-10   Budget and Operating Expenses.



Sec. 5-11   Official and Fidelity Bonds.



Sec. 5-12   Contracts With Other Governmental Units.



Sec. 5-13   Savings Clause.



Sec. 5-14 Through Sec. 5-17 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.



Sec. 5-18   Park Hours.



Sec. 5-19   Domestic Animals Prohibited.



Sec. 5-20   Hunting and Fishing Generally.



Sec. 5-21   Park Property Protected.



Sec. 5-22   Refuse and Litter.



Sec. 5-23   Motor Vehicle Regulations.



Sec. 5-24   Bicycle, Skateboard and Skating Regulations.



Sec. 5-25   Alcoholic Beverages.



Sec. 5-26   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 5-27   Boat Regulations.



Sec. 5-28   Motor Driven Model Toys.



Sec. 5-29   Designated Areas for Activities.



Sec. 5-30   Permit and Reservation Fees.



Sec. 5-31   Exemptions from Permit Fees.



Sec. 5-32   Amusements and Similar Rides.



Sec. 5-33   Permits for Fishing and Boating.



Sec. 5-34   Park Vegetation Protected.



Sec. 5-35   Restricted Parking.



Sec. 5-36   Penalties.



Sec. 5-37   Feeding of Wild Animals Prohibited.



Sec. 5-38 Through Sec. 5-44 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. TOWN PARKS.



Sec. 5-45   Elmer P. Miller Community Park.



Sec. 5-46 Through Sec. 5-55 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1. PARKS AND RECREATION IN GENERAL.



Sec. 5-1  Authority to Operate. 1



The Town may establish, aid, maintain, and operate public parks, playgrounds,
and recreation facilities and programs.



                             



1   I.C., §36-10-2-2, addresses recreation facilities and programs.



Sec. 5-2  Administration of Parks and Recreation Programs.



The Park Department as addressed in Section 2-42 through Section 2-45 of this
code shall be responsible for administering programs under the Park and
Recreation Law, Indiana Code, § 36-10-3-1, et seq.



Sec. 5-3 through Sec. 5-5  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 5-6  Creation of Department.



A Department of Parks and Recreation of the Town of Dyer, Lake County,
Indiana, is created.  All prior ordinances creating separate park and
recreation departments or authorities, if any, are repealed. (Ord. No. 819,
§ 1, 5-9-72)



Sec. 5-7  Definitions.



   “Town” means the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



   “Board” means the Dyer Park and Recreation Board.



   “Council” means the Town Council of the Town of Dyer.



   “Department” means the Park and Recreation Department as created
hereunder. (Ord. No. 819, § 2, 5-9-72)



   “Senior Citizen” means, for the purpose of all rules, regulations,
and resolutions passed by the Dyer Park & Recreation Department, the words
“Senior Citizen” shall be defined to be any person 55 years of age or
older. (Res. No. 93-23, 9-14-93)



   “Superintendent” means the Administrative Head of the Department of
Park and Recreation responsible for a park and recreation program. (Ord. 819,
§ 2, 5-9-72)



Sec. 5-8  Dyer Park and Recreation Board.



The Dyer Park and Recreation Board shall have the duties, powers, and
authority set forth in the Indiana Park and Recreation Law, Indiana Code, §
36-10-3-1, et seq. (Ord. No. 83-16, 4-12-8)



Sec. 5-9  Park Superintendent.



The Park Superintendent shall have the powers and duties set forth pursuant
to Indiana Code, § 36-10-3-13.



Sec. 5-10  Budget and Operating Expenses.



   (a)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget to the
Town Council in the same manner as other Departments of the Town, as
prescribed by the State Board of Accounts.



   (b)   The Town Council as they might determine shall provide the
revenues necessary for the operation of the Department and for capital
expenditures not provided by the issuance of bonds, or both, by a specific
levy to be used for such purposes exclusively or by special appropriation, or
both. (Ord. No. § 5, 5-9-72).



Sec. 5-11  Official and Fidelity Bonds. 2



   (a)   Each person and each employee who may be charged with the duty
of handling any funds in the performance of his or her duties as authorized
or directed by the provision of this Article shall execute an official bond
for his or her term.  The bonds required shall be individual surety company
public official bonds continued on the faithful performance of duties and the
penal amount of the bonds shall be fixed by Resolution of the Town Council,
from year to year and if no Resolution be adopted, the amount to be fixed at
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or the amount required by applicable state
law.



   (b)   All monies received by or on account of said Department shall
be paid over and delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer to be
accounted for and disbursed according to law. (Ord. No. 819, § 6, 5-9-72).



                             



2   I.C., § 36-10-3-16, addresses bonds.



Sec. 5-12  Contracts With Other Governmental Units.



The Board may contract with another like Board, a governmental unit,
department or agency, or with a person for property, facilities or services;
but the Board shall have no authority to contract with a person, corporation
or private agency for the operation of a park or recreation program. (Ord.
No. 819, § 7, 5-9-72).



Sec. 5-13  Saving Clause.



The Board shall succeed to and continue all park and recreational functional
activities lawfully exercised by the Town Council prior to the enactment of
this Ordinance, and any rights or obligations that have vested on behalf of
or against park and recreation authorities, if any, the existence of which
are terminated by the repeal of any prior ordinance, if any, shall remain in
full force and effect as rights or as obligations of the Board as its
successor.  All physical effects and property which shall or ought to belong
to a park and recreation authority shall be transferred to the Board.  (Ord.
No. 819, § 8, 5-9-72)



Sec. 5-14 through Sec. 5-17  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS.



Sec. 5-18  Park Hours.



   (a)   No person shall remain or be in any part of any park between
dusk and dawn, without permission of the Park Board. (Ord. No. 83-11, Art. §
1, 3-8-83)



   (b)   The Dyer Town Parks shall be open to the public three hundred
and sixty-five (365) days each year. (Ord. No. 89-7, 2-14-89)



Sec. 5-19  Domestic Animals.



No domestic animal or otherwise is permitted within the Dyer Town Park
District properties, or perimeters of said properties, except as authorized
in designated areas by the Board of Directors of the Town of Dyer, Department
of Parks and Recreation.  (Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 1, 4-13-76; Am. Ord.
No. 2009-09, 8-19-09)



Sec. 5-20  Hunting and Fishing Generally.



No fishing without permit, hunting, seining, netting, gigging, molesting or
pursuit of any animal, in any manner, shall be permitted within the Dyer Town
Park District properties, provided, however, that for educational purposes,
exceptions may be granted for examination, study, research and collection of
specimens of wildlife or vegetation within park areas.  (Ord. No. 993, Art.
II, § 2, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-21  Park Property Protected.



No person shall cut, break, climb on, or in any way injure or deface any
lamppost, hydrant, curbstone, coping, fence, wall fence, building or other
construction or property in any park.  (Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 3, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-22  Refuse and Litter.



No person or group of persons shall discharge any sewage or refuse matter, or
in any form pollute or otherwise contaminate any lake or stream in the Dyer
Town Park District; nor shall any person burn any combustible materials
within park areas, except in receptacles provided for that purpose, nor shall
any person deposit, dump or litter in such park areas any paper, garbage,
refuse or trash except in receptacles provided for that purpose. (Ord. No.
993, Art. II, § 4, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-23  Motor Vehicle Regulations.



The operation and use of all motor vehicles within the confines of park areas
is strictly prohibited except for parking in designated parking areas or
operation of a motor vehicles on designated roadways.  The term motor
vehicle includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, motorbikes, trailbikes,
snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles. (Ord. No. 993, Art. 11, § 5, 4-13-76;
Am. Ord. No. 2006-02, 2-15-06)



Sec. 5-24  Bicycle, Skateboard and Skating Regulations.



No person shall utilize roller skates or inline skates, or other similar
sports equipment on park property except in designated areas.  No person
shall ride any bicycle, skateboard, scooter, or other similar vehicle on park
property or on any of the sidewalks of any park or in any of the buildings or
adjacent shelter areas except in designated areas and pathways.  (Ord. No.
993, Art. 11, § 6, 4-13-76; Am. Ord. No. 2006-02, 2-15-06)



Sec. 5-25  Alcoholic Beverages.



The possession and use of alcoholic beverages within the confines of any park
is prohibited.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, bought, given away or
consumed in any park facility within the Town of Dyer unless with written
permission of the Park Board.  All individuals or organizations must have a
license or permit to sell alcoholic beverages. (Ord. No. 993, Art. 11, § 7,
4-13-76)



Sec. 5-26  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 5-27  Boat Regulations.



No person shall operate a motorized boat on any lake or stream within the
Dyer Town Park District.  Non-motorized boats may be operated by permit
only. (Ord. No. 993, Art. 11, § 9, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-28  Motor Driven Model Toys.



The operation of miniature motor driven toys, including but not limited to,
boats, airplanes, rockets or automobiles is expressly prohibited.  The Park
Board, however, may in their judgment, set aside days or times during which
public displays or operation of such miniature airplanes, rockets or
automobiles, properly supervised, may be made.  (Ord. No. 993, Art. II, §
10, 4-13-76; Am. Ord. No. 2006-02, 2-15-06)



Sec. 5-29  Designated Areas for Activities.



Any athletic games, amusements, sports, exercises, or activities, shall be
carried on in areas designated for such purposes provided, however, that
should such facilities not be in existence, then such activities may be
carried on in a reasonable manner.  The playing of golf or the driving of
golf balls is prohibited within the Dyer Park System. (Ord. No. 993, Art. 11,
§ 11, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-30  Permit and Reservation Fees.



   (a)   All organized groups of persons numbering fifteen (15) or more
and all businesses and entertainments permitted by the Park Board shall
occupy grounds to be designed by the Park Board through permits.



   (b)   Permits issued to picnic-parties or outings do not cover the
entire park, and are only for the area designated by their permits. Permits
and fees for events larger than the shelter area shall be considered by the
Park Board on an application by application basis based upon the size of the
area requested and the number of attendees.



   (c)   The following permit fees are established:



Shelter Rental Fees:*



 



 
Central Park Shelter
 
Elmer Miller Park Shelter
 
Northgate Park Shelter
 
Pheasant Hills Park North Shelter
 
Pheasant Hills Park South Shelter


   Effective Dates
 
4/1/2013
 
1/1/2014
 
1/1/2014
 
1/1/2014
 
1/1/2014


Residents:
 
 
 
 
 


  Fri., Sat., Sun. or Town Holiday
 
$150
 
$90
 
$130
 
$90
 
$120


  Monday - Thursday
 
$60
 
$30
 
$40
 
$20
 
$30


Non-Residents
 
 
 
 
 


Fri., Sat., Sun. or Town Holiday
 
$195
 
$117
 
$169
 
$117
 
$156


  Monday - Thursday
 
$78
 
$39
 
$52
 
$26
 
$39




 



   * State of Indiana sales tax is collected on the above fees.



      Refundable clean-up/damage deposit for all groups   $50



      The following organizations receive half off of the above fees: 
Town of Dyer school groups, Lake Central High School groups, Home School
Association, service clubs, veterans groups, Dyer police groups, Town of Dyer
church groups and Dyer Chamber of Commerce.



   Town of Dyer departments, parks and recreation programs, boards or
commissions are exempt from fees.



   The clean-up/damage deposit is refundable only if the permitted group
properly cleans up after its use of the park.  Any clean-up not completed by
the permit holder that requires completion by Dyer Park and Recreation
personnel, or any damage to the park or equipment in the park by the permit
holder that must be repaired by Town of Dyer Park and Recreation personnel,
will be charged against the deposit.  The Town of Dyer reserves the right to
seek additional funds and attorney fees from the permittee in the event the
clean-up/damage deposit is insufficient to cover the cost of
clean-up/repairs.  If approved, the clean-up and damage deposit will be
returned via mail to the permit holder within sixty (60) days after the date
the park is used.



Athletic Field Rental Fees:



   Groups and organizations shall provide a certificate of insurance
naming the Town of Dyer as an additional insured, showing a minimum of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in liability coverage in addition to paying
the appropriate fee.



   Residents   $25 per hour



   Non-residents   $50 per hour



   A discount of twenty percent (20%) will apply to the above fees if a
team or organization reserves and pays for ten (10) or more dates in one (1)
calendar year. Total payment must be made at one time to receive the discount.



   Teams are considered residents if fifty-one percent (51%) or more of
players on the official team roster reside in the Town of Dyer.



   Dyer Babe Ruth, Dyer Girls Softball League, Dyer Kickers and Dyer
Little League teams and Town of Dyer departments, parks and recreation
programs, boards and commissions are exempt from these fees.



   All reservation fees shall be refundable to the applicant only at the
discretion of the Dyer Parks and Recreation Board in accordance with the Town
of Dyer Park Board refund policy.



Plum Creek Center Rental Fees:



 

   Town of Dyer Residents

   $250.00 per 4-hour rental

   Additional hours: $62.50 each
 
   Non-Resident

   $350 per 4-hour rental

   Additional hours: $87.50 each
 
   Non Profit (Dyer based)

$20 per hour (Mon. - Thurs. only)

 

Non-Profit (Non-Dyer based)

Regular Fees Apply



 



   Four (4)-hour rentals are allowed a free hour before for set up and a
free hour after for clean-up added to their rental time. State of Indiana
sales tax is collected on the above fees.



   Refundable clean-up and damage deposit for all groups   .$100



   Dyer based non-profit organizations are exempt from this deposit.



   The following organizations shall pay one-half (½) of the above rental
fees: Dyer police groups, service clubs and Dyer Chamber of Commerce. Town of
Dyer departments, park and recreation programs, boards and commissions are
exempt from fees.



   The clean-up and damages deposit is refundable only if the permitted
group properly cleans up after its use of the park. Any clean-up not
completed by the permit holder that requires completion by Town of Dyer Park
and Recreation personnel, or any damage to the park or equipment in the park
by the permit holder that must be repaired by Town of Dyer Park and
Recreation personnel, will be charged against the deposit. The Town of Dyer
reserves the right to seek additional funds and attorney fees from the
permittee in the event the clean-up/damage deposit is insufficient to cover
the cost of clean-up/repairs. If approved, the clean-up and damage deposit
will be returned via mail to the permit holder within sixty (60) days after
the date the park is used.



   Shelter Rental Fees shall be deposited in the Parks and Recreation
Fund. Athletic Field Rental Fees and Plum Creek Center.  Rental Fees shall
be deposited in the Parks Activities Fund. All clean-up and damage deposits
shall be deposited-in the Parks Escrow Fund.



(Ord. No. 96-14, 8-13-96; Am. Ord. No. 98-02, 1-13-98; Am. Ord. No. 98-12,
7-14-98; Am. Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 9-8-98; Am. Ord. No. 2002-12, 4-16-02; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-40, 12-17-02; Am. Ord. No. 2005-20, 11-16-05; Am. Ord. No.
2007-27, 12-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 2010-02, 2-3-10; Am. Ord. no. 2013-02, § 1,
3-14-13)



Sec. 5-31  Exemptions from Permit Fees.



Permit and reservation fees for any organization may be waived at the
discretion of the Dyer Parks and Recreation Board.



(Ord. No. 87-4, 2-10-87; Am. Ord. No. 98-02, 1-13-98)



Sec. 5-32  Amusements and Similar Rides.



No person or group of persons shall operate amusements, rides or devices in
any park within the Dyer Town Park District without the written permission of
the Park Board.



(Ord. No. 993, Art. III, § 2, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-33  Permits for Fishing and Boating. 3



   (a)   A permit for fishing and boating must be obtained in order to
fish or boat in a Dyer Park.  All persons sixteen (16) years of age and
older must have a fishing or boating permit to engage in these activities in
a Dyer Park.  Dyer residents may obtain a fishing or boating permit upon
application at the Dyer Clerk-Treasurer's Office and the payment of a two
dollar and fifty cent ($2.50) annual fee.



   (b)   Non-residents may obtain a fishing or boating permit from the
Clerk-Treasurer's Office upon application and the payment of a five dollar
($5.00) annual fee.



   (c)   Permit fees will be waived for Senior Citizens.



   (d)   Permits are issued from January 2 of each year and are good
for the remainder of that year.



   (e)   Boating permits apply only to non-motorized boats, fishing
permits do not substitute for an Indiana fishing license.



(Ord. No. 83-11, Art. III, § 3, 3-8-83)



                                   



3   Editor's Note:  The Board of Park and Recreation defined a senior
citizen as a person age 55 years or older at its August 2, 1993.



Sec. 5-34  Park Vegetation.



   (a)   No person shall remove, destroy, break, cut, deface, trim or
in any way injure or interfere with any tree or shrub that is within the park
district.  Provided, however, that this Section shall not apply to Town
employees working in the course of their employment.



(Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § I, 4-13-76)



   (b)   No person shall move, injure or misuse any guard or device
placed or intended to protect any tree, plant or shrub growing within the
park district.



(Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 2, 4-13-76)



   (c)   No person shall, without the written consent of the Park
Board, attach any electrical wire, insulator, or any other device or object
to any tree growing within the park district.



(Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 3, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-35  Restricted Parking.



Parking will be restricted to designated parking facilities only. Vehicles
left inside of the park after closing hours will be fined and/or towed away
at the owner's expense.



(Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 4, 4-13-76)



Sec. 5-36  Penalties.



Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty
of an ordinance violation and shall be fined a minimum sum of fifty dollars
($50.00).



(Ord. No. 993 Art. V, § 1, 4-13-76; Am. Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 5-37  Feeding of Wild Animals Prohibited.



   (a)   No person shall feed or otherwise attempt to feed any geese,
ducks, or other waterfowl within the Dyer Park District properties, or
perimeters of said properties.



   (b)   Any person who violates this section shall be deemed guilty of
an ordinance violation and shall be fined a minimum sum of fifty dollars
($50.00) in accordance with Sec. 5-36.



(Ord. No. 2000-16, 7-18-00)



Sec. 5-38 through Sec. 5-44  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. TOWN PARKS.



Sec. 5-45  Elmer P. Miller Community Park.



Upon the recommendation of the Dyer Lions Club, and in recognition of Elmer
P. Miller's many fine attributes befitting the character of the man who
nurtured the young to a ripe and wholesome maturity, that henceforth, in his
honor, the Town Park located and fronting on Schulte Street, in Dyer, Lake
County, Indiana, shall be known and is designated as the “Elmer P. Miller
Community Park”, and the Town Council is authorized to take such further
actions as appropriate to assure this designation and commemoration.



(Res. No. 770, 10-13-70).



Sec. 5-46 through Sec. 5-55  Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 6-1   Town's Authority to Regulate.



Sec. 6-2   Preservation of Public Peace and Order.



Sec. 6-3   Authority to Regulate Air and Sound.



Sec. 6-4   Authority to Regulate Public Gateways.



Sec. 6-5   Authority to Establish a Police and Law Enforcement System.



Sec. 6-6   Authority to Establish Firefighters and Fire Prevention System.



Sec. 6-7   Offenses Against Public Health, Order and Decency.



Sec. 6-8   through Sec. 6-14 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2.  REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



Sec. 6-15   Definitions.



Sec. 6-16   Consumption or Possession Prohibited.



Sec. 6-17   Operation Prohibited.



Sec. 6-18   Citations.



Sec. 6-19   Enforcement and Penalty.



Sec. 6-20   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-21   Force and Effect.



Sec. 6-22 through Sec. 6-24 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3.  SPRINKLING REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-25   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-26   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-27   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-28   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-29   Council to Declare Sprinkling Ban.



Sec. 6-30   Penalties.



Sec. 6-31 through Sec. 6-33 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4.  AUTOMATIC AND MANUAL ALARM SYSTEMS.



Sec. 6-34   Definitions.



Sec. 6-35   Permitted Devices.



Sec. 6-36   Monitoring System.



Sec. 6-37   Permit Required.



Sec. 6-38   Application for Permit.



Sec. 6-39   Certification by Alarm Equipment Supplier for Alarms Which
Require a Permit.



Sec. 6-40   Inspection.



Sec. 6-41   Local Alarms.



Sec. 6-42   Fines Applicable for False Alarms.



Sec. 6-43   Revocation of Permit.



Sec. 6-44   Disconnection and Reconnection.



Sec. 6-45   Hold Harmless.



Sec. 6-46   Separability.



Sec. 6-47   Penalty.



Sec. 6-48 and Sec. 6-49 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5.  FIRE AND SMOKE ALARMS REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-50   Installation Requirement of Smoke Detectors in New
Construction.



Sec. 6-51   Installation in Existing Buildings.



Sec. 6-52   Buildings Required to Have Smoke Detectors.



Sec. 6-53   Inspections.



Sec. 6-54   Penalty.



Sec. 6-55 through Sec. 6-57 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 6.  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   Division I.  Overall Guidelines to Article.



Sec. 6-58   Definitions.



Sec. 6-59   Illustrations Enumerated–Weeds, Rubbish, Noise, Odors, Junk
Vehicles, Etc.



Sec. 6-60   Enforcement and Penalties.



Sec. 6-61 and Sec. 6-62 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II.  Lewd Films and Sale of Obscene Publications.



Sec. 6-63   Policy.



Sec. 6-64   Definitions.



Sec. 6-65   Lewd Films and Theaters.



Sec. 6-66   Stock in Trade.



Sec. 6-67   Possession.



Sec. 6-68   Enforcement and Penalties.



Sec. 6-69   Knowledge Presumed.



Sec. 6-70   Judgment and Forfeiture.



Sec. 6-71   Severability.



Sec. 6-72 through Sec. 6-74 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 7.  HUMANE CONTROL AND REGULATIONS OF ANIMALS.



Sec. 6-75   Definitions.



Sec. 6-76   Town Manager Responsibilities.



Sec. 6-77   Licensing.



Sec. 6-78   Permits and Fees.



Sec. 6-79   License and Permit Issuance and Revocation.



Sec. 6-80   Restraint.



Sec. 6-81   Impoundment and Violation Notice.



Sec. 6-82   Animal Care.



Sec. 6-83   Keeping of Exotic Animals.



Sec. 6-84   Keeping of Animals Classified as Farm Animals.



Sec. 6-85   Performing Animal Exhibitions.



Sec. 6-86   Animal Waste.



Sec. 6-87   Sterilization.



Sec. 6-88   Enforcement.



Sec. 6-89   Penalties.



Sec. 6-90   Exceptions.



Sec. 6-91   Trapping.



Sec. 6-92   Wild Animals.



Sec. 6-93 and Sec. 6-94 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. FIREWORKS REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-95   Definitions.



Sec. 6-96   Special Permit.



Sec. 6-97   Use and Discharge, Generally.



Sec. 6-98   Manufacturer, Wholesaler, Importer or Distributor.



Sec. 6-99   Identification of Fireworks.



Sec. 6-100   Sales.



Sec. 6-101   Revocation of Special Permit.



Sec. 6-102   Penalty.



Sec. 6-103 Through Sec. 6-109 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 9. REGULATION OF AIR RIFLES, AIR PISTOLS AND SLING SHOTS.



Sec. 6-110   Discharging in Public Ways Prohibited.



Sec. 6-111   Consent of Owner Required.



Sec. 6-112   Impoundment.



Sec. 6-113   Penalties.



Sec. 6-114 Through Sec. 6-115 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 10. HUNTING WITH FIREARMS PROHIBITED.



Sec. 6-116   Hunting Prohibited.



Sec. 6-117   Shooting of Firearms Prohibited-Exception.



Sec. 6-118   Minors.



Sec. 6-119   Penalties.



Sec. 6-120 Through Sec. 6-123 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 11. SIDEWALKS FREE OF ICE AND SNOW.



Sec. 6-124   Duty to Remove Ice and Snow.



Sec. 6-125   Penalties.



Sec. 6-126 and Sec. 6-127 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 12. CURFEW REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-128   Minor Curfew.



Sec. 6-129   Violations.



Sec. 6-130   Penalty.



Sec. 6-131 Through Sec. 6-133 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 13. DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.



Sec. 6-134   Definitions.



Sec. 6-135   Proper Disposal Required.



Sec. 6-136   Container Regulations.



Sec. 6-137   Collection By the Town.



Sec. 6-138   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-139   Location of Dumpster Units on Commercial Real Estate.



Sec. 6-140   Rubbish Fires Prohibited.



Sec. 6-141   Enforcement and Penalties.



Sec. 6-142   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-143 Through Sec. 6-149 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 14. ORDINANCE VIOLATION BUREAU.



Sec. 6-150   Ordinance Violation Bureau Established.



Sec. 6-151   Clerk-Treasurer to be Administrator of the Bureau.



Sec. 6-152   Schedule of Ordinances and Civil Penalties.



Sec. 6-153   Civil Penalty Amendments.



Sec. 6-154   Specific Procedures.



Sec. 6-155 Through Sec. 6-159 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 15. HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIAL SPILLS AND LEAKS.



Sec. 6-160   Service Charges for Hazardous or Toxic Material Spills and
Leaks.



Sec. 6-161   Reimbursement Procedures.



Sec. 6-162   Clean-Up Contractors and Direct Payment Procedures.



Sec. 6-163   Billing Procedures.



Sec. 6-164   Penalty for Non-Payment.



Sec. 6-165 through Sec. 6-169 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 16. SMOKING IN PUBLIC AREAS.



Sec. 6-170   Town Hall Smoking Regulations.



Sec. 6-171   Penalty



Sec. 6-172 through Sec. 6-175 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 17.  TREES AND FLORA.



Sec. 6-180   Title.



Sec. 6-181   Purpose and Intent.



Sec. 6-182   Definitions.



Sec. 6-183   Jurisdiction.



Sec. 6-184   Tree Program Supervisor.



Sec. 6-185   Appeals.



Sec. 6-186   Enforcement.



Sec. 6-187   Performance Evaluation of Article.



Sec. 6-188   Severability.



Sec. 6-189   Local Government Disclaimer of Liability.



Sec. 6-190   Responsibility of Property Owners.



Sec. 6-191   Penalties for Tree Removal and Damage Violations.



Sec. 6-192   Penalty for Planting, Arboricultural Work or Encroachment
Violations.



Sec. 6-193   Topping Prohibited.



Sec. 6-194   Action on Failure to Abate.



Sec. 6-195   Procedural and Labor Charges.



Sec. 6-196   Resolution of Conflicts Between Trees and Structures.



Sec. 6-197   Situations Which are Declared to be a Public Nuisance.



Sec. 6-198   Destruction of Diseased or Hazardous Trees and Plants.



Sec. 6-199   Abatement of Hazards and Public Nuisances.



Sec. 6-200   Cleanup of Trimmings.



Sec. 6-201   Permit Required For Any Planting Within Town Right-of-Way.



Sec. 6-202   Landscape Structures Prohibited.



Sec. 6-203   Harming Public Trees Forbidden.



Sec. 6-204   Licensing of Private Tree Care Firms.



Sec. 6-205   Conservation of Forest and Woodland Resources During
Development.



Sec. 6-206   Prohibited Species List.



Sec. 6-207 through Sec. 6-210 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 18.  PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS.



Sec. 6-211   Definitions.



Sec. 6-212   Restrictions.



Sec. 6-213   Penalty.



Sec. 6-214 through Sec. 6-220 reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 6-1  Town's Authority To Regulate. 1



The Town may regulate the conduct, or use or possession of property which
might endanger the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens.



                             



1   I.C., §36-8-2-4, authorizes the regulation of conduct and property
for reasons of public health, safety and welfare.



Sec. 6-2  Preservation of Public Peace and Order. 2



The Town may establish, maintain, and operate a police and law enforcement
system to preserve public peace and order and may provide facilities and
equipment for that system.



                             



2   I.C., §36-8-2-2, sets forth the authority to preserve public peace
and order.



Sec. 6-3  Authority to Regulate Air and Sound. 3



The Town may regulate the introduction of any substance or odor into the air,
or any generation of sound.



                             



3   I.C., §36-8-2-8, authorizes the regulation of air and sound.



Sec. 6-4  Authority to Regulate Public Gatherings. 4



The Town may regulate public gatherings, such as shows, demonstrations,
fairs, conventions, sporting events, and exhibitions.



                             



4   I.C., §36-8-2-4, authorizes the regulation of public gathering.



Sec. 6-5  Authority to Establish a Police and Law Enforcement System. 5



The Town may establish, maintain, and operate a police and law enforcement
system to preserve public peace and order and may provide facilities and
equipment for that system.



                             



5   I.C., §36-8-2-4, sets forth the authority to establish a police and
law enforcement system.



Sec. 6-6  Authority to Establish Firefighter and Fire Prevention System. 6



The Town may establish, maintain, and operate a fire fighting and fire
prevention system and may provide facilities and equipment for that system.



                             



6   I.C., §36-8-2-3, sets forth the authority to establish a fire
fighting system.



Sec. 6-7  Offenses Against Public Health, Order and Decency. 7



   (a)   All offenses against public health, order or decency not
addressed by this Code shall be governed by applicable State Statute.



   (b)   Except as specifically set forth herein, any violation of any
provision of this Chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided by Sec.
1-11 of this Code.



                             



7   I.C., §35-45-1-1, et seq., addresses such offenses.



Sec. 6-8 through Sec. 6-14  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALCOHOLIC CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



Sec. 6-15  Definitions.



For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:



   a.   Alcoholic beverage. The term “alcoholic beverage” means a
liquid or solid



      (1)   Is, or contains, one-half percent (0.5%) or more alcohol
by volume: used as a beverage.



      (2)   Is, fit for human consumption; and



      (3)   Is reasonably likely, or intended to be.



   b.   Container. The term “container” means a receptacle in which
an alcoholic beverage is immediately contained and with which the alcoholic
beverage contained in it is in immediate contact.



   c.   Motor vehicle. “Motor vehicle” shall have the meaning set
forth in Indiana Code, § 9-13-2-105A, except that “Motor Vehicle” as
used in this Article, shall not include any chartered passenger vehicle
licensed to operate within the State of Indiana. (Ord. No. 92-20, § 1,
7-14-92)



Sec. 6-16  Consumption or Possession Prohibited.



It is unlawful for any person to knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage or
possess a container that has been opened, that has a broken seal, or from
which some of the content have been remove while in a motor vehicle that is
being operated upon a public highway, street or alley within the Town of
Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 92-20, § 2, 7-14-92)



Sec. 6-17  Operation Prohibited.



   (a)   It is unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle upon a
public highway, street or alley to knowingly keep or allow to be kept in any
area of the motor vehicle that is accessible to the driver or passengers a
container that has been opened, that has a broken seal, or from which some of
the contents have been removed.



   (b)   Open alcoholic containers that are left over from any type of
outing must be placed in the vehicle trunk. If there is no trunk, the
container must be placed farthest to the back of the vehicle and put into a
closed box, bag or container, out of the reach of the driver or passengers, 
so that they may not be able to consume the alcoholic beverage. Licensed
caterers may transport open containers of alcoholic beverages so long as no
human consumption occurs during transporting to and from the destination.
(Ord. No. 92-20, § 3, 7-14-92)



   (c)   It is a defense to this article that the container is in the
motor vehicle for the purpose of recycling and not for consumption while in
the vehicle. The person shall bear the burden of establishing the fact that
the open container was in the vehicle for the purpose of recycling. (Ord. No.
92-20, § 6, 7-14-92; Am. Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-16-00)



Sec. 6-18  Citations.



An officer of the Town of Dyer Metropolitan Police Department shall issue a
local ordinance citation or uniform complaint and summons, on a form
prescribed for such purposes by the Department for such use, to a person who
violates this article of the Town Code. (Ord. No. 92-20, § 4, 7-14-92; Am.
Ord. No. 2000-09, 5-16-00)



Sec. 6-19  Enforcement and Penalty.



Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be
fined fifty dollars ($50.00). Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of the fine shall
be deposited into the Town Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund (LECEF)
for the purposes as set forth and permitted by Town Code Section 2-187 as
amended from time to time. The remaining portion of the fine in the amount of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be deposited to the Town General Fund.
Each offense of violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense,
with separate fines for each as set forth herein. All such fines shall be
paid to the Local Ordinance Violations Bureau, administered by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town. (Ord. No. 92-20, § 5, 7-14-92; Am. Ord. No.
2000-09, 5-16-00)



Sec. 6-20  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-21  Force and Effect.



This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon adoption and
publication under Indiana Code, § 5-3-1. (Ord. No. 92-20, § 7, 7-14-92)



Sec. 6-22 through Sec. 6-24 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3.  SPRINKLING REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-25  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-26  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-27  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-28  Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 6-29  Council to Declare Sprinkling Ban.



The Town Council shall have the authority, by majority vote, to declare a
severe water shortage.  Upon the Town Council's declaring a severe water
shortage, the Town Council shall have the authority to place any and all
regulations into effect regarding sprinkling or other outside hose usage,
including but not limited to a total ban upon sprinkling or other outside
hose usage, that the Town Council may deem necessary to alleviate the severe
water shortage to the benefit of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Town. (Ord. No. 92-21, § 5, 7-14-92; Am. Ord. No. 95-12, §
2, 4-11-95)



Sec. 6-30  Penalties.



Any person or firm who violates the terms and provisions of this Ordinance
shall be fined as follows:



   For the first violation   $50.00



   For the second violation   $200.00



   For all subsequent violations   $500.00



(Ord. No. 92-21, § 6, 7-14-92)



Sec. 6-31 through Sec. 6-33 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4.  AUTOMATIC AND MANUAL ALARM SYSTEMS.



Sec. 6-34  Definitions.



The following definitions shall be applicable for the purpose of this Article:



   (a)   Alarm Equipment Supplier.  Any person that sells, leases,
installs or otherwise deals in automatic protection devices or signaling
devices which transmit alarms upon a stimulus from a detection apparatus or a
manually operated system.



   (b)   Alarm Conditions.  Alarms activated by unlawful violation of
a user's property, other violations that the systems were designed to protect
against, acts of God, other violent conditions, outside agencies, hazards or
external forces not under the control of the owner, lessee or his or her
employee or agent.



   (c)   Alarm User.  Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the Town of Dyer, including those systems which employ an
audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to
alert or signal persons outside of the premises.



   (d)   Alarm System.  An assembly of equipment and devices, such as
a solid state unit, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard urgent
attention and to which the Police or Fire Department are expected to respond.



   (e)   Central Station.  A facility whose prime purpose is to
monitor incoming alarm signals 24 hours a day and relay the signal
information to the appropriate authorities.



   (f)   Direct Line. A data line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to report
signals on a station-to-station basis.



   (g)   False Alarms. The activation of an alarm system caused by
improper operation, negligence of the owner or lessee or his or her employee
or agent, or equipment malfunction.



   (h)   Local Alarms. A signaling system which, when activated, causes
an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the
premises within which the system is installed.



   (i)   Person. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association
or society, but such term does not include the Town of Dyer.



   (j)   Police Chief. The Chief of the Police Department of the Town
of Dyer, or his or her authorized representative.



   (k)   Public Trunkline.  A data line leading into the
communications center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of
handling emergency and administrative calls on a person-to-person basis.



   (l)   Signal Board.  A system located in the Police Department to
receive data signals over direct lines to note a fire, burglary or other
emergency a specific locations within the Town of Dyer.



   (m)   Signaling Device. An electrically operated instrument which
automatically sends data signals to be registered by indicators at a monitor
panel at the receiving terminal or central station.



   (n)   Town. The Town of Dyer, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 1, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-35  Permitted Devices.



Permitted Devices. No person shall use or cause or permit to be used, an
alarm system utilizing signaling devices that automatically select a public
trunkline of the Police Department of the Town of Dyer and then reproduce any
prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire, hazard or other
emergency.



With the exception of local alarms, only signaling devices shall be permitted
to be installed in the Town for the purpose of reporting any robbery,
burglary, fire, hazard or other emergency to the Police Department of the
Town.  For alarm systems other than those that are directly linked to the
Police Department of the Town of Dyer, the central station must call the
premises at which the alarm has been activated in an effort to ascertain the
validity of the alarm, before calling or relaying the alarm to the Dyer
Police Department.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 2, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-36  Monitoring Systems.



The Police Department of the Town is authorized to contract for the
installation of and maintain a signal board within the Police Department of
the Town.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 3, 2-12-85)



Sec. 6-37  Permit Required.



   (a)   Multi-family (three (3) units and above), commercial and
industrial users, as well as any user who is directly connected to the signal
board at the Dyer Police Department shall be required to obtain a permit
prior to installing an alarm system.



   (b)   Any alarm user, as noted above, who operates an alarm system
without first obtaining authorization as required by this Section, or who,
after having an authorization revoked, fails to disconnect his or her alarm
System, shall be in violation of this Article.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 4, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-38  Application for Permit.



Applications for permits to install, maintain, and operate an alarm system
shall be filed with the Clerk- Treasurer of the Town.  If an electrical
permit is required to install the alarm the permit fee shall be a total of
sixty dollars ($60.00).  If there is no electrical permit required, the
permit fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00), for alarm systems to be installed,
maintained, and operated for multi-family uses (three (3) units and above),
by merchants, and businesses, for Commercial and Industrial Use. If said
alarm system is directly linked to the signal board at the Dyer Police
Station, the alarm permit must be renewed on an annual basis in January of
each new calendar year.  The alarm user applying for the authorization
required shall state on the application form the following:



      (1)   His or her name.



      (2)   The address of the residence, or business or businesses
in or upon which the alarm system has been or will be installed, together
with the telephone number.



      (3)   The type of alarm system (burglar signaling device,
holdup signalling device, fire signaling device).



      (4)   The alarm equipment supplier selling, installing,
monitoring, inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system.



      (5)   The name and telephone number of at least two (2) other
persons (in case of a corporate alarm user applicant) and at least three (3)
persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who can open the
premises in which the system is installed.



      (6)   The alarm user shall provide updates when changes occur
in the contact persons.



The information contained in an alarm user authorization application required
by this Section and other information received by the Police Chief through
correspondence or communications with an alarm user shall be securely
maintained.



Upon issuance of the permit the Clerk-Treasurer shall distribute the
information therein to the Police Chief.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 5, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2001-26, 10-16-01; Am. Ord. No.
2006-04, 4-19-06; Am. Ord. No. 2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-39  Certification by Alarm Equipment Supplier for Alarms Which
Require a Permit.



   (a)   Within ten (10) days after the initial installation of an
alarm system, and within ten (10) days after a modification of an existing
alarm system, the alarm equipment supplier shall deliver to the
Clerk-Treasurer a certification by it that the alarm system is installed and
operating in accordance with standard industry practices and in compliance
with applicable laws and ordinances.



   (b)   For commercial alarms which are directly linked to the signal
board at the Dyer Police Department, the alarm user shall submit with the
renewal application proof that the alarm has been tested by an alarm
equipment supplier in compliance with state statute, that the alarm system is
installed and operating under industry standards and in accordance with
applicable laws and ordinances.



   (c)   No permit, either initial or renewal, shall be issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer without the satisfactory compliance with the certification or
testing required herein.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 6, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06; Am. Ord. No.
2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-40  Inspection.



   (a)   The Chief of Police, or his or her delegate, shall have the
right to inspect any alarm system on the premises where it is intended to be
used, both prior to and subsequent to the issuance of a permit, at reasonable
times, for the purpose of determining whether a permit should be granted or
renewed, and to determine if said alarm system is being used in conformity
with the terms of the permit, industry standards, and in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances.



   (b)   Each alarm user who is directly linked to the signal board at
the Dyer Police Department authorizes the Chief of Police or his or her
delegate to have the alarm system inspected at least once each year by an
alarm equipment supplier chosen by the Town for such purpose.  Any costs
incurred for said inspection shall be the responsibility of the licensee, and
shall in no way be the responsibility of the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 7, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-41  Local Alarms.



   (a)   Local alarms with any externally audible alert shall not make
a sound similar to that of Civil Defense Warning System.  Local alarms shall
not be required to obtain a permit.



   (b)   Such local alarms in residential districts must automatically
cut-off at five (5) minutes or less of sounding.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 8, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-42  Fines Applicable For False Alarms.



   (a)   Any alarm user who has false alarms in a calendar year shall
be subject to payment of a fine or fines for such false alarms. The false
alarm fine schedule shall be as follows:



      (1)   1st false alarm: no charge;



      (2)   2nd false alarm: no charge;



      (3)   3rd false alarm: no charge;



      (4)   4th false alarm: one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine;



      (5)   5th false alarm: two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine;



      (6)   Every false alarm thereafter will result in a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) fine.



   (b)   False alarms which result from malfunction of the telephone
system which connects the alarm to the central board shall not be charged as
false alarm violations. The Chief of Police has the discretion to determine
if other conditions were present which would justify he or she making a
determination as to whether an alarm would be classified as a false alarm or
not.



   (c)   All fines shall be payable to the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town
and deposited to the General Fund.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 9, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2001-26, 10-16-01; Am. Ord. No.
2006-14, 9-20-06; Am. Ord. No. 2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-43  Revocation of Permit.



   (a)   The Chief of Police may revoke any permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this Article upon a finding of any one or more of the
following violations:



      (1)   False information in an application for issuance or
renewal of an alarm system.



      (2)   Failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance,
as amended from time to time.



      (3)   Installation, maintenance or operation of an alarm
system in violation of this Ordinance or of any term or condition of the
permit granting authority.



      (4)   Failure to pay any fine charged hereunder.



      (5)   Failure to obey any order of the Police Chief to
disconnect the alarm system.



      (6)   Excessive false alarms which shall be defined as more
than ten (10) false alarms in a calendar year.



   (b)   Before exercising his or her power to revoke any permit issued
hereunder, the Chief of Police shall first give written notice to the alarm
user describing therein the violation or failure by the alarm user and
advising the alarm user that:



      (1)   He or she shall have a reasonable time, but not
exceeding seven (7) days, to cure the matter and effect compliance; or



      (2)   He or she shall provide to the Chief of Police such
additional information and data as the alarm user believes sufficient to deny
or excuse the claim of violation or failure.



   (c)   An alarm user may appeal an adverse action or decision made by
the Chief of Police by filing a written request within ten (10) days after
the date of said adverse action or decision.  The appeal shall be heard by
the Dyer Police Commission at a date, time and place designated by it.  The
Police Commission may hold a public hearing as determined by it in its sole
discretion.  The Police Commission shall review the action of the Police
Chief, the record of the proceedings, and further information submitted in a
hearing, if granted, and thereafter shall either affirm, affirm with
modifications, or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 10, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06; Am. Ord. No.
2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-44  Disconnection and Recommendation.



   (a)   Whenever alarm conditions are received by the Police
Department that evidence a failure of the alarm equipment or the alarm user
to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance, the Chief of Police may
order that the alarm user disconnect such alarm system until it is made to
comply with the  requirements  of  this Ordinance.  If there are more
than ten (10) false alarms in any one calendar year from any alarm system,
the Chief of Police may remove the alarm system from the signal board.



   (b)   No action or disconnection shall take place unless the Chief
of Police first gives written notice of his or her intention to do so, and
the date on which the action will be taken provided, however, that in the
event the Chief of Police believes that action of disconnection is necessary
for the public health or safety, he or she may disconnect the alarm system
and provide the alarm user with prompt notification thereof.



   (c)   Reconnection. An alarm system user whose authorization has
been revoked is not precluded under this Section from applying for a new
authorization pursuant to Section 6-38, provided, however, that all fines due
must be paid and the system corrected from any deficiencies and the
application is accompanied by a certification by the alarm installer that the
system is installed and operating in accordance with standard industry
practices and in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.



   (d)   Any person affected by the Police Chief's order to disconnect
or by the Police Chief's refusal to certify to the Clerk-Treasurer that the
system currently meets all requirements, shall have the right to request the
Police Commission of the Town of Dyer to review the decision or action by the
Police Chief within ten (10) days after any decision has been made by the
Police Chief. The Police Commission is given the authority to either affirm,
modify, or reverse any decision made by the Police Chief.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 11, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-45  Hold Harmless.



   (a)   In the event that an alarm user or an alarm equipment supplier
has violated or failed to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, such
alarm user and such alarm equipment supplier shall hold the Town harmless
from any cost, expense, claim or the like incurred or paid by the Town
arising out of or occurring as a result of the installation and operation of
an alarm system within the Town including but not limited to reasonable
attorney fees, litigation expenses and court costs.



   (b)   The alarm user and the alarm equipment supplier, by applying
for a permit and by installing alarm systems within the Town of Dyer, waive
any claim or cause of action which either may have against the Town for acts
or actions taken by the Town of Dyer in good faith.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 12, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-46  Separability.



If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such provisions, or portion of this Article shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 13, 2-12-85)



Sec. 6-47  Penalty.



Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of
this Article upon conviction shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 85-4, § 14, 2-12-85; Am. Ord. No. 2001-26, 10-16-01; Am. Ord. No.
2011-01, 2-10-11)



Sec. 6-48 and Sec. 6-49  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. FIRE AND SMOKE ALARM REGULATIONS. 8



                         



8   I.C. §§22-11-5-11 and 22-11-18-1, et seq. promote safety from fire
hazards.



Sec. 6-50  Installment Requirement of Smoke Detectors in New Construction.



Commencing with the date of this Ordinance (March 9, 1993) all new
construction in the Town of Dyer, shall have functional smoke detectors
installed in addition to such other fire alarms or fire preventative devices
required by any other laws, rules or regulations of the State of Indiana and
Town of Dyer.  All smoke detectors shall be connected into the building's
electrical system with a battery back-up system.  All such devices for smoke
detection shall be installed in conformity with the manufacturer’s
requirements or acceptable trade union requirements or as directed by the
Town's electrical inspector.  These devices shall be installed at intervals
in such rooms, corridors, or other spaces within a building in order that the
entire building shall be secured, protected, or covered.  No occupancy
permit shall be issued by the Town until this Article is fully complied with
regardless when a building permit was issued.



(Ord. No. 93-5, § 1, 3-9-93; Am. Ord. No. 2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-51  Installation in Existing Buildings.



Smoke detectors shall be installed in all existing commercial and residential
buildings on or before January 1, 1991. Smoke detectors installed in existing
buildings may be battery operated. If a battery operated detector is
installed, it must contain a tamper resistant cover to protect the batteries.
The batteries shall be periodically replaced and maintained in order that the
detector is always operational. The owner of the real estate and the occupier
of said real estate shall be responsible for maintenance of the smoke
detector in workable condition. Smoke detectors installed in already
constructed buildings or structures shall conform in every way to the
requirements of smoke detectors in new construction, except they may be
battery operated.



(Ord. No. 90-7, § 2, 4-10-90; Am. Ord. No. 93-5, § 2, 3-9-93)



Sec. 6-52  Buildings Required to Have Smoke Detectors.



This Article shall be applicable to all hotels, motels, businesses,
commercial buildings, apartments, residential buildings, and condominiums
located within the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 90-7, § 2, 4-10-90; Am. Ord. No. 93-5, § 3, 3-9-93)



Sec. 6-53  Inspections.



Where conditions of safety warrant the electrical inspector or the Fire Chief
of the Town of Dyer or their duly- appointed designee or the duly-appointed
representative may enter into any building, structure, office, apartment,
condominium, residence, or any other place where a smoke detector is required
at any reasonable time in order to inspect the smoke detector.  The
electrical inspector or the Fire Chief or their duly-authorized
representative may make such rules and regulations and other requirements
consistent with the intent of this Article.



(Ord. No. 90-7, § 4, 4-10-90; Am. Ord. No. 93-5, § 4, 3-9-93; Am. Ord. No.
2006-04, 4-19-06)



Sec. 6-54  Penalty.



Any person violating the terms and provisions of this Article shall be
subject to a fine of $50.00 for the first violation payable through the
Ordinance Violation Bureau, and for subsequent violations not to exceed three
hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense thereafter. Each day the violation
occurs shall be a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89; Am. Ord. No. 90-7, § 5, 4-10-90; Am. Ord. No.
93-5, § 5, 3-9-93)



Sec. 6-55 through Sec. 6-57  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 6. PUBLIC NUISANCES.



Division I. Overall Guidelines.



Sec. 6-58  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   Native Species.  A plant or animal that originally occurred in an area
(USEPA).



   For the purpose of this Article, the word “nuisance” is defined as
the doing of an unlawful act, or the omitting to perform a duty, or the
suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act,
omission, condition or thing either:



      (1)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others; or



      (2)   Offends decency; or



      (3)   Is offensive to the senses; or



      (4)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to
obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street,
highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage; or



      (5)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the
use of property; or



      (6)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of
life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of
others; or



      (7)   Violates the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana.



   Rank Vegetation.  Uncontrolled growth of weeds and grasses - six (6)
inch height limitation on developed lot, ten (10) inch on undeveloped lot.



   Turf Grass.  Grass commonly used in regularly cut lawns or play areas,
such as, but not limited to, bluegrass, fescue, and ryegrass blends.



   Weeds.  Any uncultivated plant other than native species occurring
naturally which has a tendency to dominate or drive out grasses and desirable
plants.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 2-9-12)



Sec. 6-59  Illustrative Enumeration - Weeds, Rubbish, Noise, Odors, Junk
Vehicles, Etc.



The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of the following items, conditions
or actions are declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however,
this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting
or restrictive;



   (a)   Turf, grass, weeds and other rank vegetation living or dead,
the height of which exceed six (6) inches above ground level on a developed
lot and ten (10) inches above ground level on an undeveloped lot.  The
failure of any property owner to cut turf grass, weeds, or other rank
vegetation, living or dead, on his or her property shall be evidence that the
property owner is maintaining a nuisance.



      (1)   The growing of taller grasses/plants constituting the
“rough” area of a golf course shall be exempt from the height regulation
stated above so long as the grasses/plants in such “rough” areas shall be
native species.



      (2)   Buffer areas along creeks, streams, ponds and lakes
shall be exempt from the height regulations stated above as such areas are
used to filter storm water runoff before it enters creeks, streams, ponds and
lakes.  Such buffer areas shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five feet
(24') in width.



      (3)   Taking into consideration topography and existing
forestry areas tracts of undeveloped land are also exempt from the height
regulations above under the following conditions.  For such undeveloped
parcels of less than one (1) acre, a strip of land at least 10 feet (10') in
width is subject to the regulations in paragraph (a) above where they border
residential and/or commercial properties.  For parcels larger than one (1)
acre that border occupied residential and/or commercial properties, a strip
of land at least twenty-five feet (25') in width is subject to the
regulations in paragraph (a) above.



      (4)   Swales and drainage ways leading to any body of water or
area designed to hold water and storm sewer inlets are also exempt from the
height regulations stated in paragraph (a) above so long as the swale or
drainage way is functioning properly.



      (5)   Areas classified as state and/or federally protected
wetlands are exempt from these regulations.



   (b)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things.



   (c)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes
and other vermin.



   (d)   Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated
condition that it is unfit for human habitation, kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in
the vicinity where it is located.



   (e)   Any of the following noises and/or noise conditions, namely:



      (1)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments, live bands
or disc jockeys, compact disc, tape or record players, amplifiers and similar
devices: Operating any such device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. Monday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m Friday, Saturday
and Sunday as to be plainly audible across property boundaries or through
partitions common to two (2) separate dwelling units shall be unlawful.



      (2)   Domestic power tools: Operating any mechanically powered
saw, drill, sander, grinder or other tool, lawn or garden tool, lawn mower,
or similar device used outdoors or indoors between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m, as to be plainly audible across property boundaries or through
partitions common to two (2) separate dwelling units shall be unlawful.



      (3)   Commercial construction: Operating any tool or equipment
used in construction, drilling or demolition between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 7:00 am. as to be plainly audible across property boundaries or through
partitions common to two (2) separate dwelling units shall be unlawful.
Further, no commercial construction noise shall be permitted on Sundays or
holidays.



      (4)   Horns and signaling devices: Operating a horn or other
audible signaling device on any motor vehicle except in an emergency or when
required by law shall be unlawful.



      (5)   Residential noisy parties or gatherings: Hosting any
party or gathering between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday
through Thursday and 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a..m. Friday, Saturday and Sunday
giving rise to noise that is plainly audible across property boundaries or
between partitions common to two (2) separate dwelling units shall be
unlawful.



      (6)   Motor vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a light motor vehicle which causes excessive noise as a result of a
defective or modified exhaust system or as a result of an unnecessary rapid
acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or tire squealing. It shall be
unlawful to operate audio equipment within a vehicle which is plainly audible
within twenty five (25) feet of the audio device.



      (7)   Stationary source: It shall be unlawful for any person
to cause the sound pressure level to exceed the limits listed below at any
point on the boundary of the property where the person is located.



         a.   If a person is located within a residential zone:
fifty-five (55) DBA at all times.



         b.   If the person is located within a commercial zone:
sixty (60) DBA at all times.



         c.   If the person is located within an industrial zone:
sixty-five (65) DBA at all times.



         d.   If the property boundary lies between two (2)
zones, the lower limits shall apply regardless of the zone in which the
person creating the noise is located.



      (8)   Emergency work exempted: Noise caused in the performance
of emergency work for the immediate safety, health, or welfare of the
community or individuals of the community or to restore property to a safe
condition shall not be subject to the conditions of this Section.



      (9)   Definitions:



         a.   Stationary source:  A fixed, non-mobile source.



         b.   Plainly audible:  Any sound that can be detected
by a person using his/her unaided hearing faculties.



         c.   Decibel (DB):  A unit for describing the amplitude
of sound as measured on a sound level meter.



         d.   Decibel meter: A device used to measure the
intensity of sound.



   (f)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as
the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or
generation of such odors and stenches.



   (g)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a
reasonable time after death.



   (h)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery industrial wastes or
other substances.



   (i)   Any building, structure or other place or location where any
activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted,
performed or maintained.



   (i)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on
any lot or piece of ground.



   (k)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities.



   (l)   The obstruction of any public street, road or sidewalk.



   (m)  The obstruction of any dedicated easement.



   (n)   The alteration of the flow of storm water to the detriment of
surrounding property.



   (o)   The public exhibition of lewd films and the sale of obscene
publications.



   (p)   Any junk vehicle. For the purposes of this Article a “junk
vehicle” shall be defined as a motor vehicle, or a part or parts from a
motor vehicle, which meets any one of the following qualifications:



      (1)   It does not carry the current state registration
(license plates);



      (2)   It cannot be safely operated under its own power;



      (3)   It is not carried on the most recent tax records of the
county assessor's office.



      (4)   It is not the property of and is not located in a
licensed junkyard.



   (q)   The discharge of any liquid onto the property of other person
including but not limited to the discharge of any water as the result of the
draining of a swimming pool or the operation of a sump pump. (Ord. No. 92-9,
§ 2, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 2000-22, § 1, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2003-11, 5-20-03;
Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 2-9-12; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 3-14-13)



Sec. 6-60  Enforcement and Penalties.



Whenever a nuisance other than the public exhibition of lewd films and the
sale of obscene publications if found to exist within the Town, the Town
through any Town officer or employee designated by the Town Council may
proceed to enforce compliance with this Article.



   (a)   By giving written notice to all persons holding a substantial
interest in the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person
causing or maintaining the nuisance, which notice shall be served as
authorized by Indiana law and which notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   An order to abate the nuisance within a time certain
which time shall be reasonable under the circumstances.



      (2)   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary.



      (3)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance.



      (4)   A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance.



      (5)   A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as
directed, the Town may abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof
against such person.



      (6)   A statement that the finding of a violation and/or the
billing of any amounts by the Town to the property owner can be appealed by
filing a notice of appeal from administrative action within ten (10) days of
the date of the finding or the receipt of the bill. The notice shall be filed
at the Town Clerk-Treasurer’s Office on forms available at the Dyer Town
Hall. All appeals from administrative action shall be heard by the Town Board
of Zoning Appeals.



Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was
served pursuant to the provisions of this article to abate the same, a duly
designated officer or employee of the Town may proceed to take any and all
action necessary including, but not limited to, entry onto any property where
the nuisance exists to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of
costs incurred in the abatement thereof.



Any and all costs incurred by the Town in the abatement of a nuisance under
the provisions of this article shall constitute a lien against the property
upon which such nuisance existed and shall be certified by the Clerk-
Treasurer to the County Auditor, who shall cause such costs to be placed upon
the tax duplicate of the owner of such property and such costs shall then be
collected from the owner as other taxes are collected. In addition, such
costs shall be a debt which may be collected by the Town in an appropriate
civil action; and



   (b)   By bringing an action in the name of the Town of Dyer before a
Court of competent jurisdiction to:



      (1)   Enforce a civil Penalty for violation of this Article,
which penalty shall be in a sum not to exceed $2,500.00; and/or



      (2)   Enjoin the violation of this Article or issue a $50.00
Ordinance Violation for first offenses in a calendar year payable through the
Ordinance Violation Bureau. (Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89; Am. Ord. No. 2003- 01,
1-21-03)



Each day that any person shall violate any of the provisions or Sections of
this Article shall be deemed to commit a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 3, 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-61 and Sec. 6-62  Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Lewd Films and the Sale of Obscene Publications.



Sec. 6-63  Policy.



The Town Council finds that the crass commercial exploitation of explicit
sexual conduct through the public exhibition of lewd films, and the sale of
obscene publications, constitutes a debasement and distortion of a sensitive
key relationship of human existence, central to a family life, community
welfare and the development of human personality; that such exploitation is
indecent and offensive to the senses and to public morals and interferes with
the interest of the public in the quality of life and total community
environment, the tone of commerce in the Town, property values, and the
public safety; and that the continuation of such activities is detrimental to
the best health, safety, convenience, good morals and general welfare of the
Town, and of the residents, citizens, inhabitants and businesses thereof. The
Town Council declares such activities to be public nuisances, and herein
established procedures for abatement thereof. This Division shall apply to
existing establishments which are presently engaged in the activities herein
declared to be public nuisances, as well as those which may be commenced in
the future.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [A], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-64  Definitions.



The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning;



   (1)   “Knowledge” or “knowledge of” such nuisance means
having knowledge of the contents and character of the patently offensive
sexual conduct which appears in the lewd matter.



   (2)   “Lewd matter” means any matter which;



      a.   the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, finds, when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest; and



      b.   depicts or describes patently offensive representations
simulated; or



         1.   ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or



         2.   masturbation, excretory functions, or exhibition of
the genitals or genital area.



Nothing herein contained is intended to include or proscribe any matter
which, when considered as a whole, and in the context of which it is used,
possesses serious literary, artistic, political scientific value



   (3)   “Matter” shall mean a motion picture film or a
publication, or both.



   (4)   “Motion picture film”: shall include any:



      a.   film or plate negative; or



      b.   film or plate positive; or



      c.   film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;



      d.   films, glass slides, or transparencies, either in
negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen;
or



      e.   video tape or any other medium used to electronically
reproduce images on a screen,



   (5)   “Place” includes, but is not limited to, any building,
structure or place, or any separate part or portion thereof whether permanent
or not, or the ground itself.



   (6)   “Publication” shall include any books, magazine, article,
pamphlet, writing, painting, illustration, picture, sound recording, or a
motion picture film which is offered for sale or exhibit in a coin-operated
machine.



   (7)   “Sale” means a passing of title or right of possession
from a seller to a buyer for valuable consideration and shall include, but is
not limited to, any lease or rental arrangement or other transaction wherein,
and whereby any valuable consideration is received for the use of, or
transfer of possession, lewd matter. (Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [B], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-65  Lewd Films and Theaters.



   (a)   Any and every place in the Town where:



      (1)   lewd films are publicly exhibited as a regular course of
business, or possessed for the purpose of such exhibition; or



      (2)   a lewd film is publicly and repeatedly exhibited, or
possessed for the purpose of such exhibition; is a public nuisance.



   (b)   Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or
possessed for such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance is a public
nuisance per se. (Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [C], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-66  Stock in Trade.



Any and every place of business in the Town in which lewd publications
constitute all or a principal part of the stock in trade is a public
nuisance. (Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [D], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-67  Possession.



Any and every lewd publication possessed at a place which is a public
nuisance under Section 6-63 is a public nuisance per se. (Ord. No. 92-9, § 4
[E], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-68  Enforcement and Penalties.



   (a)   Upon investigation by any Town officer or employee designated
by the Town Council or upon receipt of information from any other person as
to possible violations of this Division, the Town Council shall refer the
matter to the Town Attorney, who shall investigate and report back to the
Council as to whether it is his opinion that a violation of this article has
occurred. Upon receipt of this report, the Town Council shall make any
independent investigation it deems necessary and appropriate.



   (b)   Upon determination that a public nuisance, as defined herein,
exists in the Town, the Town Council, in applying the provisions of this
ordinance to such nuisance, shall provide for the following by resolution:



      (1)   Declare the fact that such a nuisance exists.



      (2)   Set forth the description or legal description of the
street address of the place which constitutes the nuisance.



      (3)   Set forth a statement of facts upon which the Town
Council declaration of nuisance is based.



      (4)   Order all persons described in Section 6-68 of this Code
to voluntarily abate such nuisance immediately, by terminating the
exhibition, sale or possession for sale of such lewd subject matter or by
terminating the use of said premises for lewdness. A certified copy of said
ordinance shall be served upon the person or persons who own, legally or
equitable, lease, maintain, conduct and/or operate what has been determined
by the Town Council to be a nuisance. Should the person or persons who own,
legally or equitable, lease, maintain, conduct and/or operate what has been
determined by the Town Council to be a nuisance fail to immediately abate
such nuisance voluntarily, the Town attorney shall forthwith commence a civil
action seeking the following relief:



         a.   A declaratory judgment that the matter found to be
lewd is or are public nuisances per se under this article and such ordinance.



         b.   A declaratory judgment that the matter named by the
Town Council is lewd as defined herein.



         c.   A declaratory judgment that each place named by the
Town Council is a public nuisance under this article and such ordinance.



         d.   An accounting of all monies paid as admission price
to or for the exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion picture films,
and valuable consideration received for the sale of lewd publications from
and after the time the persons maintaining said nuisance received a copy of
the ordinance of the Town Council that the public nuisance exists, and a
judgment that such monies or valuable consideration are a public nuisance
under this article.



         e.   An order that all admission price monies or
valuable consideration received and enumerated in the Court ordered
accounting be forfeited as contraband to the general fund of the Town or as
property belonging to the Town.



         f.   An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons
responsible for maintaining said nuisance from possessing or publicly
exhibiting said lewd motion picture films, or from selling and for sale said
lewd publications at any time in the future in the Town, and such other
injunctive relief as the Court may order.



         g.   An order that all positive prints of the named lewd
film and all lewd publications or copies or reproductions thereof be
forfeited as contraband under this article.



         h.   Judgment for the Town for all costs therein
expended, including investigative costs, Court costs, reasonable attorney's
fees, and such other expenses as are provided for herein.



         i.   All other relief as the Court may deem proper
including, but not limited to, a fine in the sum not to exceed $2,500.00 for
each day that any person shall violate any of the provisions of this Division
shall be deemed to commit a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 5 [F], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-69  Knowledge Presumed.



Upon and after receiving notice through service of a certified copy of said
ordinance provided for in Section above, any and every person who shall own,
legally or equitably, lease, maintain, manage, conduct or operate a place in
the Town which is declared to be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in
this Code is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such nuisance for the
purpose of this Division and is, thereafter, responsible for its maintenance
and shall be liable thereafter.



Sec. 6-70  Judgment and Forfeiture.



   (a)   Upon judgment for the Town in a legal proceeding brought
pursuant to this Division, an accounting shall be made by such defendant or
defendants of all monies or valuable consideration their equivalent and any
other valuable consideration received shall be forfeited  to  the general 
fund of  the Town  or to  the Town  as property  of the  Town if any
valuable consideration received be not money. The cost of abatement shall
include the following:



      (1)   Investigative costs



      (2)   Court costs



      (3)   Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the
preparation for, and trial of the cause, and appeals therefrom, and other
costs allowed on appeal.



   (b)   Upon obtaining judgment in a civil action pursuant to this
Division the costs of abatement shall, by special ordinance, be made a lien
against such property and a personal obligation against the theater operator
and property owner and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws, applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of municipal taxes, shall be applicable to such
special assessment.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [H], 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-71  Severability.



If any Court shall determine that any word, clause, phrase, sentence,
paragraph, or subsection of this Article is unconstitutional as worded, the
Court shall first attempt to construe or interpret such unconstitutional
provision so as to enable the same to be constitutional as so narrowed or
construed. If the Court cannot so limit or construe such work or provision
narrowly so as to render the same constitutional, it shall strike or modify
only the minimum number of words, phrases, clauses, sentences or paragraphs
as will be absolutely necessary to render the remainder constitutional. In no
case shall a subordinate clause or phrase or words render the attached major
section or provision unconstitutional, but instead shall be severed therefrom
entirely, unless such severance renders the remainder wholly meaningless or
unconstitutional.



(Ord. No. 92-9, § 5, 3-10-92)



Sec. 6-72 through Sec. 6-74  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 7. HUMANE CONTROL AND REGULATION OF ANIMALS.



Sec. 6-75  Definitions.



As used in this Article the following terms mean:



   Abandon:  The act of leaving a companion animal, domestic animal, or
exotic animal:



      (1)   Without food, water or care for 24 hours or more; or



      (2)   In a situation where conditions present an immediate,
direct and serious threat to the life, safety, or health of the animal



   Animal:  Every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild.



   Animal Facility:  Any facility operated by a humane society, or
municipal agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of temporarily
impounding animals under the authority of this Article or state law for care,
confinement, return to owner, adoption, or euthanasia.



   Auction:  Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought,
sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this
Article.  This section does not apply to individual sale of animals by
owners.



   Breeder.  Any individual and/or entity who allows or causes to mate an
animal strain that reproduces the characteristics by which it is recognized.



   Circus:  A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.



   Commercial Animal Establishment:  Any pet shop, grooming shop, guard
dog auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing
animal exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel.



   Companion Animal.  Dogs and cats.



   Domestic Animal:  Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an
animal of a species that has been bred and raised to live in or about the
habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter,
including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, horses, dairy and beef cattle,
swine, goats, sheep and fowl.



   Exotic Animal:  Any animal not considered “domesticated,” that
normally would be found in a wild state.



   Grooming Shop:  A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped, plucked, or otherwise groomed.



   Guard Dog:  Any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an
intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured.



   Humane Officer or Animal Control Officer:  Any person designated by
the State of Indiana, county of jurisdiction or a federally licensed humane
society as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to perform such duties
under the laws of this state.



   Kennel or Cattery:  Any premises wherein any person engages in the
business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee,
or selling of dogs or cats.  Six or more dogs and/or cats owned, harbored,
possessed, cared for or kept in custody of any person shall be constructed as
and shall constitute a kennel under this Article.



   Owner:  Any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring one or more animals.  An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if
it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.



   Performing Animal Exhibition:  Any spectacle, display, act, or event
other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.



   Pet Shop:  Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated
separately or in connection with another business enterprise (except for a
licensed kennel), that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.



   Public Nuisance Animal:  Any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy
humans, endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or
substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners,
to their enjoyment of life or property.  The term “public nuisance
animal” shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that:



      (1)   Is repeatedly found at large;



      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;



      (3)   Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;



      (4)   Chases vehicles;



      (5)   Excessively makes disturbing noises, including, but not
limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other
utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to
neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is
kept or harbored;



      (6)   Causes fouling of the air by odor thereby creating an
unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close
proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (7)   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or
surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored;



      (8)   Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety,
or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained;



      (9)   Attacks other domestic animals or pursues them in a
threatening manner; or



      (10)   Has been found by the Bi-Town Animal Control Board,
after notice to its owner and a hearing, to be a public nuisance animal by
virtue of being a menace to the public health, welfare, and/or safety.



   Restraint:  Any animal secured by a leash, fence or lead under the
control of a responsible person and obedient to that person’s commands, or
contained within the real property limits of its owner.



   Riding School or Stable:  Any place that has available for hire,
boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro;
or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the aforementioned
animals, including, but not limited to, a racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo.



   Running at Large:  It shall be unlawful for any person having charge,
care, ownership or control of any animal to let the animal run at large and
beyond the limits of his or her lot or other real property.  All animals
which are found unlawfully running at large within the Town may be taken into
custody and impounded at the animal shelter.



   Veterinary Hospital:  Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.



   Vicious Animal:  Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human
beings or domesticated animals without adequate provocation, or which,
because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to
attack, bite, or injure human beings or domesticated animals.



   Wild Animal:  Any living member of the animal kingdom, including those
born or raised in captivity, except the following: human beings, domestic
dogs (excluding hybrids with wolves, coyotes or jackals), domestic cats
(excluding hybrids with ocelots or margays), farm animals, rodents (such as a
mouse or squirrel), any hybrid animal that is part wild, and captive-bred
species of common cage birds.



   Zoological Park:  Any facility operated by a person, partnership,
corporation, or government agency, other than a pet shop or kennel,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 1, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-1, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-76  Town Manager Responsibilities.



   The Town Manager of the Town of Dyer shall have the following
responsibilities with regards to animal control:



   (a)   Recommend to the Town Council promulgation of or revisions to
rules and regulations concerning the operation of the animal shelter,
standards for the collection, care, custody and disposal of animals at large
and public nuisance animals and standards for the maintenance of holding
facilities for guard and sentry dogs;



   (b)   Review the proposed budget of the Animal Control Department
and make recommendations for funding of the same to the members of the
respective Town Council;



   (c)   Upon written complaint, conduct an investigation and public
hearing, if necessary, to determine if an animal or holding facility
constitutes a public nuisance;



   (d)   Upon written recommendation by the Animal Control Officer,
revoke any license under this Article for violation of this Article, if
deemed necessary;



   (e)   Upon written request by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer,
whichever may apply, hear and decide appeals of licenses that have been
revoked by the Animal Control Board for violations of this Article; and



   (f)   Recommend necessary and/or advisable changes to this Article
regarding the humane control and regulation of animals to the Town Council.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 2, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-2, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 2, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-77  Licensing.



   (a)   Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of
any animal over three months of age within the Town must obtain a license as
herein provided.  This provision may not apply to small cage birds or to
aquatic and amphibian animals kept solely as pets.



   (b)   Written application for licenses, which shall include name and
address of applicant, description of the animal, the appropriate fee, and
current rabies certificate documenting date of administration and expiration
with either a one-year or three-year rabies vaccine, issued by a licensed
veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic, shall be made to the licensing authority.



   (c)   If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs and cats
shall be for a period of one year.



   (d)   Application for a license must be made within thirty (30) days
after obtaining a dog or cat over three months of age; this requirement will
not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the Town for not
longer than thirty (30) days.



   (e)   License fees shall not be required for certified Seeing Eye
dogs, hearing dogs, governmental police dogs, or other certified dogs that
are trained to assist the physically handicapped.



   (f)   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the
licensing authority shall issue a durable tag stamped with an identifying
number and the year of issuance.  Tags should be designed so that they may
be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal’s collar or harness.



   (g)   Dogs and cats must wear identification tags or identification
collars at all times when off the premises of their owners.



   (h)   The licensing authority shall maintain a record of the
identifying numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available
to the public upon request.



   (i)   The licensing period shall begin with the fiscal year and
shall run for one year.  A license application may be made up to thirty (30)
days prior to April 30 of the fiscal year and up to sixty (60) days
thereafter. This amendment shall be in effect for Year 2004 only and, at the
conclusion of the same, the time period within which to file a pet license
application shall revert to the original time period, namely, up to thirty
(30) days prior to March 31 of the fiscal year and up to sixty (60) days
thereafter.



   (j)   Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the
time period specified in this section will be subject to a fine of ten
dollars ($10.00)



   (k)   A license shall be issued after payment of the following
application fee:



 

Non-neutered male dog
 
$20.00
 
Neutered male dog
 
$5.00


Non-spayed female dog
 
20.00
 
Neutered male cat
 
5.00


Non-neutered male cat
 
10.00
 
Spayed female dog
 
5.00


Non-spayed female cat
 
10.00
 
Spayed female cat
 
5.00



 



   (l)   A duplicate tag may be obtained upon payment of a one dollar
($1.00) replacement fee.



   (m)   No person may use any license for any animal other than the
animal for which it was issued.



   (n)   Animals rented solely for the purpose of guarding a business
or residence are exempt from licensing with the Town.  However, the
contractor providing guard animals must be able to produce vaccination
records immediately upon request.  Also, any such establishment must provide
written notice to the Town upon commencement of operation of said business.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 3, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-3, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2004-03, 1-20-04; Am. Ord. No.
2008-02, § 3, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-78  Permits and Fees.



   (a)   No person, partnership, or corporation shall operate a
commercial animal establishment or animal shelter without first obtaining a
permit in compliance with this Section.



   (b)   The respective Town Councils shall promulgate regulations for
the issuance of permits which shall include requirements for humane care of
all animals and for compliance with the provisions of this Article and other
applicable laws.  The Town Councils may amend such regulations from time to
time as deemed desirable for public health, safety and welfare and for the
protection of animals, and upon recommendation from the Animal Control
Officer.



   (c)   When a permit applicant has shown that he or she is willing
and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the Town Council, a
permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee.



   (d)   The permit period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall
run for one year.  Renewal applications for permits shall be made at least
thirty (30) days prior to and up to sixty (60) days after the start of the
fiscal calendar year.  Applications for a permit to establish a new
commercial animal establishment under the provisions of this Article may be
made at any time.



   (e)   No business shall train any dog to be used as a guard dog or
sentry dog without possessing a valid license.  This section shall not apply
to the Town government or any of its agencies.  An application for a guard
dog or sentry dog training license shall state the name and address of the
owner and trainer, location of the facility, and the maximum number of dogs
to be housed at the training facility.



   (f)   Annual permits for guard or sentry dog training facilities
shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee:



 



Kennel authorized to house fewer than six (6) dogs or cats
 
$150.00


Kennel authorized to house six (6) or more, but fewer than ten (10) dogs or
cats
 
200.00


Kennel authorized to house ten (10) or more dogs or cats
 
250.00


Breeder permits
 
50.00


Pet shops
 
150.00


Riding stable
 
100.00


Auction
 
100.00


Zoological park
 
200.00


Circus
 
200.00


Grooming shops
 
100.00


Petting zoo
 
300.00


Guard dog training center
 
300.00




 



   (g)   Every facility regulated by this Article shall be considered a
separate enterprise requiring a separate permit.



   (h)   No fee shall be required of any veterinary hospital, animal
shelter, or government-operated zoological park.



   (i)   Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered
in this section shall result in a fine as set forth in Section 6-89.



   (j)   Failure to obtain a breeders permit prior to breeding shall
result in a fine as set forth in Section 6-89.



   (k)   Any person who has a change in the category under which a
permit was issued shall be subject to reclassification and readjustment of
the permit fee.



   (l)   No more than five dogs and/or cats combined over the age of
three months may be kept on any residential, commercial or other premises
within the Town unless the owner or owners of the animals provide prior
notification to the Town and the same is approved by appropriate officials.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 4, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-4, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09,  4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 4, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-79  License and Permit Issuance and Revocation.



General Permit.



   (a)   After an application for a license to or permit to operate a
facility referenced in Section 6-78 is filed, the Animal Control Officer
shall inspect the facility prior to issuing the permit.  The Animal Control
Officer may revoke any permit or license if the person(s) holding the permit
or license refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of this Article,
the regulations promulgated by the Town Council, or any law governing the
protection and keeping of animals.



   (b)   When a permit applicant has shown that he or she is willing
and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the Town Council, a
permit shall be issued upon payment of the applicable permit or license fee.



   (c)   Any person whose permit or license is revoked shall, within
ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned, kept or
harbored.  No part of the permit or license fee shall be refunded in a case
or revocation.  It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or
license that the Animal Control Officer or duly authorized agents shall be
permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at
any time and, if permission for such inspection is refused, the Board may
revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner(s)



   (d)   It shall be a condition of the issuance of any permit or
license that the Animal Control Officer or the Town’s duly authorized
agents, shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where
animals are kept at any time and shall, if permission for such inspection is
refused, revoke the permit or license of the refusing owner.



   (e)   If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on
the license or permit application, the licensing authority shall refuse to
issue a permit or license.



   (f)   No person who has been convicted of cruelty to animals shall
be issued a pet license, permit or permit or license to operate a commercial
animal establishment.



   (g)   Any person having been denied a license or permit may not
reapply for a period of 30 days.  A fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall
accompany each reapplication.



Pet Shop Permit



   (a)   Any person operating a pet shop as defined in this chapter
shall obtain a pet shop permit.



   (b)   The permit holder shall furnish the purchaser a written
statement at the time of purchase containing the following:



      (1)   Date of sale.



      (2)   Permit number of permit holder.



      (3)   Breed, description, approximate age of animal sold
(small mammals other than cats or dogs, parrot type birds, and fish are not
included).



      (4)   Medication and prophylactice immunization and dates
administered.



      (5)   Internal parasite medication(s) and dates administered.



      (6)   A guarantee of good health for a period of not less than
one week with the recommendation to have the animal examined by a licensed
veterinarian.



   (c)   The permit holder shall retain a copy of written statement for
12 months from date of sale.



   (d)   The Animal Control Officer or Health Department may restrict
the sale of, or adoption of any animal suspected of being diseased or
otherwise unfit for sale and/or adoption (an examination by a licensed
veterinarian may be requested).



   (e)   All pet shops and stores selling animals, birds, reptiles
and/or fish are subject to the inspection of the Animal Control Officer
and/or Health Department to ensure the health and welfare of any animal
whether sold or adopted from the premises is in good health and is maintained
under the regulations described.



   (f)   No puppy or kitten under the age of eight (8) weeks may be
offered for sale, trade, adoption, free give- away or other compensation
(except a puppy or kitten, or litter or litters taken by the Animal Control
Department).



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 5, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-5, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 5, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-80  Restraint.



   (a)   All dogs shall be kept under restraint.



   (b)   All cats shall be kept under restraint.



   (c)   No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his
or her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.



   (d)   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a
building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat
cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding.



   (e)   No person shall allow an animal to ride in an enclosed area of
a motor vehicle, both motor or pedal, including open bed cars and trucks,
unless the animal is confined by a securely affixed, well-ventilated
container, cage or other device designated to safely prevent the animal from
falling or jumping from the vehicle.



   (f)   No animal shall be hitched, tied or fastened by any rope,
chain or cord that is directly attached to the animal’s neck. Animals that
must be tied, hitched or fastened to restrain them must wear a properly
fitted collar or harness made of leather or nylon, not of choker type. This
is not to prohibit the proper use of choker collars in the training of
animals. The tying device shall be attached to the animal’s collar or
harness and shall be at least six (6) feet in length and must have a swivel
device on the anchor and collar end to prevent tangling and/or choking.



   (g)   Any animal that is tethered must have access to adequate water
and shelter at all times.



   (h)   Every vicious animal, as determined by the Animal Control
Officer, shall be confined by the owner(s) within a building or secure
enclosure and shall be securely muzzled or caged whenever off the premises of
its owner(s).



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 6, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-6, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 6, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-81  Impoundment and Violation Notice.



   (a)   Unrestrained dogs and nuisance animals shall be taken by the
police or Animal Control Officer and impounded in an animal shelter and there
confined in a humane manner.



   (b)   Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for not less than
forty-eight (48) hours, unless specifically determined otherwise by the Town
of Dyer or its Animal Control Officer.



   (c)   If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded
animal can be identified, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately upon
impoundment notify the owner by telephone, certified mail, or in person, of
the animal(s) location.



   (d)   An owner reclaiming an impounded cat shall pay a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per animal, if said animal(s) is claimed within the
parameter of the first 24 hours. A fee of one hundred fifty dollars 
($250.00) shall be imposed thereafter. Any reoccurrence within a 12-month
period shall cause a revisit to determine the appropriate fine amount. Any
and all medical fees and costs will be added to the total charges deemed
payable by said owner(s).



   (e)   An owner reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per animal, if said animal(s) is claimed within the
parameter of the first 24 hours. A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)
shall be imposed thereafter. Any reoccurrence with in a 12-month period shall
cause a revisit to determine the appropriate fine amount. Any and all medical
fees and costs will be added to the total charges deemed payable by said
owner(s).



   (f)   Any animal not reclaimed by its owner within forty-eight (48)
hours shall become the property of the Town of Dyer, and shall be placed for
adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized, unless said animal is
determined to be a threat to the facility, in which case that animal may be
humanely euthanized at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.



   (g)   In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at
large, the Animal Control Officer or police officer may issue to the known
owner(s) of such animal a notice of ordinance violation.  Such notice shall
impose upon the owner a penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first
offense, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense and one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for every offense thereafter, to be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer within the time period specified on said notice of ordinance
violation.  In the event that such penalty is not paid within the time
period prescribed, said violation shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
all local ordinance violations.



   (h)   The Animal Control Officer shall review automatically all
licenses issued to animal owners against whom three or more ordinance
violations have been issued under this article in a twelve (12) month period,
and shall determine what action it deems appropriate in such instances.



   (i)   The Animal Control Officer shall keep complete and accurate
records of the care, feeding, veterinary treatment, and disposition of all
animals impounded at the shelter.



   (j)   After a dog or cat has bitten a person or other animal, the
following action will be taken:



      (1)  If the owner of the dog or cat is able to provide
documentary evidence confirming the current status of vaccinations (shots),
the dog or cat can be confined inside the owner’s residence for a period of
ten days, as required by applicable Indiana Code, provided such action is
approved by the Animal Control Officer.



      (2)  If the owner of the dog or cat is unable to provide
documentary evidence confirming the current status of vaccinations, the dog
or cat shall be quarantined for a period of ten days at an animal hospital or
veterinary clinic with the owner paying all costs of confinement.  It shall
be the sole responsibility of the owner to provide verification of the
animal’s vaccinations (shots) to the Animal Control Officer.



      (3)   It shall be the duty of every physician or other
practitioner to report to the Animal Control Officer the names and
address(es) of persons treated for bites, inflicted by animals together with
such information as necessary to aid with rabies control.  It shall be the
duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Animal Control Officer
his or her diagnosis of any animal observed by him or her as a rabies suspect.



      (4)   Any animal that has three documented unprovoked bite
incidents shall be recommended to the Town of Dyer to be deemed
“vicious.”  Upon written complaint to the Animal Control Board, a
determination will be made as to the disposition of said animal.  The owner
of a suspected vicious animal may voluntarily surrender the animal to the
Animal Control Officer for humane disposal at any time prior to a
determination being made.  The owner will be responsible for any fees
incurred during the holding of said animal.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 7, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-7, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 7, 4-16-08; Am. Ord. No.
2009-21, 12-16-09)



Sec. 6-82  Animal Care. 9



   (a)   A dog, cat or ferret, three (3) months of age or older, must
be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed and accredited veterinarian yearly.



   (b)   No owner shall fail to provide his/her animal(s) with
sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, water in sufficient quantities,
proper air, shelter space and protection from weather, veterinary care when
needed to prevent suffering and humane care and treatment.



   (c)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate or permit any
dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans.



   (d)   No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.



   (e)   No person shall crop a dog’s ears or dock a dog’s tail
except a licensed veterinarian. In no event shall any person except a
licensed veterinarian perform such an operation.



   (f)   Chickens, ducklings or rabbits younger than eight (8) weeks of
age may not be sold in quantities of less than twenty-five (25) to a single
purchaser.



   (g)   No person shall give away any live animal, reptile or bird as
a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other
competition, as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or as an
incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the
purpose of attracting trade.



   (h)   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by an
animal, provided that it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his or her
own real property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance.



   (i)   No person or persons shall confine any animal in a motor
vehicle in such a manner that places said animal in a life or health
threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or
cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold.
In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, an Animal Control
Officer, law enforcement officer or other investigator, who has probable
cause to believe that this Section is being violated shall have authority to
enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances
after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person. The
animal’s owner shall be liable for any cost incurred for removal of the
animal.



   (j)   No person shall possess animal fighting paraphernalia and a
dog, cock, fowl or any animal bearing a scar or injury consistent with animal
fighting.



   (k)   No person shall permit anyone to use any building, shed, room,
yard, ground, premises, vehicle or property, whether enclosed or not, for the
purpose of animal fighting.



   (l)   The board or its agent may make sanitary inspections and
surveys in all parts of this state, and shall have the right to enter upon
any public or private property, examining such animals, conducting rests in
regard



to the presence of an infectious, contagious, or communicable disease of
domestic animals and the possible sources of such disease, and performing
other function authorized by this article (I.C. 15-2.1-3-1) in compliance
with Indiana Animal Law.



   (m)   Public sale means any sale where the general public is invited
to participate whether held in an established place of business dedicated
principally to the sale of domestic animals or at a place where such sales
are infrequently held. Standards for the sale and/or adoption of domesticated
animals at a public place are as follows:



      (1)   Cage area must be clean and clutter free, with proper
sanitary measures taken to ensure the area does not become offensive to the
public.



      (2)   Food and water must be provided to any animal that is on
display for sale or adoption.



      (3)   Daily cleaning schedule must be posted.



      (4)   Current vaccine records must be available at all times
for any and every animal that is on display for sale or adoption (small
mammals, parrot like birds and fish are not included).



      (5)   Disinfectant must be present for use in handling and
maintaining area of animals that are on display.



      (6)   Location of cages and/or crates should not block product
aisles or obstruct customer traffic flow (the store must provided consistent
designated locations).



      (7)   Any animal for sale and adoption must be properly
restrained under the provisions in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 8, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-8, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 8, 4-16-08)



                         



9   I.C., §15-2.1-21-8, addresses running at large, and I.C.,
§15-2.1-6-1, et seq., addresses rabies quarantine procedures and health care
requirements.



Sec. 6-83  Keeping of Exotic Animals.



   (a)   Facilities (outdoors).



      (1)   When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or
discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow animals kept outdoors
to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun.



      (2)   Whenever animals are outdoors, they shall be provided
with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow.



      (3)   In kennels where animals are housed exclusively
outdoors, adequate shelter from the weather shall be provided at all times
when the atmosphere temperature falls below 50 ° F.  Sufficient clean
bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements shall
be provided when the ambient atmosphere temperature (that temperature to
which an animal is acclimated) falls below 40° F. Each shelter shall be
provided with a windbreak at its entrance.



      (4)   A suitable method shall be provided to drain surface
water rapidly.



      (5)   Surfaces of outdoor enclosures of pet shops, shelters,
and boarding kennels shall be constructed and maintained so that they are
impervious to moisture and may be readily cleaned and disinfected. Run-off
from outdoor enclosures shall be disposed of properly.



   (b)   Primary enclosures.



      (1)   Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair so as to:



         a.   Contain the animals.



         b.   Protect animals from injury.



         c.   Keep predators out.



         d.   Ensure that animals remain dry and clean.



         e.   Permit anima’'s convenient access to food and
water as required by this Article.



         f.   Provide sufficient space for each animal to turn
about freely and to stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable normal position.



         g.    Have no sharp edges accessible to the animals that
could cause injury.



      (2)   In addition to the other provisions of this Section,
each dog in any primary enclosure shall be provided a minimum square footage
of floor space equal to the mathematical square of the sum of the length of
the dog in inches, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its
tail, plus six inches, expressed in square feet.



      (3)   Animals housed in the same primary enclosure shall be
maintained in compatible groups, with the following additional restrictions:



         a.   Females shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosure with sexually intact males, except for breeding purposes.



         b.   Any animal exhibiting a vicious disposition shall
be housed individually in a primary enclosure.



         c.   Immature animals shall not be housed in the same
primary enclosures with adults other than their mothers, except when
permanently maintained in breeding colonies.



         d.   Animals of different species shall not be housed in
the same primary enclosures.



      (4)   The floors of primary enclosures shall be constructed so
as to protect the animal’s feet and legs from injury.  Enclosures may have
grid type flooring, provided that the grid material is of adequate gauge to
prevent sagging under the weight of the animals and that the mesh is small
enough to prevent their feet from passing through or to cause cutting
injuries to the foot pad.



      (5)   Adult dogs confined in cages of less than double the
minimum standard size as stated in subsection (b)(2) above, shall be
exercised on runs at least twice a day or walked on a leash for at least 20
minutes per day.



      (6)   Animals shall not be tied to fences or cages or any
other structure in lieu of being housed in primary enclosures.



      (7)   Animals shall not be kept in any vehicle in lieu of
being kept in a suitable primary enclosure.



   (c)   Enclosures.



      (1)   Weatherproof.  Shelter must be of solid construction. 
There shall be no crack or openings other than the entrance.  The shelter
shall not have any metal or plastic primary interior surfaces.  Commercially
made shelters with insulation material between the inner and outer layers of
fiberglass/plastic construction are generally acceptable.



      (2)   Elevated.  Floor must be off the ground by at least two
inches.



      (3)   Door map.  Entrance must be covered with a flexible
flap and/or entrance placed down wind when necessary to protect the animal
from the elements of the weather.



      (4)   Bedding.  Bedding must be dry.  Straw, leaves, hay,
cedar chips or other material must be provided as needed during cold and
inclement weather.



      (5)   Size.  Large enough to allow the animal to enter,
stand, turn around and lie down comfortably.  Small enough to allow the
animal to warm the interior with its body.



      (6)   If a chain, rope or other such item is used to restrain
the animal, it shall be of sufficient length to safely and humanely allow the
animal freedom of movement without becoming entangled with obstructions.  It
must be of sufficient length to allow the animal access to shelter at all
times.



   (d)   No person shall own, possess or have custody on his or her
premises any wild or vicious animal for display, training or exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.  This subsection shall not be
construed to apply to The American Association of Zoological Parks and
Aquariums (AAZPA) accredited facilities.



   (e)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept as a pet any wild
animal including, but not limited to, hybrids dogs and cats.



   (f)   The Animal Control Officer shall have the power to release or
order the release of any infant wild animal under temporary permit that is
deemed capable of survival.



(Ord. No. 02-2002 , 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 9, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-84  Keeping of Animals Classified as Farm Animals.



   (a)   No person shall own, possess or have custody on his or her
premises any animal classified as a farm animal including horses, pigs,
goats, chickens, and the like, unless said person operates a farm.



   (b)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any farm animal as a
pet. 



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 10, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-10, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 10, 4-16-08) 



Sec. 6-85  Performing Animal Exhibitions.



   (a)   No person may sponsor, promote or train a wild, domestic or
exotic animal to participate in, contribute to the involvement of an animal
in or attend as a spectator any activity or event in which any wild animal
engages in unnatural behavior or is wrestled, fought, mentally or physically
harassed or displayed in such a way that the animal is abused or stressed
mentally or physically or is induced or encouraged to perform through the use
of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner that will
cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering.  This prohibition
applies to events and activities taking place in either public or private
facilities or property and applies regardless of the purpose of the event or
activities and irrespective of whether or not a fee is charged to spectators.



   (b)   All equipment used on a performing animal shall fit properly
and be in good working condition.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 11, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-11, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 11, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-86  Animal Waste.



   (a)   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal
of any excreta deposited by his or her animal(s) on public walks, recreation
areas or private property.



   (b)   The owner of any dead animal shall remove and properly dispose
of the animal within 24 hours of its death.  A real property owner is
responsible for the removal of any strange carcass on such real property.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 12, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-12, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09,  4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 12, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-87  Sterilization.



No unclaimed dog or cat shall be released for adoption without being
sterilized or without written agreement from the adopter guaranteeing that
such animal will be sterilized within 30 days for adults and a specified date
in the contract for puppies and kittens.  A deposit comparable to the cost
of sterilization must be paid at the time of adoption.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 13, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-13, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 13, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-88  Enforcement.



The civil and criminal provisions of this Article shall be enforced by those
persons or agencies designated by the municipal authority.  It shall be a
violation of this Article to interfere with the Animal Control Officer in the
performance of his or her duties. In the event that any costs are incurred as
a result of the information in this Article, such as medical expenses for the
treatment of animals, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
animal to reimburse the municipality for said expenses.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 14, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-14, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 14, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-89  Penalties.



Any person violating any provision of this Article shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).  If a violation continues, each day’s violation shall be
deemed a separate violation.  If any person is found guilty by a court for
violating Section 6-82, his or her permit to own, keep, harbor or have
custody of animals shall be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit
may be issued.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 15, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-15, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 15, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-90  Exceptions.



   The provisions of this Article shall not apply to:



   (a)   Guide dogs being used to assist the visually or physically
impaired;



   (b)   Animals being used by any governmental law enforcement agency;
and/or



   (c)   Animals that are a part of a parade or show that have been
properly authorized by the Animal Control Officer.



(Ord. No. 2002-09, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2008-02, § 16, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-91  Trapping.



   (a)   Any individual, firm, corporation or commercial establishment
who intentionally or accidentally attracts any type of animal onto their
property with the purpose of trapping or any other capture that has not been
approved by the Department of Animal Control assumes ownership of said
animal(s) and must remove the animal(s) at their own expense or take
responsibility for the welfare of that animal. The Department of Animal
Control under the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, will not take liability
for such acts.



   (b)   Traps discovered by the Department of Animal Control to have
been set in a manner that is in conflict with this chapter may be seized and
the person(s) responsible for the setting of the traps may be fined Fifty
Dollars ($50.00) under penalty of the ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 17, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-92  Wild animals.



   (a)   No person shall own, possess, or have custody on his premises
any deemed wild or vicious animal for display, training or exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be
construed to apply to AAZPA accredited facilities.



   (b)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a
pet, this being determined by the Animal Control Officer.



   (c)   The Animal Control Officer shall have the power to release or
order the release of any infant wild animal under temporary permit that is
deemed capable of survival.



(Ord. No. 95-32, § 9, 12-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 98-04, § 3-9, 2-10-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2008-02, § 18, 4-16-08)



Sec. 6-93 and Sec. 6-94  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. FIREWORKS REGULATIONS.



Sec. 6-95  Definitions.



   (a)   Consumer Fireworks.  Includes small fireworks that are
defined as small devices designed to produce an audible effect, such as
whistling devices, ground devices containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of
explosive composition, and aerial devices containing one hundred thirty (130)
milligrams or less of explosive composition. Propelling or expelling charges
of a mixture of charcoal, sulfur, and potassium nitrate are not  considered
as designed to produce an audible effect. Aerial devices, may include sky
rockets, missile type rockets, helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles,
mines and shells. Ground audible devices, which include firecrackers,
salutes, and chasers. Devices containing combinations of the effects
described as aerial devices and ground audible devices are also included as
Consumer Fireworks.



   (b)   Fireworks Exclusions.  The following items are excluded in
the definition of fireworks: model rockets, toy pistol caps, emergency signal
flares, matches, fixed ammunition for firearms, ammunition components
intended for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons, or small arms, shells,
cartridges and primers for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons, or small
arms, indoor pyrotechnics special effects material, M-80's, cherry bombs,
silver salutes, and any device banned by the federal government.



   (c)   Section 8(a) Fireworks.  Includes dipped sticks, wire
sparklers, cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torches,
wheels, ground spinner, flitter sparklers, snakes or glow worms, smoke
devices, trick noisemakers such as party poppers, booby traps, snappers and
trick matches, cigarette loads and auto burglar alarms.



   (d)   Special Fireworks.  Fireworks designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation,
including firecrackers containing more than one hundred thirty (130)
milligrams of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than forty
(40) grams of pyrotechnic composition and other exhibition display items that
exceed the limits for classification as consumer fireworks. A person may not
possess, transport, or deliver special fireworks, except as authorized under
I.C., § 22-11-14-2.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-96  Special Permit.



   (a)   The owner, occupant, or agent of an organization, business or
group that uses any type of fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects
materials used indoor or outdoor, shall apply for a special permit issued by
the Town Council at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the use of the
fireworks or pyrotechnical devices. This permit shall be in addition to any
other permits required by federal or state agencies. The permit must be made
available upon request of the Fire Chief or his designee.



   (b)   The storage, use and handling of fireworks and pyrotechnics
special effects shall be in accordance with Indiana Fire Code (675 Indiana
Administrative Code 22), Article 76 and I.C., § 22-11-14 et seq., and
current edition of National Fire Protection Association standards for
fireworks.



   (c)   An applicant shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
when submitting the special permit application.



   (d)   The special permit application must be approved and signed by
the Town Council and contain the following information to be valid:



      (1)   Name, address and phone number of the individual person
or company doing the production or display;



      (2)   Name and qualifications of the individual person or
operator doing the production or display;



      (3)   Contact name, address and phone for whom the production
or display is being performed;



      (4)   A detailed location where the display shall take place;



      (5)   Date and time of the display;



      (6)   Estimated number of fireworks or pyrotechnical devices
to be used and length of show; and



      (7)   A copy of a valid certificate of insurance conditioned
for damages and/or injury to persons or property for said event in the amount
of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) shall be attached to and
submitted with each application for and shall become part of the special
permit.



   (e)   The above fees or requirements may be waived by the Town
Council for any public fireworks display sponsored by any state or local
governmental agency.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-97  Use and Discharge, Generally.



   (a)   Age requirement.  Consumer fireworks and Section 8(a)
fireworks shall not be purchased by persons under eighteen (18) years of age.



   (b)   Possession by minors.  Children shall only possess or use any
kind of fireworks when an adult is present.



   (c)   Location of use.  Consumer fireworks shall exclusively be
used on:



      (1)   The user’s property; or



      (2)   The property of someone who has consented to the use of
fireworks on the property; or



      (3)   A location authorized by special permit as a special
discharge location, that is defined as a place designated for the discharge
of consumer fireworks under policies of the State Fire Marshal in effect
until the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission adopts rules, as
amended from time to time.



   (d)   Exemptions.  This Ordinance shall not be construed to
prohibit the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies,
the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show, ceremonial purpose, use by
military organizations, the intrastate sale of fireworks not approved for
sale in Indiana between interstate wholesalers, use of indoor pyrotechnics
special effects material and the possession, sale or disposal of fireworks
incidental to the public display of authorized Class B fireworks.



   (e)   Time of use.  A person may utilize consumer fireworks and
Section 6-95(a) fireworks on the following specific days, and no other,
without a special permit as follows:



      (1)   Between 5:00 p.m. and two (2) hours after sunset on June
29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and July
9;



      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
July 4; and



      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00
a.m. on January 1.



   (f)   Special permit.  A person seeking to discharge fireworks,
except as permitted in subsection (e) above, must apply for and obtain a
special permit as provided herein.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-98  Manufacturer, Wholesaler, Importer or Distributor.



   It shall be unlawful for a manufacturer, wholesaler, importer, or
distributor to sell at wholesale, offer to sell at wholesale, or ship or
cause to be shipped into the Town of Dyer fireworks, novelties, or trick
noisemakers unless they hold a valid certificate of compliance issued by the
Indiana State Fire Marshal.  This provision applies to nonresidents and
residents of Indiana.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-99  Identification of Fireworks.



   All fireworks,  novelties, and trick noisemakers shipped into the Town
of Dyer or manufactured or sold in the Town of Dyer, must have distinctly and
durably painted, stamped, printed or marked on the package, box or container
in which the items are enclosed the exact nature and quantity of the
fireworks contained in the container.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-100  Sales.



   Retailers may not sell consumer fireworks until the retailer has met
all permit requirements and has obtained a Certificate of Compliance from the
State Fire Marshal. A Certificate of Compliance issued to a retailer of
consumer fireworks is not transferable except to a subsequent owner or
operator of a business at the same location in accordance with the policies
and guidelines of the State Fire Marshal.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-101  Revocation of Special Permit.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates I.C., § 22-11-14 et seq.
or the provisions herein shall be subject to applicable penalties and/or
revocation of their permit to sell fireworks. This provision shall apply to
all retailers, manufactures, wholesalers, importers, and distributors.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-102  Penalty.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction or finding of liable, be fined in an amount
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation.



(Ord. No. 2007-15, 8-15-07)



Sec. 6-103 through Sec. 6-109  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 9. AIR RIFLES, AIR PISTOLS AND SLING SHOTS.



Sec. 6-110  Discharging in Public Ways Prohibited.



No person shall be permitted to discharge or fire any air rifle, air gun, air
pistol, spring rifle, spring gun, sling shot, or any similar device which is
calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow, or other
projectile or missile upon any public way or street within the town limits or
to discharge or fire such device as to have the said bullet, pellet, arrow,
projectile or missile travel any space used as a public way in said Town of
Dyer, Lake County, Indiana. (Ord. No. 399, § 1, 2-10-59)



Sec. 6-111  Consent of Owner Required.



It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any air rifle, air
gun, air pistol, spring rifle, spring gun, sling shot, or any similar device
which is calculated or intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow,
or other projectile or missile upon or against any property in the corporate
limits of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, without the consent of the
owner thereof. (Ord. No. 399, § 2, 2-10-59)



Sec. 6-112  Impoundment.



Such air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring rifle, spring gun, sling shot, or
other similar device used in the manner prohibited by any section of this
Article be immediately seized and impounded until such time as disposition of
such device can be made by the proper judicial authority. (Ord. No. 399, §
3, 2-10-59)



Sec. 6-113  Penalties.



Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article shall upon
conviction, be fined not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars. (Ord. No. 399, §
4, 2-10-59; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-114 and Sec. 6-115  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 10. HUNTING WITH FIREARMS PROHIBITED. 11



                             



11   I.C., §35-47-2-7, prohibits person under eighteen (18) years of age
to own firearms.



Sec. 6-116  Hunting Prohibited.



It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt with a firearm or any other
weapon within the town limits of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana,
without obtaining the express, written, permission of the Town Council.



(Ord. No. 393, § 1, 12-9-58; Am. Ord. No. 2003-32, 11-18-03)



Sec. 6-117  Shooting of Firearms Prohibited - Exceptions.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except police officers in
the performance of their duties, to discharge or shoot any firearms within
the town limits of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-9-58)



Sec. 6-118  Minors.



No person, company, partnership or corporation, shall within the town of
Dyer, Indiana, sell or give away to any minor under the age of eighteen (18)
years of age, any gunpowder, explosive shells or ammunition such as is used
in shot guns, rifles or other shooting arms or firearms.



(Ord. No. 25, § 4, 1-7-13)



Sec. 6-119  Penalties.



Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article shall upon
conviction, be fined not less than fifty ($50.00) dollars for each violation.



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-9-58; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-120 through Sec. 6-123  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 11. SIDEWALKS FREE OF ICE AND SNOW.



Sec. 6-124  Duty to Remove Ice and Snow.



It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation owning, leasing,
occupying or using any real estate in said Town to shovel and remove all snow
and ice from the Public sidewalks or abutting any such real estate within a
reasonable time from the accumulation Thereof, and to keep said sidewalks
free from snow and ice.



(Ord. No. 72, § 1, 2-6-23)



Sec. 6-125  Penalties.



Any person, firm or cooperation owning any real estate within the Town of
Dyer, Indiana, or any tenant or occupant of any such real estate, who shall
so fail, refuse or neglect to keep said sidewalks free from snow and ice as
provided for by Section 6-124, shall, upon conviction, be fined fifty
($50.00) dollars for each violation of this ordinance. Each day that any
person, firm or corporation or tenant or  occupant of  any of said premises
shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove  said  snow  or  ice  or 
shall  fail  or  refuse  to  keep  said  sidewalks free  from snow or
ice, as herein provided, shall be a separate violation of this Article.



(Ord. No. 72, § 2, 26-23; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-126 and Sec. 6-127  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 12. CURFEW REGULATIONS. 12



                         



12   I.C., §31-6-4-2, addresses curfews.



Sec. 6-128  Minor Curfew.



   (a)   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of
age be in a public place:



      (1)   Between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;



      (2)   After 10:30 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday; or



      (3)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday.



   (b)   It is a curfew violation for a child less than fifteen (15)
years of age to be in a public place after 10:00 p.m. or before 5:30 a.m. on
any day.



   (c)   A law enforcement officer may not detain a child or take a
child into custody based on a violation of this section unless the law
enforcement officer, after making a reasonable determination and considering
the facts and surrounding circumstances, reasonably believes that:



      (1)   The child has violated this section; and



      (2)   There is no legal defense to the violation.



(Ord. No. 95-23, 9-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 2000-08, 5-16-00; Am. Ord. No.
2002-02, 1-30-02; Am. Ord. No. 2004-16, 5-16-04)



Sec. 6-129  Violations.



   (a)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department may take
into custody any person violating the terms and provisions of Section
6-128(a) set forth hereinabove, as deemed appropriate by that officer. It
shall be the duty of the police officer to contact a parent, guardian or
other person having legal custody of the minor person in order to release the
minor person to the custody of that person.



   (b)   In the event any parent, guardian or other person having legal
custody of the minor person refuses to take custody of the minor child upon
notification by the Town Police Officer, the following action may be taken by
the Town Police Department: a local ordinance citation or uniform complaint
and summons, in form prescribed for such purposes by the Department for such
use, may be issued to that person.



(Ord. No. 95-23, 9-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 99-18, 7-13-99; Am. Ord. No. 2000-08,
5-16-00)



Sec. 6-130  Penalty.



Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be
fined fifty dollars ($50.00). Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) of the fine shall
be deposited into the Town Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund (LECEF)
for the purposes as set forth and permitted by Town Code Section 2-187 as
amended from time to time. The remaining portion of the fine in the amount of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be deposited to the Town General Fund.
Each offense of violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense,
with separate fines for each as set forth herein. All such fines shall be
paid to the Local Ordinance Violations Bureau, administered by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town.



(Ord. No. 95-23, 9-12-95; Am. Ord. No. 2000-08, 5-16-00)



Sec. 6-131 through Sec. 6-133  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 13. DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.13



                             



13   I.C., §13-7-1-11, defines “garbage”, and I.C., §13-7-1-9,
defines “disposal”.



Sec. 6-134  Definitions.



The following terms used herein shall be held to mean as follows:



   (a)   Garbage - kitchen and table refuse, swill and every
accumulation of both vegetable and animal matter that attends the cooking,
preparation, handling, dealing in or storing of meats, fish, fowl, fruits and
vegetables.



(Ord. No. 568, § 1(a), 11-10-64)



   (b)   Rubbish - shall include paper, cardboard, excelsior, weeds,
lawn sweepings, grass, cloth, rags, leather scraps, carpets, rugs, glass,
cans, bricks, and similar materials.



(Ord. No. 84-44, § 1 (b), 10-9-84)



   (c)   Container - shall include, but not be limited to, those
receptacles which contain trash, recyclable materials, yard waste, and the
like.



(Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 9-15-00)



Sec. 6-135  Proper Disposal Required.



It shall be unlawful for any person to throw out or deposit on any lot,
ground, premises, right-of-way, street, alley, stream, bank, drive, sidewalk,
or parkway within the limits of the Town of Dyer, Indiana garbage or rubbish.



(Ord. No. 568, § 2, 11-10-64)



Sec. 6-136  Container Regulations.



   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person who is the owner or
occupant of any premises within the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer to
use the containers provided by the waster hauler for the Town of Dyer.



   (b)   Garbage and rubbish and containers shall be placed out for
collection no sooner than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to scheduled pickup, and
returned to storage location by 8:00 p.m. on the day of pickup.



   (c)   All receptacles for garbage and trash shall be kept clean and
in a sanitary condition.



   (d)   All garbage containers and receptacles required by the Town
Code, as amended from time to time, shall be stored so as not to be visible
from the street unless the size of the property and location of the home on
the lot prohibits the same.



   (e)   All owners or occupants of premises within the corporate
limits of the Town of Dyer shall be responsible for loose garbage on their
premises.



   (f)   The Town of Dyer (or its authorized agent) shall not collect
or provide pick-up service for persons violating the terms of this ordinance.



   (g)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this Article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Fifty Dollars
($50.00) for each violation.  Each day a violation exists shall be
considered a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 902, § 1-10, 6-11-74; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 2000-12,
7-18-00; Ord. No. 2011-15, 11-10-2011)



Sec. 6-137  Collection By The Town.



Garbage and rubbish shall systematically be collected by the Town of Dyer (or
its authorized agent), and will be removed and disposed of only at such
residences where the provisions of this Article are observed and obeyed. 
Any person or persons owning or leasing any residence or establishment that
fails to comply with the provisions of this Article shall promptly remove and
dispose of the garbage and rubbish accumulated by such person or persons at
their own expense, and in a sanitary manner.



The Town of Dyer (or its authorized agent) shall supply free of charge
recycling containers to all residents participating in the voluntary Dyer
Curbside Recycling Program.  Should a resident require any additional
containers due to increased recycling efforts, a charge will be made to the
resident equal to the current price for recycling containers as paid by the
Town to its supplier of recycling containers.



Replacement of containers.  Should th initial trash and recycling containers
issued to a resident need to be replaced due to major damage or other similar
loss, the resident shall contact the current waste hauler to make arrangement
for replacement containers.



Placement of containers.  Containers shall be placed within four (4) feet o
f the roadway, unless otherwise prohibited by weather conditions.  There
shall be at least three (3) feet of clearance between the container and any
other item near it.  Trash shall not be placed on top of the containers. 
All other trash bagged or canned will be picked up by the driver.  The
containers shall be places at the curb with the arrows on the lid pointing to
the street.  Should a container not have arrows, the wheels should be away
from the street.  Items that are too large to fit in the container (stove,
couch, washer, dryer, etc.) should be placed outside of the container with at
least three (3) feet of clearance on all sides.(Ord. No. 568, § 3, 11-10-64;
Ord. No. 95-34, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 2011-15, 11-10-2011)



Sec. 6-138  Reserved for future use.



Sec. 6-139  Location of Dumpster Units on Commercial Real Estate.



   (a)   No dumpster shall be located closer than eight (8') feet from
any utility meter, junction box, or regulator.



   (b)   Any person who violates the terms and provisions of this
Article shall be subject to a fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars payable through
the Ordinance Violation Bureau for first-time violations and not to exceed
one hundred dollars ($100.00) thereafter, and each day may be considered a
separate offense.



(Ord. No. 89-24, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-140  Rubbish Fires Prohibited. 14



No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize
any such fire to be kindled within the limits of the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 84-44, § 7, 10-9-84)



                         



14   I.C., §13-7-1-4, defines “air pollution”, and I.C., §13-7-1-15,
defines “open burning”.



Sec. 6-141  Enforcement and Penalties.



   (a)   Enforcement of the terms and provisions of this Article is
vested in the Town of Dyer Code Enforcement Officer. (Ord. No. 568, § 10,
11-10-64)



   (b)   Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of the
terms and provisions of this Article shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed fifty ($50.00) dollars.  Each day a violation exists shall be
considered a separate offense.  (Ord. No. 568, § 11, 11-10-64; Ord. No.
2011-15, 11-10-2011)



Sec. 6-142 through Sec. 6-149  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 14. ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU. 15



Sec. 6-150  Ordinance Bureau Established.



There is established an Ordinance Violations Bureau for the Town of Dyer
pursuant to Indiana Code, § 33-6-3-1, et seq., as amended, for collection of
fines for violations of ordinances hereafter described, or added hereto at a
subsequent date, or adopted subsequent to enactment of this ordinance with a
fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars or less. (Ord. No. 89-38, § 1, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-151  Clerk-Treasurer to be Administrator of the Bureau.



The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the Violations Clerk, and
shall be Administrator of the Bureau. The Clerk-Treasurer and her staff, as
her agents, shall accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of
violations, and payment of civil penalties in the amount and the violation as
provided in Sec. 6-152. (Ord. No. 89-38, § 1, 10-10-89)



                           



15   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 89-38, creating the Ordinance Violation, is
also set forth in §§2-220 through 2-223 of this Code.



Sec. 6-152  Schedule of Ordinances and Civil Penalties Under the
Jurisdiction of the Ordinance Violations Bureau.



The following schedule of Dyer Municipal Code provisions and ordinances shall
be subject to the jurisdiction of the Ordinance Violation Bureau, and shall
be subject to a civil penalty as prescribed in the following charts.



   Schedule of Ordinances and Civil Penalties



 

CODE SECTION
 
CODE PROVISIONS
 
MINIMUM CODE PENALTY




 
 
 
 
 


6-54
 
Alarms System/

False Alarms
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-19
 
Alcohol in Motor Vehicles
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-89
 
Animal Control
 
$25.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-89
 
Animal Control and Licensing
 
$25.00


 
 
 
 
 


7-85
 
Building Code
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-140
 
Burning
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


4-32
 
Carnivals and Permits
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-130
 
Curfew Violation
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-60
 
Discharge of Bullet or Projectile
 
$50.00


 
 
Electronic Games
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 




 



 

CODE SECTION
 
CODE PROVISIONS
 
MINIMUM CODE PENALTY




6-119
 
Firearms
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-59
 
Fireworks Discharge
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-141
 
Garbage Disposal
 
$50.00


7-2
 
House Numbers
 
$50.00


6-113
 
Hunting in Town Limits
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


7-98
 
Licensing of Contractors and Subcontractors
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


4-59
 
Licensing of Peddlers and Transient Merchants
 
$50.00


6-139
 
Location of Dumpsters
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-119
 
Loitering
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


8-3
 
Motorized Bicycles
 
$25.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-104
 
Muffler Violation
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-59
 
Obstruction of Public Way
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-60
 
Public Nuisance
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 




 



 

CODE SECTION
 
CODE PROVISIONS
 
MINIMUM CODE PENALTY




 
 
Public Purpose Permit
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Railroad Cars
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


5-24
 
Regulation of Parks
 
$50.00


6-30
 
Regulation of Sprinkling
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-104
 
Sale or manufacture of Fireworks
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


7-85
 
Sewer Connection
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-125
 
Snow Removal
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


8-3
 
Snowmobiles and Off Road Vehicles
 
$25.00


 
 
 
 
 


6-30
 
Sprinkling Ban,

1st Violation
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Swimming Pools
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


4-32
 
Traveling Shows
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 


8-175
 
Weight Limit
 
$50.00


 
 
 
 
 




 



 

CODE SECTION
 
CODE PROVISIONS
 
MINIMUM CODE PENALTY


10-138
 
Zoning Ordinance
 
$50.00



 



Sec. 6-153  Civil Penalty Amendments.



The provisions of the Dyer Town Code and ordinances referred to herein, are
amended to provide and declare the civil penalty scheduled herein to be the
specific civil penalty for the violation of said Code provision and
ordinance. This ordinance repeals all Dyer Municipal Code and ordinance
provisions inconsistent herewith. All other provisions of the Dyer Municipal
Code not affected by this ordinance remain in full force and effect. (Ord.
No. 89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-154  Specific Procedures.



A person charged with an ordinance or Code violation under this Article is
entitled to a trial before a court as provided by law, unless the person
waives the right to trial and enters an admission of the violation with the
Violations Clerk Upon such an admission, the Clerk shall assess and receive
from the violator the amount prescribed by the schedule of civil penalties
established herein. Payment of civil penalties may be made in person or by
mail to the Ordinance Violations Bureau. If a person charged with a violation
under this ordinance wants to exercise the right to trial, the person shall
appear before the Violations Clerk and deny the violation or enter a written
denial with the Clerk.



If a person:



   (1)   denies an ordinance or Code violation under this ordinance;



   (2)   fails to satisfy a civil penalty assessed by the Violations
Clerk after having entered an admission of violation; or



   (3)   fails to deny or admit the violation under this ordinance;



the Clerk shall report this fact to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer and the
Town Attorney for prosecution. Proceedings in court against the person shall
then be initiated for the alleged ordinance violation. All sums collected by
the Violations Clerk as civil penalties for ordinance violations shall be
accounted for and paid to the General Fund of the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No.
89-38, 10-10-89)



Sec. 6-155 through Sec. 6-159  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 15. HAZARDOUS AND TOXIC MATERIAL SPILLS AND LEAKS.



Sec. 6-160  Service Charges for Hazardous or Toxic Material Spills and Leaks.



The procedures and fees addressing service charges for hazardous or toxic
material spills and leaks are set forth in Sections 4-20 and 4-21 of this
Code.



Sec. 6-161  Reimbursement Procedures.



Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of Dyer,
who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or toxic
materials within the Town of Dyer, for which leaks or spills that the Dyer
Volunteer Fire Department vehicles and equipment and/or equipment of the
Department of Public Works are used in response, shall reimburse the Town
within thirty (30) days for any such equipment which has been damaged,
destroyed, discarded or otherwise adversely affected, based upon an estimate
obtained accurately stating the cost of said damage. (Ord. No. 88-6, § 2,
2-9-88) 16



                       



16   Editor's Note: Ord. No. 90-32 contained a scrivener's error listing
“Board of Public Works” instead of “Department of Public Works”.



Sec. 6-162  Clean-Up Contractors and Direct Payment Procedures.



Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of Dyer,
who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or toxic
materials within the Town of Dyer, for the clean-up of which separate
clean-up contractors are required to be called in (in the determination and
at the discretion of the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department) shall assume and
bear full responsibility for the direct payment for said clean-up to the
clean-up contractor. (Ord. No. 88-6, § 3, 2-9-88)



Sec. 6-163  Billing Procedures.



The Dyer Volunteer Fire Department and Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer
shall be responsible for billing the shippers, transporters, owners of
automobiles and other vehicles, and including owners (or tenants) of fixed
facilities within the Town of Dyer, which cause or suffer the leak or spill,
within a reasonable time after the Dyer Volunteer Fire Department's or Town
employees' initial response to the said leak or spill. Payment received shall
be duly appropriated and deposited to the General Fund. (Ord. No. 88-6, § 4,
2-9-88)



Sec. 6-164  Penalty for Non-Payment.



Shippers, transporters, owners of automobiles and other vehicles, and
including owners (or tenants) of fixed facilities within the Town of Dyer,
who cause or suffer leaks or spills of potentially hazardous or toxic
materials within the Town of Dyer, and who fail to reimburse the Town within
thirty (30) days after receipt of said billing, shall be deemed to have
violated this ordinance, and shall suffer a penalty in an amount not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), in addition to the determined
reimbursement, as provided herein. (Ord. No. 88-6, § 5, 2-9-88)



Sec. 6-165 through Sec. 6-169  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 16. SMOKING IN PUBLIC AREAS.



Sec. 6-170  Town Hall Smoking Regulations.



   (a)   That smoking shall be prohibited in the Dyer Town Hall,
located at One Town Square, in the Town of Dyer.  In addition, smoking shall
be prohibited in all Town of Dyer buildings including, but not limited to,
all buildings that comprise the Town’s Department of Public Works,
Department of Wastewater Treatment, Police Department, Volunteer Fire
Department and Parks Department.



   (b)   For the purposes of this ordinance, "smoking" means the
carrying or holding of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other lighted
smoking equipment, or the inhalation or exhalation of smoke from any lighted
smoking equipment. (Ord. 2000-17, 6-20-00; Am. Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1,
5-19-04)



Sec. 6-171  Penalty.



Each violation of Sec. 6-170 is punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars
($25.00) against the person responsible for the violation, payable to the
Town Clerk-Treasurer, as the Clerk of the Town Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
Each instance of prohibited smoking shall be considered a separate violation
of this ordinance. (Ord. 2000-17, 6-20-00; Am. Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1,
5-19-04)



Sec. 6-172 through 6-175 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 17.  TREES AND FLORA.



Sec. 6-180  Title.



This Article shall be known as the Town of Dyer Tree and Flora Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-181  Purpose and Intent.



   (a)   This Article establishes policies, regulations, and standards
necessary to ensure that the Town will continue to realize the benefits
provided by trees, plants, shrubs and flora located on public property and
affecting public property.



   (b)   The provisions of this Article are enacted to regulate the
planting, maintenance, protection and removal of trees, shrubs, plants and
flora located on or affecting public property. It also provides for the
issuing of permits for the planting, maintenance, protection and removal of
trees, shrubs, plants and flora on public property.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-182  Definitions.



For the purpose of this Article the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "Consulting Arborist" shall mean an individual who is trained and
certified by the International Society of Arboriculture, in the art and
science of planting, caring for and maintaining individual trees, forests,
plants, shrubs and flora.



   "Flora" shall mean any and all trees, shrubbery and other plants, which
grow to a height of greater than twelve (12) inches, but excludes weeds.



   "Owner(s)" shall mean any one or more of the following:  The fee
simple title holder of a parcel of real estate, including the life estate as
reflected on the Lake County Assessor's records. It shall also include the
purchaser(s) of such real estate under any contract for the conditional sale
thereof, whether or not such contract is recorded.



   "Plants" shall mean all trees, shrubbery and other plants that grow to
a height of greater than twelve (12) inches, but excludes weeds.



   "Shrubs" shall mean any woody, perennial plant with multiple stems that
grows to a height of less than ten (10) feet. This shall include ornamental
grasses.



   "Topping" shall mean the cutting back of tree branches to stubs or
lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role. This
shall also include "heading," "tipping," "hat-racking," and "rounding over",
which are other terms meaning "Topping."



   "Tree" shall mean any woody, perennial plant and includes those having
a single stem or multiple stems that grows to a height of over ten (10)
feet.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-183  Jurisdiction.



The Town of Dyer shall have control of all trees, shrubs, plants, flora and
other plantings now or hereafter located on or affecting public property
within the corporate limits, and shall have the power to plant, maintain,
remove, and replace such trees, shrubs, plants, flora and other plantings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)c



Sec. 6-184  Tree Program Supervisor.



The Director of Public Works is hereby designated as the Tree Program
Supervisor. The Tree Program Supervisor shall supervise the management of the
natural resources within the Town by enforcement of this Article and
evaluation of the overall Tree Management Program.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-185  Appeals.



Any action or decision of the Tree Program Supervisor may be appealed to and
heard by the Town Manager. An appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days
after the action or decision of the Tree Program Supervisor. The appeal shall
be in writing and shall be filed with the Clerk/Treasurer. The appeal must be
in writing and state the reasons for the appeal. The Town Manager shall have
thirty (30) days to act on the appeal and his decision shall be in writing.
He may conduct hearings as he feels are necessary. The decision of the Town
Manager shall be final.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-186  Enforcement.



The Tree Program Supervisor and the Town Manager are hereby charged with the
responsibility for the enforcement of this Article and may serve notice to
any person in violation thereof or institute legal proceedings as may be
required, and the Town Legal Counsel is hereby authorized to institute
appropriate proceedings to that end.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-187  Performance Evaluation of Article.



The Tree Program Supervisor shall collect and maintain all records and data
necessary to objectively evaluate the progress being made toward the stated
goals of this Article. An annual written summary and analysis of the
evaluation, and recommendations for action shall be prepared at the direction
of the Tree Program Supervisor and the consulting arborist and presented to
the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall consider the report and
recommendations and take all actions deemed necessary to accomplish the goals
of this Article. These actions may include, but are not limited to
recommending revision or amendment of this Article or the adoption of other
resolutions or ordinances.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-188  Severability.



Should any part or provision of this Article be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity
of the Article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be
invalid.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-189  Local Government Disclaimer of Liability.



Nothing contained in this Article shall be deemed to create a duly or impose
a liability on the Town, or its officers and employees, to plant, keep, or
remove any tree, shrub, plant or flora located on public property or located
on private property affecting public property, nor to relieve the owner of
any private property from the duty to keep any tree, shrub or plant on his
property or under his control in such condition and to prevent it from
constituting a hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street,
park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place within the town. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-190  Responsibility of Property Owners.



It shall be the duty and responsibility of every person owning or occupying
any real property within the Town of Dyer, to keep all trees, shrubs, flora
and plants on that property trimmed in such a manner that there is a
clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet above any street or alley, and a
clearance of at least seven (7) feet over any sidewalk. It shall also be the
duty and responsibility of every person owning or occupying any real property
within the Town of Dyer to keep all trees on that property trimmed in such a
manner that they do not obstruct the view of any traffic sign or device for
vehicle traffic in the direction controlled by that traffic sign or device. 
(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-191  Penalties for Tree Removal and Damage Violations.



Any person who fails to comply with, or assists in the violation of, any of
the provisions of this Article, or any order, permit, or notice issued
pursuant hereto, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each such violation and shall pay in addition the cost of
replacement as provided in this Article. Each day any such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each tree removed or
damaged shall also constitute a separate offense. Any person who causes a
tree to be removed or damaged in violation of this Article, or any order,
permit, or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall repair or replace any such
tree at the violator's sole cost and expense pursuant to the tree replacement
requirements set forth in this Article. The cost of replacement shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each DBH inch of the removed or damaged tree.
If the precise DBH cannot be determined, the cost of replacement shall be
determined by the Tree Program Supervisor based on the consulting arborist's
estimate of the DBH of the removed or damaged tree. The person found
responsible for the violation shall pay the replacement cost of the tree to
the Town. The location, species, and planting specification for replacement
trees shall be approved prior to replanting by the Tree Program Supervisor
pursuant to the requirements of this Article.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-192  Penalty for Planting, Arboricultural Work or Encroachment
Violations.



If the Tree Program Supervisor determines that a violation exists regarding
planting, maintenance or encroachment of trees, flora, plants or shrubs upon
public property, the following procedures shall be implemented:



   (a)   A preliminary notice shall be given to the owner and/or
occupant of such property, either verbally or by posting a written notice on
the property. The notice shall state the nature of the alleged violation,
corrective action necessary and a date, not less than two (2) weeks in the
future, when the property will be re-inspected to determine if compliance has
been effected. After re-inspection, if it is determined that the violation
has been corrected, the owner or occupant shall not be liable for any charges
by reason of the preliminary notice procedure.



   (b)   If any violation is not corrected as a result of the
preliminary notice, the Tree Program Supervisor shall give to the owner and
occupant of such real estate written notice of the violation. Such notice
shall be given by Certified Mail, stating the nature of the violation,
describe the real estate upon which the condition exists and demand abatement
of the condition and set a date for completion of the abatement action, not
less than two (2) weeks after the date of such notice. The property shall
then be re-inspected to determine if abatement has been effected. If the
Certified Mail is returned or if the address of the owner is unknown and
cannot be ascertained after due diligence, it shall be sufficient to give
notice by publication one time pursuant to statute. The owner(s) notified by
publication shall have ten (10) days from the date of the published notice in
which to abate the offending condition.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-193  Topping Prohibited.



The practice of topping and/or other especially destructive maintenance
practices such as severely trimming trees in public streets is strictly
prohibited. "Severely trimmed" shall mean the cutting of the branches and/or
trunk of a tree in a manner which will substantially reduce the overall size
of the tree area so as to destroy the existing symmetrical appearance or
natural shape of the tree in a manner which results in the removal of main
lateral branches leaving the trunk of the tree in a stub appearances. The
standards identified in the ANSI A300 standards describe trimming methods,
which will give maximum benefits to both trees and people and are
incorporated herein by reference. These specifications and methods shall be
made available from the Tree Program Supervisor.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-194  Action on Failure to Abate.



Upon failure of an owner or occupant to abate the violation after notice
pursuant to Sec. 6-192, the Tree Program Supervisor shall cause the violation
to be abated, and shall be allowed to enter upon such private property or
public property and proceed with corrective action.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-195  Procedural and Labor Charges.



For services rendered in the enforcement of this Article, the owners(s) of
the real estate shall pay to the Town of Dyer the following fees and charges:



   (a)   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for each inspection to determine
compliance.



   (b)   Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for property ownership
determination.



   (c)   All costs for publication of notice.



   (d)   Twenty dollars ($20.00) for services performed in perfecting a
lien.



   (e)   Ten dollars ($10.00) for Certified Mail preparation and
sending.



   (f)   Forty ($40.00) per man-hour plus equipment charges, as
determined by the Tree Program Supervisor, for services rendered in abatement
of a violation.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-196  Resolution of Conflicts Between Trees and Structures.



Where sidewalk or curb damage due to tree roots occurs, every effort shall be
made to correct the problem without removing or damaging the tree. The Tree
Program Supervisor, in conjunction with the consulting arborist, shall be
responsible for developing or approving corrective measures. Corrective
action may include alteration of sidewalk and/or curb construction.  (Ord.
No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-197  Situations Which are Declared to be a Public Nuisance.



Any tree, shrub, groundcover, flora or plant growing or standing on private
property in such a manner that any portion thereof interferes with any public
street, sidewalk, alley or restricts the flow of traffic or visibility of
such street, sidewalk, alley or intersection thereof to any person or persons
lawfully using such streets, sidewalks, alleys or intersections shall
constitute a public nuisance.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-198  Destruction of Diseased or Hazardous Trees and Plants.



The Town of Dyer shall have the exclusive authority to destroy any plants,
trees, shrubs or flora in or on public streets, alleys, ways, places and
parks if infected by disease or injurious insects, or if in the judgment of
the Tree Program Supervisor, such represents a dangerous condition or hazard
to the public. The destruction may also occur when necessary for the
protection of other flora or in any other cause when the public safety,
health or welfare is or may be adversely affected.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-199  Abatement of Hazards and Public Nuisances.



The Town of Dyer may remove or trim any tree, plant, shrub, or flora, or may
permit any public utility to do so, or may require the property owner to
remove or trim such tree, plant, shrub or flora on private property abutting
or affecting public property. The failure of the property owner, or his duly
authorized agent, to remove such tree, plant, shrub or flora or perform
specified maintenance on the tree, after fifteen (15) days notice by the Tree
Program Supervisor, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this
Article, and the Tree Program Supervisor may then remove or trim such tree
and assess the cost thereof against the property.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-200  Cleanup of Trimmings.



All private tree care firms shall be responsible for cleanup of trimmings
within seven (7) days of performing work. All private tree care firms working
for residents and all commercial or nonresidential businesses must dispose of
trimmings at their expense. Any tree care work completed by a resident on his
property may leave the trimmings on the public parkway and contact the
Department of Public Works to arrange for pickup.  (Ord. No. 2007-04,
3-21-07)



Sec. 6-201  Permit Required for Any Planting Within Town Right-of-Way.



No person shall plant any tree, plant, shrub or flora on public property
except according to policies, regulations and specifications established
pursuant to this section.



   (a)   All trees, plants, shrubs or flora material planted on or in
the public street, sidewalk area, alley or parks require the approval of the
Tree Program Supervisor and the consulting arborist and require a special
permit for such planting granted by the Tree Program Supervisor.



   (b)   Trees, plants, shrubs and flora shall be located and planted
as directed by the Tree Program Supervisor or his designee, who shall
supervise such planting and location. In the performance of such work,
consideration shall be given to setbacks and safety. No tree shall be planted
in any public street, alley, place or park in the Town of Dyer less than
thirty (30) feet away from any other tree planted in the same area or at a
distance of less than three (3) feet from any established sidewalk or curb
bordering any public right-of-way, except by written permission by the Tree
Program Supervisor.



   (c)   The Tree Program Supervisor shall have the authority to create
further specifications as required and may alter methods of planting, reject
any tree or tree species, or suspend the right of a permit holder to plant,
for any reason and without advance notice.



   (d)   Trees that are removed shall be replaced by a new planting,
except where impractical due to construction or space.



   (e)   Plant material selected may vary, depending on location;
however, it must be of high quality and of suitable species, and not of the
prohibited species as determined by the Tree Program Supervisor. All plant
materials must conform to the specifications set forth by the American
Association of Nurserymen Plant Standards.



   (f)   Planting procedures shall comply with ANSI MOO standards for
the installation of nursery stock. Suitable maintenance plans and procedures
must be submitted prior to installation and shall be subject to the approval
of the Tree Program Supervisor and the consulting arborist.



   (g)   Permit holders shall guarantee survival of each tree for a
minimum of one (1) year after planting date. Any tree not surviving the
minimum shall be replaced either by the permit holder or the Town at the
permit holder's expense. After a period of one (1) year, all plant materials
shall become property of the Town and becomes the responsibility of the Town.



   (h)   The coordination of tree planting on public ways with
landscaping on private property so as to achieve the above purposes is deemed
desirable.



   (i)   Trees may not be planted in parkways that are less than five
(5) feet between curb and sidewalk.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-202  Landscape Structures Prohibited.



No landscaping structures may be constructed within the public rights-of-way
that will hinder or endanger the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. A
prior approval of the Tree Program Supervisor is required prior to any type
of structure being constructed within a public right-of-way.  (Ord. No.
2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-203  Harming Public Trees Forbidden.



It shall be a violation of the provisions of this Article for any person to
abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, plant or shrub in the right-of -way or
any other public place, or to attach or place any rope, wire (other than one
used to support a young or broken tree), chain, sign, poster, handbill or
other things to or on any tree growing in a public place, or to cause or
permit any wire charged with electricity to be placed or attached to any such
tree, or allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to
such trees to come in contact with their roots, trunks, or leaves. No person
shall perform any arboricultural work on any plant material on Town property
unless first granted a special permit indicating the approved activity on
each designated plant. All work on Town trees including pruning, protecting,
bracing, relocating, cultivating, spraying or removing will be allowed only
as permitted by the Tree Program Supervisor.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-204  Licensing of Private Tree Care Firms.



It is unlawful for any person or business to perform tree pruning and/or
repair work on public trees for hire within the Town of Dyer without a valid
tree care license approved by the Tree Program Supervisor and issued by the
Building Department.



   (a)   Each tree pruned or otherwise modified in violation of this
provision shall constitute a separate offense. The first such offense is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00); each
subsequent offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1000.00). A single person or business establishes no maximum fine for
multiple violations.



   (b)   The Tree Program Supervisor is authorized to issue tree care
licenses to persons or businesses that meet the following minimum
requirements: The person or at least one (1) person on the staff of a
business must be designated as a qualified arborist by the Town. To be
designated as a qualified arborist, a tree service employee shall demonstrate
knowledge of proper arboricultural techniques by providing documentation of
professional certification, education, and/or experience acceptable to the
Town Arborist.



   (c)   The licensee must carry a current certificate of insurance and
be bonded for such work.



   (d)   The licensee must sign an affidavit to certify that all tree
work will be performed under the direct supervision of the qualified arborist
and will comply with all Town standards and ordinances.



   (e)   The Tree Program Supervisor is authorized to suspend or revoke
the tree care license of any person or business that performs work which does
not comply with tree care standards as specified in ANSI A300, in this
Article and in the Tree Management Plan. License suspensions and revocations
may be appealed to the Town Manager within ten (10) days of notification. The
decision of the Town Manager shall be final and is not subject to appeal.



   (f)   The Tree Program Supervisor, under the guidance of the
consulting arborist, may reissue any tree care business license previously
revoked subject to the above minimum requirements and any additional
requirements as may be prescribed by the consulting arborist and approved by
the Town Council.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-205  Conservation of Forest and Woodland Resources During Development.



   (a)   No person, business or corporation shall destroy or
significantly alter any forest or woodland through tree damage or removal,
clearing, grading, tilling, burning, application of chemicals, or any other
means unless they apply for a permit to do the same. No person, business or
corporation shall be granted a permit for subdivision, grading, building or
the construction of any improvement on wooded or forested lands unless they
possess a valid permit.



   (b)   Any alteration of wooded or forested lands shall conform to
the conditions and specifications of the Town of Dyer Tree Management
Program. All such permits shall be issued by the Tree Program Supervisor
after approval by the Town's arborist.  (Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-206  Prohibited Species List.



The following tree species shall not be used by anyone for planting along any
public street, alley, right-of- way or park. The Town shall not place, nor
permit to be placed, any tree or shrub, which will cause or tend to cause a
hazardous or unsafe condition either for motorists or pedestrians.



 



Acer negundo
 
Box Elder


Acer sacharrinum
 
Silver Maple


Ailanthus altissima
 
Tree of Heaven


Betula papyrifera
 
Paper Birch


Betula pendula
 
European White Birch


Catalpa bignoides
 
Southern Catalpa


Morus species
 
Mulberry


Populus nigra
 
Lombardy Poplar


Populus deltoides
 
Cottonwood


Salix species
 
Willows, all


Ulmus species
 
Elms, all


Robinia
 
Black Locust




 



 



Gingko species
 
Gingko. except seedless


Juglans nigra
 
Black Walnut


Pyrus calleryana

"Bradford"
 
Bradford Pear


Albiriaspp
 
Mimosa


Betula
 
White Birch


Elaeagnus
 
Russian Olive


Madura
 
Osage Orange


Malus spp.
 
Common apple




 



(Ord. No. 2007-04, 3-21-07)



Sec. 6-207 through Sec. 6-210 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 18.  PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS.



Sec. 6-211  Definitions.



For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   Portable Storage Container.  A portable, weather-resistant receptacle
designed and used for the storage or shipment of household good, wares, or
merchandise of any type.



   Single Family Residential District.  means Zoning Districts R-l and
R-2 as defined by the Dyer Town Code.  (Ord. No. 2018-3, 4-26-18)



Sec. 6-212  Restrictions.



Portable storage containers located outside of a fully-enclosed building or
structure shall be allowed only in single-family residential districts
subject to the following restrictions:



   (a)   No more than one portable storage container shall be allowed
on a zoned residential lot, and for no longer than a total of 30 days in any
consecutive 12 month period; provided, however, that during bona fide
construction activity on such lot where a building permit has been issued,
and for an additional period of 24 hours before and after construction, a
portable storage container used in connection with such construction activity
may remain on the lot for a period not exceeding a total of six months in any
12 month period;



   (b)   No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater
than 16 feet in length and eight feet in height;



   (c)   Except where a building permit has been issued, all portable
storage containers shall be located on private property and on a driveway or
other paved surface;



   (d)   Portable storage containers shall be allowed only upon
issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator, The fee for such permit
shall be in the sum of $100.00.  (Ord. No. 2018-3, 4-26-18)



Sec. 6-213  Penalty.



   (a)   Any person or entity that violates the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (b)   In addition to seeking penalties against any individual or
entity that violates the provisions of this ordinance, the Town may commence
any and all necessary and appropriate legal action, This shall include, but
is not limited to, seeking an equitable action for injunctive relief against
any individuals or entities violating the provisions of this ordinance or an
action at law for damages, as well as the recovery of attorney fees related
to the same.



   (c)   Nothing herein shall prevent or restrict the Town from
prosecuting any violation of this ordinance as an ordinance violation in the
Lake Superior Court, County Division and seeking all available remedies
permitted thereby.



   (d)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this ordinance
shall be cumulative and independently available to the Town, and the Town
shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this
ordinance to the full extent allowed by law.  (Ord. No. 2018-3, 4-26-18)



Sec. 6-214 through Sec. 6-220 Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 7
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



ARTICLE 1. NUMERICAL DISPLAY OF ADDRESS.



Sec. 7-1   Duty to Have Address Displayed.



Sec. 7-2   Penalties.



Sec. 7-3   Effective Date.



Sec. 7-4 and Sec. 7-5 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR DRAINAGE AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
(DYER DRAINAGE CONTROL ORDINANCE).



Sec. 7-6   Land Alterations to be Accomplished in Accordance with Drainage
Requirement.



Sec. 7-7   Definitions.



Sec. 7-8   Drainage Permits Required; Exceptions; When to be Obtained



Sec. 7-9   Eligibility to Obtain Permit.



Sec. 7-10   Application; Issuance.



Sec. 7-11   Professionally Prepared and Certified Drainage Plans.



Sec. 7-12   When Professionally Prepared and Certified Drainage Plan Are
Not Required.



Sec. 7-13   Duration of Permit.



Sec. 7-14   Deviation From the Approved Plan.



Sec. 7-15   Determination of Impacted Drainage Areas.



Sec. 7-16   Posting of Bond.



Sec. 7-17   Dedication of Easement.



Sec. 7-18   Certification of Completion and Compliance.



Sec. 7-19   General Authority for Investigations and Inspections.



Sec. 7-20   Fees for Permits Obtained After Commencement of Work.



Sec. 7-21   Revocation of Permits.



Sec. 7-22   Stop-Work Order.



Sec. 7-23   General Penalty.



Sec. 7-24   Variance Procedure.



Sec. 7-25   Application Fee.



Sec. 7-26   Exemption for Certain Governmental Units.



Sec. 7-27   Drainage to Adequate Receiving Place.



Sec. 7-28   Characteristics of Drainage Facility.



Sec. 7-29   Accommodation of Runoff Within Parcel.



Sec. 7-30   Accommodation of Runoff Downstream From Parcel.



Sec. 7-31   Acceptance of Upstream Drainage.



Sec. 7-32   Habitable Structures to be Free From 100-Year Floods.



Sec. 7-33   Drainage Away From Structures.



Sec. 7-34   Damage to Adjoining Property.



Sec. 7-35   Maximum Slope.



Sec. 7-36   Permanency of Grades.



Sec. 7-37   Subsurface Drainage.



Sec. 7-38   Blocking Drainageways.



Sec. 7-39   Exposed Areas to be Protected; Potential Erosion.



Sec. 7-40   Protection During Development.



Sec. 7-41   Permanent Vegetation: Structural Methods.



Sec. 7-42   Sediment Control.



Sec. 7-43   Additional Powers.



Sec. 7-44 Through Sec. 7-49 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. BUILDING CODE.



   Division I. Background Provisions.



Sec. 7-50   Title.



Sec. 7-51   Purpose.



Sec. 7-52   Authority of the Building Commissioner.



Sec. 7-53   Scope.



Sec. 7-54   Adoption of Rules by Reference.



Sec. 7-55   Application for Permits.



Sec. 7-56   Permit Required.



Sec. 7-57   Other Ordinances.



Sec. 7-58 and Sec. 7-59 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Fees and Exemptions.



Sec. 7-60   Building and Moving Fees.



Sec. 7-61   Wrecking and Other Building Permits.



Sec. 7-62   Driveway Permits.



Sec. 7-63   Sign Permits.



Sec. 7-64   Plumbing, Housing, Drainage and Sewer Work.



Sec. 7-65   Electrical Installation.



Sec. 7-66   Payment Fees.



Sec. 7-67   Reinspection Fees.



Sec. 7-68   Swimming Pools.



Sec. 7-69   Water.



Sec. 7-70   Exemptions.



Sec. 7-71   Occupancy Escrow Fee.



Sec. 7-72 Through Sec. 7-74 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Permit Procedures and Related Regulations.



Sec. 7-75   Review of Application.



Sec. 7-76   Inspection and Reinspection Procedures.



Sec. 7-77   Inspection Assistance.



Sec. 7-78   Entry.



Sec. 7-79   Stop Order.



Sec. 7-80   Certification of Occupancy.



Sec. 7-81   Workmanship.



Sec. 7-82   Violations.



Sec. 7-83   Right of Appeal.



Sec. 7-84   Remedies.



Sec. 7-85   Penalties.



Sec. 7-86 Through Sec. 7-89 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Enforcement of Building Standards Procedures.



Sec. 7-90   State law Adopted by Reference.



Sec. 7-91   Role of Building Commissioner.



Sec. 7-92   Hearing Authority.



Sec. 7-93   Substantial Property Interest.



Sec. 7-94 Through Sec. 7-97 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS.



Sec. 7-98   Registration of Contractors and Subcontractors and Penalties.



Sec. 7-99   Restricting the Size of Residential Water Closets.



Sec. 7-100 Through Sec. 7-118 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE I. NUMERICAL DISPLAY OF ADDRESSES.



Sec. 7-1  Duty To Have Address Displayed.



It shall be the duty of the owner and the occupant of every building having a
properly designated Street address in the Town of Dyer to have placed
thereon, in a place visible from the street, numerical figures at least four
inches (4") high and two inches (2") wide in areas zoned residential and at
least eight inches (8") high and three inches (3") wide in areas zoned
commercial or industrial, showing the numerical street address of the
building. (Ord. No. 92-26, § 1, 9-8-92)



Sec. 7-2  Penalties.



Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall be fined not
less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) payable through the Ordinance Violations
Bureau, for the first violation and in a sum not to exceed Two Thousand Five
Hundred ($2,500.00) Dollars thereafter. Each day that any person shall
violate any of the provisions or sections of this Article shall be deemed to
commit a separate offense. (Ord. No. 92-26, § 2, 9-8-92)



Sec. 7-3  Effective Date.



This Article shall take effect July 1, 1993. (Ord. No. 92-26, § 3, 9-8-92)



Sec. 7-4 and Sec. 7-5  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR DRAINAGE
AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
(DYER DRAINAGE CONTROL ORDINANCE)



Sec. 7-6  Land Alterations To Be Accomplished In Accordance With Drainage
Requirement.



Any land alteration must be accomplished in conformity with drainage
requirements. Where any apparent conflict exists between drainage
requirements of this ordinance and similar requirements of any state or
federal agency which has jurisdiction of the work involved, the most
stringent requirements shall be applicable. Except for the foregoing,
compliance with any other applicable provision of law, ordinance or
regulation shall not excuse noncompliance with this Article. (Ord. No. 92-4,
§ 1, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-7  Definitions.



   (a)   “Board” shall mean the Storm Water Management Board of the
Town of Dyer, Indiana.



   (b)   “Drainage Facilities” as used herein, shall mean all
ditches, channels, conduits, retention-detention systems, tiles, swales,
sewers, and other natural or artificial means of draining storm water from
land.



   (c)   “Drainage Requirements” as used herein, shall mean:



      (1)   Minimum drainage standards stated in this Article.



      (2)   Regulations promulgated by the Board.



      (3)   Obligations and requirements relating to drainage
established under the Subdivision Control Ordinance (see Chapter 10 of this
Code) or other Town drainage specifications.



      (4)   Requirements stated under the Flood Hazard Ordinance.
(see Chapter 10 of this Code)



      (5)   Commitments relating to drainage made pursuant to
agreement.



      (6)   Conditions relating to drainage attached to a grant of a
variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (d)   “Impacted Drainage Areas” as used herein, shall be those
areas defined and identified by the Board, which are unlikely to be easily
drained because of one or more actors such as topography, soil type or
distance from adequate drainage facilities.



   (e)   “Land Alteration” is used herein, shall mean any action
taken relative to land which, either on a temporary or permanent basis:



      (1)   Changes the contour; or



      (2)   Increases or decreases the runoff rate; or



      (3)   Changes the elevation; or



      (4)   Decreases the rate at which water is absorbed; or



      (5)   Changes the drainage pattern; or



      (6)   Creates or changes a drainage facility; or



      (7)   Involves construction, enlargement or location of any
building on a permanent foundation; or



      (8)   Creates an impoundment.



Land alteration includes (by way of example and not of limitation) terracing,
grading, excavating, building construction, earthwork, draining, installing
drainage tile, filling and paving.



   (f)   “Maintenance” as used herein, shall mean cleaning out of,
spraying, removing obstructions from and making minor repairs in a drainage
facility so that it will perform the function for which it was designed and
constructed.



   (e)   “Short Title”: This Article may be referred to as the Dyer
Drainage Control Ordinance. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 2, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-8  Drainage Permits Required; Exceptions; When To Be Obtained.



   (a)   No person, partnership, or corporation shall undertake or
accomplish any land alteration without having in force a written drainage
permit obtained from the Board; provided, however, that a drainage permit
shall not be required for:



      (1)   Excavation of cemetery graves;



      (2)   Refuse disposal sites where storm drainage is controlled
by other regulations;



      (3)   Excavation for wells, excavation and backfills for
poles, conduits and wires of utility companies;



      (4)   Exploratory excavation or soil testing under the
direction and control of professional engineers, soil engineers, geologists,
civil engineers, architects or land surveyors, which are backfilled to the
original contours;



      (5)   Ordinary cultivation of agricultural land including
tilling, terracing, construction of minor open ditches and crop irrigation;



      (6)   The planting and tilling of gardens, flower beds,
shrubs, trees and other common uses and minor landscaping of land appurtenant
to residences; so long as same does not negatively impact adjacent properties
or obstruct any dedicated easements.



      (7)   Fill and grading of former basement site after the
demolition of a structure, to conform to adjacent terrain;



      (8)   Fill of small holes caused by erosion, settling of earth
or the removal of such materials as dead trees, posts or concrete;



      (9)   A fill less than one (1) foot in depth, and placed on
natural terrain with a slope flatter than ten (10%) percent, not intended to
support structures, which does not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards per acre and
does not obstruct drainage;



      (10)   Maintenance of drainage facilities;



      (11)   Construction of a driveway, when a proper permit which
includes culvert requirements has been obtained;



      (12)   Installation of building sanitary sewers and water
service lines, when a proper permit has been obtained for the installation of
that service.



   (b)   The drainage permit must be obtained before any work is
initiated with the exception of testing to determine procedures or materials.
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-9  Eligibility To Obtain Permit.



In order to obtain a drainage permit a person, partnership or corporation
must be the person, partnership or corporation that will be responsible for
accomplishing the land alteration for which the drainage permit was issued.
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 4, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-10  Application; Issuance.



   (a)   Application for a drainage permit shall be made to the Board.
The application shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the Board.



   (b)   A drainage permit shall be issued if;



      (1)   The person, partnership or corporation is eligible to
apply for and obtain a drainage permit;



      (2)   The application required by this section and supporting
information required by other sections or regulations have been properly
prepared and submitted;



      (3)   The drainage plan, together with supplemental
information required by other sections or regulations reflect compliance with
drainage requirements;



      (4)   A certification of “sufficiency of plan” and a
certificate of “obligation to observe” have been filed by a registered
professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, engaged in still drainage
design;



      (5)   If required by the Board, a bond has been posted
pursuant to this Article;



      (6)   If required by the Board, an easement has been dedicated
pursuant to this Article: and



      (7)   The applicable fee has been paid. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 5,
2-10-92)



Sec. 7-11  Professionally Prepared And Certified Drainage Plans.



A drainage plan fulfilling the requirements of this Article and Board
regulations shall be submitted to the Board for approval before a drainage
permit can be obtained to accomplish a land alteration, unless the land
alteration is such that a drainage permit can be obtained in accordance with
Section 7-12. The drainage plan must be submitted in triplicate, and shall
indicate in a precise way the work to be accomplished pursuant to the
drainage permit. One (1) copy of the drainage plan will remain on file with
the Board. The following information must be submitted for approval:



   (a)   Construction Features. The drainage plan shall demonstrate and
describe surface and subsurface drainage and include the following:



      Scale; Arrow; Contours and USGS Bench Marks: The drainage plan
shall be drawn to scale, preferably one (1") inch per fifty (50') feet, and
an arrow indicating North shall appear on each page. Existing land contours
shall be shown, with one-foot (1') contours for land with a slope flatter
than ten (10%) percent, two (2') foot contours for slopes equal to or greater
than ten percent (10%) but flatter than twenty percent (20%), and five-foot
(5') contours for slopes equal to or greater than twenty percent (20%). A
bench mark, which is easily accessible pavement or shoulder, the existing
ground over the storm drain with proposed grading shall be shown with the
centerline grade of the road. If the storm drain is to be constructed on
fill, the profile of the undisturbed earth, at drain location, shall be shown.



   (b)   Design Calculations. Design calculations are required as part
of the drainage plan and shall specifically include:



      (1)   Estimation of Storm Water Runoff:



         (a)   Drainage area map (scale one (1") inch equals one
hundred (100') feet indicating contours at two-foot intervals and limits of
100-year floodplain, where applicable;



         (b)   Weighted runoff coefficient computations;



         (c)   Time of concentration computation indicating
overland flow time and flow time in the swale, gutter, pipe or channel. All
drainage facilities shall be designed in conformity with drainage and design
standards and regulations as enacted and as may be amended from time to time
by the Board.



      (2)   Closed Conduit And Open Channel Design Computations:



         (a)   Size of pipe or channel cross section;



         (b)   Pipe or channel invert's slope in percent;



         (c)   Roughness coefficient;



         (d)   Flow velocities in feet per second;



         (e)   Design capacity in cubic feet per second;



      (3)   Head Loss Computations In Manholes And Junction Chambers:



      (4)   Hydraulic Gradient Computations, wherever applicable;



      (5)   Erosion Control Methods. All design calculations shall
conform with the drainage and design standards and regulations as enacted and
as may be amended from time to time by the Board.



   (c)   Additional Information.  The Board shall be empowered to
require such additional information to be included in a drainage plan that is
necessary to evaluate and determine the adequacy of the proposed drainage
facility.



   (d)   Certification Required. All drainage plans submitted under
this section to the Board for approval must be certified by a registered
professional engineer, land surveyor or architect engaged in storm drainage
design under whose supervision the plans were prepared. The certificate shall
be in the following form:



   CERTIFICATE OF SUFFICIENCY OF PLAN



   Permit Number         



Location where land alteration is occurring   



Plan Date             



I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge and belief:



   (1)   The drainage plan for this project is in compliance with the
drainage requirements of the Town of Dyer pertaining to this class of work.



   (2)   The calculations, designs, reproducible drawings, masters and
original ideas reproduced in this drainage plan are under my dominion and
control and they were prepared by me and my employees.



Signature                              Date   



Type or Printed Name                     Phone   



(SEAL)



Business Address   



Surv.            Eng.               Arch.   



Indiana Registration No.   



   (3)   Obligation To Observe.  All drainage plans submitted under
this section to the Board must include a certificate of obligation to observe
by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect engaged in
storm drainage design. The certificate shall be in the following form:



   CERTIFICATE OF OBLIGATION TO OBSERVE



   Permit Number         



Location where land alteration is occurring   



Plan Date            



   I will perform periodic observations of this project during
construction to determine that such land alteration is in accordance with
both the applicable drainage requirements and the drainage plan for this
project submitted for a drainage permit to the Storm Water



   Management Board.



Signature                           Date   



Type or Printed Name                  Phone   



               (SEAL)



Business Address   



Surv.               Eng.            Arch.   



Indiana Registration No.   



(Ord. No. 92-4, § 6, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-12  When Professionally Prepared And Certified Drainage Plan Are Not
Required.



   (a)   A drainage plan that does not contain as much information as
drainage plans prepared to fulfill the requirements of Section 6 and that is
not prepared or certified by a registered professional engineer, land
surveyor or architect engaged in storm drainage design, may be submitted when:



      (1)   No part of the parcel or property for which the drainage
permit is requested is in an impacted drainage area; and



      (2)   The primary basis on which a drainage permit is required
is the construction, enlargement or location, on a permanent foundation, of a
one-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or accessory structure appurtenant
to either a one- or two-family dwelling.



   (b)   The drainage plan must be submitted in triplicate and shall
indicate the nature and location of all work to be accomplished pursuant to a
drainage permit. The drainage plan must be neat, accurate and readable. One
(1) copy of the drainage plan will remain on file with the Board. The
following information must be submitted for approval under this section:



      (1)   The legal description and location of the property;



      (2)   The dimensions and borders of the parcel;



      (3)   The name and address of the owner;



      (4)   An arrow indicating North;



      (5)   Location and measurements of all existing and proposed
improvements, structures and paved areas on the site;



      (6)   Existing and proposed grading showing positive drainage
by contouring or sufficient spot elevations;



      (7)   Location of all existing or proposed swales, ditches,
culverts, drainage channels, surface and subsurface drainage devised and the
direction of the flow.



The drainage plan shall include information necessary to demonstrate
conformity with all drainage requirements of this ordinance. The plat map
shall illustrate the surface drainage pattern of the site away from
structures and the final distribution of surface water off site, either
preventing or planning for surface ponding.



   (c)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, submission
of a drainage plan shall not be required as a precondition for obtaining a
drainage permit in the instance of a one- or two-family dwelling constructed
in a subdivision for which a plat has been approved in accordance with the
Dyer Subdivision Control Ordinance, (see Chapter 10 of this Code) and for
which a drainage plan meeting the requirements of this Article has been
approved and a permit issued, so long as the permit applicant certifies that
the land alteration shall be accomplished in compliance with the
specifications and information found on the approved plat and on such
drainage plan. Any deviations from the drainage provisions as approved in the
plat and drainage plan for the subject plot must be submitted to the Board
for approval and the Board may require the submission of plans or other
information relative to the deviation which may be required as a precondition
to approval. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 7, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-13  Duration of Permit.



If the land alteration for which a permit has been issued has not commenced
within one (1) year from the date of its issuance, the permit shall expire
and no longer be of any force or effect; provided, however, the Board, for
good cause, shown in writing, may extend the validity of the permit for an
additional period of time not to exceed one (1) year.  If the drainage
activity is only partially completed and no substantial land alteration has
occurred on the site for a period of one (1) year, the permit shall expire
and no longer be of any force or effect; provided, however, the Board may,
for good cause, shown in writing, extend the validity of such permit to allow
completion of the work. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 8, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-14  Deviation From The Approved Plan.



Any significant deviation or change in the detailed plans and specifications
after granting of the drainage permit shall be filed in triplicate with and
approved by the Board prior to the time land alteration involving the change
occurs. A copy thereof, if approved, shall be attached to the original plans
and specification. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 9, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-15  Determination Of Impacted Drainage Areas.



   (a)   The Board is authorized, but is not required, to classify
certain geographical areas as impacted drainage areas and to enact and
promulgate regulations for land alteration in impacted drainage areas, in
addition to regulations which are applicable generally. Such classifications
and regulations may be later modified or rescinded by the Board.



   (b)   Action of the Board to classify or declassify any area as an
impacted drainage area, or to promulgate, repeal or modify any regulation in
regard thereto, shall be in compliance with the requirements of state
statute, regarding promulgation, repeal and modification of regulations
generally.



   (c)   In determining impacted drainage areas, the Board shall
consider such factors as topography, soil type and distance from adequate
drainage facilities. The following areas shall be designated as impacted
drainage areas, unless good reason for not including them is presented to the
Board:



      (1)   A floodway or floodplain as designated by the Dyer
Zoning Ordinance, the Dyer Flood Hazard Areas Ordinance, and the Federal
Emergency Management Authority (FEMA). In the case of any uncertainty, the
more restrictive designation shall apply.



      (2)   Land within seventy-five (75) feet of the centerline of
any drain.



      (3)   Land within fifty (50) feet of the centerline of a
natural drainageway, including a river, stream, gully, ditch or other
definite natural watercourse.



      (4)   Land where there is not an adequate outlet, taking into
consideration the capacity of depth of the outlet.



   (d)   A map identifying individual impacted drainage areas shall be
retained in the office of the Board, and shall be made conveniently available
to members of the public during regular business hours. (Ord. No. 92-4, §
10, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-16  Posting Of Bond.



   (a)   The Board may, as a prerequisite to the issuance of a drainage
permit, require the posting of a performance bond from a company licensed by
the State of Indiana to provide such surety, upon which the principal may be
the owner of the affected land, the developer, or any other party or parties
the Board believes necessary or helpful. Such bond shall name the Town of
Dyer as the party who can enforce the obligations thereunder, and shall be in
an amount established by the Board as adequate to provide surety for the
satisfactory completion of the improvements required by the drainage permit.
In the instance of platting, such bond may be a part of the total bonding
required by the Dyer Plan Commission.



   (b)   In instances where the Board has required a performance bond
pursuant to this section, it may, as an alternative to the posting of such
bond, accept other appropriate security, such as a properly conditioned
irrevocable letter of credit, which meets the same objectives as the
performance bond described in this section, subject to approval of any other
department or agency whose interest are protected by the same bonding
requirement. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 11, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-17  Dedication Of Easement.



The Board may, as a prerequisite to issuance of a drainage permit, require
the dedication of easements to the Town of Dyer and to owners of other
affected lands, by the owner of the parcel of land, relative to which
application for a drainage permit has been made, where such is necessary to
achieve satisfactory present and future drainage of the parcel and the area
surrounding the parcel.



As a minimum, the following covenant shall he executed by the owner or owners
of such land which will be included in a recorded plat, or in the recorded
restrictions:



   “It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any lot or parcel of
land within the area of this plat to comply at all times with the provisions
of the drainage plan as approved for this plat by the Storm Water Management
Board of the Town of Dyer and the requirements of all drainage permits for
this plat issued by the Board.“ (Ord. No. 92-4, § 12, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-18  Certificate Of Completion And Compliance.



Within ten (10) days after completion of a land alteration for which a
drainage permit was required and relative to which a certified plan was
required to be filed pursuant to Section 7-11, a registered-professional
engineer, land surveyor or architect, engaged in storm drainage design, shall
execute and file with the Board a certificate of completion and compliance.
Such certificate shall be in the following form:



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION AND COMPLIANCE



Location of premises on which land alteration was accomplished   



Inspection Date(s):                  Permit No.



Relative to plans prepared by:                   on    ,



I hereby certify that:



   (1)   I am familiar with drainage requirements applicable to such
land alteration; and



   (2)   I have personally observed the land alteration accomplished
pursuant to the above-referenced drainage permit; and



   (3)   To the best of my knowledge, information and belief such land
alteration has been performed and completed in conformity with all such
drainage requirements, except



Signature                           Date   



Type or Printed Name                     Phone   



(SEAL)



Business Address   



Surv.               Eng.               Arch.  �
�



Indiana Registration No.   



Accepted by:   



         Authorized Town of Dyer Representative (Ord. No. 92-4, §
13, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-19  General Authority For Investigations And Inspections.



   (a)   The power to make investigations and inspections of land
alterations shall be vested in both the Board and its authorized
representatives.



   (b)   Investigation and inspection of land alteration may be made at
any time by going upon, around or about the premises on which the land
alteration has occurred.



   (c)   Such investigation and inspection may be made either before,
during or after the land alteration is completed and it may be made for the
purposes, among others, of determining whether the land alteration meets
drainage requirements and ascertaining whether the land alteration has been
accomplished in a manner consistent with plans and specifications or a
certificate filed pursuant to this ordinance.



   (d)   Efforts to afford an opportunity for investigation and
inspection of the land alteration shall be made by persons working on or
having control of the land alteration, including making available a copy of
plans and specifications submitted to obtain a drainage permit. (Ord. No.
92-4 § 14, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-20  Fees For Permits Obtained After Commencement Of Work.



   (a)   If work for which a drainage permit is required by this
ordinance is commenced by the permit applicant without compliance with the
provisions of Section 7-8, the permit fee shall be double the applicable
amount stated in Section 7-25, and if work for which a permit is required is
completed by the permit applicant without compliance with the provisions of
Section 7-8, the permit fee shall be ten (10) times the applicable amount
stated in Section 7-25 plus the amount of the normal fee for the permit.



   (b)   This fee shall in no way limit the operation of penalties
provided elsewhere in this Article. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 15, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-21  Revocation Of Permits.



   (a)   The Board may revoke a drainage permit where the application,
plans or other supporting documents required by this Article reflect either;



      (1)   A false statement or misrepresentation as to material
fact; or



      (2)   Lack of compliance with drainage requirements; or



      (3)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this Article.
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 16, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-22  Stop-Work Order.



   (a)   Whenever a member of the Board, the Public Works Director, the
Building Commissioner, or  that officer's  authorized representative
discovers the existence of any of the  circumstances  listed below,  such
official  is empowered to issue an order requiring the suspension of the
land alteration. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall state to
what land alteration it is applicable and the reason for its issuance. One
(1) copy of the stop-work order shall be posted on the property in a
conspicuous place, one (1) copy shall be delivered to the permit applicant,
one (1) copy shall be delivered to the person doing the land alteration, one
(1) copy shall be delivered to the owner of the property, or his agent, and
one (1) copy shall be delivered to the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department.
The stop-work order shall state the conditions under which land alteration
may be resumed. A stop-work order may be issued if:



      (1)   Land alteration is proceeding in a manner reasonably
likely to cause harm to persons or property; or



      (2)   Land alteration is occurring in violation of a drainage
requirement and in such manner that if land alteration is allowed to proceed,
there is a probability that it will be substantially difficult to correct the
violation; or



      (3)   Land alteration has been accomplished in violation of a
drainage requirement and a period of time which is one-half (½) the time
period in which land alteration could be completed, but no longer than
fifteen (15) calendar days has elapsed since written notice of the violation
or noncompliance was either posted on the property in a conspicuous place or
given to the person doing the land alteration, without the violation of
noncompliance being corrected; or



      (4)   Land alteration for which a drainage permit is required
is proceeding without a drainage permit being in force.  In such an instance
the stop-work order shall indicate that the effect of the order terminates
when the required drainage permit is obtained.



   (b)   This sanction shall in no way limit the operation of penalties
provided elsewhere in this Article. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 17, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-23  General Penalty.



Any person, partnership or corporation violating the substantive or
procedural provisions of this ordinance or any regulation promulgated by the
Board shall be subject to a fine in any sum not exceeding Two Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00). Each day that the property remains in violation
of this Article or any regulation promulgated thereunder shall be considered
a separate offense. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 18, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-24  Variance Procedure.



   (a)   The Board shall have the power to modify or waive any minimum
drainage standard found in this ordinance or any regulations promulgated by
it. The Board may, but is not required to, grant such a modification or
waiver if an applicant for a drainage permit makes a substantial showing:



      (1)   That a minimum drainage standard regulation is
infeasible or unreasonably burdensome; and



      (2)   That an alternate plan submitted by the applicant will
achieve the same objective and purpose as compliance with minimum drainage
standards and regulations.



   (b)   The request for a variance together with supporting
information shall be made in writing to the Board who shall make a decision
within thirty (30) days. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 19, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-25  Application Fee.



Each application for a drainage permit shall be accomplished by an
application fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00), except, applications made pursuant
to Section 7-12, in which case the fee shall be Thirty Dollars ($30.00).
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 20, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-26  Exemption For Certain Governmental Units.



Drainage permits shall be obtained for land alteration activity accomplished
by or for a governmental unit and inspections as specified in this section
shall be allowed. Fees shall be required as specified in Section 7-25, except
for the following:



   (1)   Land alteration activity for which a fee cannot be charged by
the municipality because of federal or state law, or



   (2)   Land alteration activity accomplished by an employee or
contractor of the Civil Town of Dyer in the course of governmental, as
opposed to proprietary, duties. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 21, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-27  Drainage To Adequate Receiving Place.



A drainage facility shall be provided which allows drainage of water runoff
from each upper watershed area and from each portion of the parcel to a place
or places adequate to receive it.



Sec. 7-28  Characteristics Of Drainage Facility.



The drainage facility shall:



   (1)   Be capable of accommodating a 25-year rainfall intensity
without endangering the public safety and health, or causing significant
damage to property;



   (2)   Be durable;



   (3)   Be easily maintained;



   (4)   Be safe to persons and vehicles;



   (5)   Retard sedimentation;



   (6)   Retard erosion.



   (7)   Where necessary, or required by the Board, provide
retention/detention storage volume sufficient to accommodate a 100-year storm
with a 3-year release rate;



   (8)   Where necessary, or required by the Board, provide
retention/detention outlets designed to allow for no increase in runoff rate.
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 23, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-29  Accommodation Of Runoff Within Parcel.



The part of the drainage facility situated within the parcel, in addition to
complying with the requirements stated under Section 7-28:



   (a)   Shall drain each and every part of the parcel;



   (b)   Shall be sufficient to accept:



      (1)   The water runoff from the parcel after development; and



      (2)   The present water runoff from developed areas upstream;
and



      (3)   The present water runoff from undeveloped areas
upstream; and



      (4)   That part of the water runoff attributable to future
development in undeveloped areas upstream, which is not reasonably likely to
be accommodated in such upstream areas. The nature of the future development
shall be that projected by applicant, subject to the Board's agreement. The
amount of water runoff not accommodated in connection with such future
development shall be determined by good engineering practice, and may assume
use of retention-detention systems except for:



         (a)   Land alteration for which a permit is not required
by this section; and



         (b)   Parcels too small to effectively use a
retention-detention system; and



         (c)   Parcels relative to which it is technically
infeasible to use a retention-detention system; and



         (d)   Parcels relative to which the cost of providing a
retention-detention system is substantially more than providing for increased
runoff capacity through the parcel and through other downstream areas to a
place adequate to receive the runoff.



   (c)   May include improvements such as retention-detention systems
in the instance where the condition of the land makes use of such
improvements feasible and appropriate. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 24, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-30  Accommodation Of Runoff Downstream From Parcel.



As to drainage facilities located downstream and beyond the boundary of the
parcel, the drainage system within the parcel shall be designed such that
there will be no increase in peak discharge or runoff rates as a result of
the development unless said downstream facilities located beyond the limits
of the parcel are sufficient to accept:



   (1)   The water runoff from the parcel after development; plus



   (2)   The present water runoff from developed areas upstream; plus



   (3)   The present water runoff of those areas through which the
drainage facility passes. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 24, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-31  Acceptance Of Upstream Drainage.



At least one adequate opening shall be provided for each watershed at the
upstream edge of the parcel to accept upstream drainage. (Ord. No. 92-4, §
26, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-32  Habitable Structures To Be Free From 100-Year Floods.



The drainage facility shall be such that all habitable structures are free
from a 100-year flood as defined by the Firm Map Flood Area. (Ord. No. 92-4,
§ 27, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-33  Drainage Away From Structures.



The drainage facility shall direct storm water away from structures. (Ord.
No. 92-4, § 28, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-34  Damage To Adjoining Property.



Land alterations shall be accomplished so as to prevent damage to adjoining
property. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 29, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-35  Maximum Slope.



The maximum vertical fall of earth on the parcel shall be six inches (6") per
foot (two [2] horizontal to one [1] vertical), for riprapped areas and four
inches (4") per foot (three [3] horizontal to one [1] vertical) for
vegetation cover, unless otherwise approved by the Board. Slopes of other
materials other than earth shall be at the safe angle of repose for the
materials encountered. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 30, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-36  Permanency Of Grades.



Land alteration shall be accomplished in such a way that the grades left at
the time that the work is completed will be permanent and stable. Vegetable
materials may be buried in the ground only if placement will clearly not
interfere with the stability of fill areas and not cause settlement or
erosion. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 32, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-37  Subsurface Drainage.



Subsurface drainage sufficient to intercept seepage that would:



   (1)   Affect earth slope stability or stability of the building
foundation; or



   (2)   Create undesirable wetness;



shall be provided in areas having a high water table. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 32,
2-10-92)



Sec. 7-38  Blocking Drainageways.



No excavations or fills, structures, fences, trees, shrubs, or other like
impediments, shall block or otherwise impede the free drainage of surface
water in a drainage swale or channel. (Ord. No. 92-4, § 33, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-39  Exposed Areas To Be Protected; Potential Erosion Minimized.



Land alteration which strips the land of vegetation, including regrading,
shall be done in a way that will minimize erosion. Whenever feasible, natural
vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. Cut and fill
operations shall be kept to a minimum to ensure conformity with existing
topography so as to create the least potential erosion. (Ord. No. 92-4, §
34, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-40  Protection During Development.



During any land alteration, the following erosion control requirements shall
apply:



   (1)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5) days of
clearing or inactivity in construction;



   (2)   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method us
used, it shall become established within two (2) weeks or the Board of Storm
Water Management may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative
option employed;



   (3)   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined
herein on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure
stabilization;



   (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of
each workday;



   (5)   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer
or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at
the close of the construction season;



   (6)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or
flow of sediment from the site; and



   (7)   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes
shall be employed.



(Ord. No. 92-4, § 35, 2-10-92; Am. Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 7-41  Permanent Vegetation: Structural Methods.



Permanent and final vegetation or structural erosion-control devices shall be
installed as soon as practical under the circumstances. (Ord. No. 92-4, §
36, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-42  Sediment Control.



During any land alteration, the following sediment control requirements shall
apply:



   (1)   Settling Basins.  A settlement basin is an impoundment with a
controlled stormwater release structure for the purpose of detaining runoff
to allow excessive sediment to settle.  Settlement basins shall be required
at the outlet of any disturbed areas with major grading that are larger than
ten (10) acres.  The minimum volume of a sediment basin shall be sixty-seven
(67) cubic yards per acre for the total drainage area, measured below the top
of principal spillway or riser.  The clean-out volume shall be not less than
one-quarter (1/4) nor more than one-third (1/3) of the total storage volume
of a sediment basin. Maximum slopes shall be 2:1 (H:V) for excavated areas
and for compacted embankments.  Side slopes shall be 3:1 (H:V) or flatter,
which will allow people and equipment to safely negotiate slopes or to enter
the sediment basin for maintenance and repair purposes.  The length to width
ratio must be greater than 2:1 (L:W) for the principal flowpaths in order to
maximize residence time of stormwater within the sediment basin. The
principal outlet or spillway should be sized to adequately convey stormwater
runoff from the two (2) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm.



   (2)   Sediment Traps.  A sediment trap is a small temporary pond
that drains a disturbed area so that sediment can settle out.  Sediment
traps shall be required for any disturbed area which is greater than one (1)
acre and less than five (5) acres.  The minimum volume of a sediment trap
shall be sixty-seven (67) cubic yards per acre for the total drainage area. 
The outlet structure shall consist of layers of aggregate, rock or riprap
material.  The clean-out volume shall be not less than one-quarter (1/4) nor
more than one-third (1/3) of the total storage volume of a sediment basin.
Maximum slopes shall be 2:1 (H:V) for excavated areas and for compacted
embankments.  Side slopes shall be 3:1 (H:V) or flatter, which will allow
people and equipment to safely negotiate slopes or to enter the sediment
basin for maintenance and repair purposes.  The length to width ratio must
be greater than 2:1 (L:W) for the principal flowpaths in order to maximize
residence time of stormwater within the sediment basin.  An emergency
overflow weir should be provided at an elevation of at least one and one-half
feet (1.5') below the top of embankment, with a minimum freeboard of one foot
(1').



   (3)   Silt Fences.  Silt fencing shall be required on all disturbed
areas and shall be constructed pursuant to the following standards:



      a.   Install silt fence at level grade parallel to the contour
of the land; extend ends upslope to allow water to pond behind fence;
excavate a trench four inches (4") wide, eight inches (8") deep; install
fence with posts on the down slope side; place twelve inches (12") of fabric
in the trench, extending the bottom four inches (4") toward the upslope side;
join silt fence sections by using a wrap joint; backfill trench with soil
materials and compact; inspect at least weekly and after each storm event,
repairing as needed and removing sediment deposits when they reach one-half
(1/2) the fence height.



      b.   The maximum drainage area to the silt fence shall be
one-half (0.5) acre or less per one hundred feet (100') of fence.  Silt
fencing shall not be used in live or continuously flowing streams or channels
and shall not be used in ditches or swales which drain areas greater than one
(1) acre.  Silt fences shall not be used in steep ditches or swales where
the design flow is greater than two feet (2') per second.



      c.   Silt fencing fabric shall be comprised of synthetic
filter fabric manufactured from woven or nonwoven sheets of polypropylene,
nylon or polyester.  Typical properties for silt fencing fabric shall be as
follows:



         Tensile strength at 20% elongation:   50 pounds per
linear inch



         Burst strength:               180 psi



         Trapezoidal tear strength:         50 pounds



         Apparent opening size:         20 to 30 (US sieve
size)



         Flow rate:                  0.30 gallons
per minute per square foot



      d.   The maximum length of silt fence between posts is eight
feet (8').  Wood posts shall have a minimum dimension of two inches (2") x
two inches (2") for hard woods (i.e. oak) and three inches (3") x three
inches (3") for soft woods (i.e. pine).  Typical post length shall be
forty-eight inches (48").  There shall be a minimum of five (5) fasteners
for each wood post.



      e.   The maximum slope lengths for silt fence installations
shall be as follows:



         Land Slope                     Maximum
Slope Length



         Less than 2%                   100 feet



         From 2% to 5%                  75 feet



         From 5% to 10%                   50 feet



         From 10% to 20%                25 feet



         More than 20%                  15 feet



   (4)   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a vegetated
buffer strip combination with perimeter controls.



   (5)   Installation and maintenance of drop inlet protection devices,
utilizing either of the following techniques:



      a.   Silt Fence.  Construct a six inch (6") dike on the down
slope side to prevent bypass flow; dig a trench eight inches (8") deep and
four inches (4") wide; space support posts evenly against the inlet perimeter
a maximum of four feet (4') apart and drive them one and one-half feet (1.5')
into the ground; use enough fabric from a single roll to eliminate joints and
using lath and nails, fasten fabric to the posts; place twelve inches (12")
of fabric in the trench, extending the bottom four inches (4") toward the
upslope side; joint silt fence sections by using a wrap joint; backfill the
trench with soil materials and compact; cross brace the corners to prevent
collapse of the structure; inspect at least weekly and after each storm
event, and repair as needed, and remove accumulated sediments after every
storm.



      b.   Placement of a pre-manufactured drop inlet protection
device around the inlet perimeter, having at least the same design
characteristics set forth in the preceding paragraph.



      c.   Block and Gravel.  Place concrete blocks lengthwise on
their sides in a single row around the perimeter of the inlet, so that the
open ends face outward and not upward.  Ends of adjacent blocks should abut.
The height of the barrier can be varied by stacking combinations of blocks
that are typically six (6) or eight (8) inches high.  Place geotextile
filter fabric over the outside vertical face of the concrete blocks.  If
more than one (1) strip is necessary, overlap the strips by at least one foot
(1').  Place clean stone against the geotextile filter fabric up to the top
of the concrete blocks.  Use one-half inch (1/2") to three-quarter inch
(3/4") gravel.



   (6)   A temporary site access road provided at all sites, unless the
Town of Dyer Board of Storm Water Management determines that such temporary
access road is not necessary.  Such temporary site access road shall be
constructed pursuant to the following standards:



      Place six inches (6") of course aggregate (INDOT CA No. 2) over a
stable subgrade; construct the road at least twelve feet (12') wide and fifty
feet (50') long or the distance of the foundation; add stone as needed to
maintain six inches (6") of clean depth.



   (7)   Other measures required by the Town of Dyer Board of Storm
Water Management in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public
streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains.  (Ord. No.
92-4, § 37, 2-10-92; Am. Ord. No. 2004-20, § 2, 9-15-04)



Sec. 7-43  Additional Powers.



In connection with the issuance of drainage permits, or in connection with
the powers granted to the Board in Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5-1, et seq., if
the Board finds and determines that new drains should be constructed, or
existing drains should be required, maintained or reconfigured, and the Board
finds such action would be conducive to the public health, convergence or
welfare or of public benefit or utility, such action shall be undertaken by
the Board.



Upon approval of the Town Council, the Board may assess and collect user fees
from all of the property of the storm water district for such purposes; or
upon approval by the Town Council the Board may cause bonds to be issued to
pay for such construction, repair, maintenance or reconfiguration.



In all instances wherein a letter of map revision has been issued by Federal
Emergency Management Agency  (FEMA) after approval by the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources (IDNR) the plans and specifications adopted by the Board
for constructing, repairing, maintaining, or reconfiguring of any existing
drain shall be such as to assure that the channel shape and elevation of such
drain will be maintained as stated in the modeling submitted to obtain such
letter of map revision. Further, such specifications shall provide for the
removal of all bush, low growing trees and thick tall grasses which may have
developed on the banks of in the channel of such drains.



Nothing contained herein shall preclude the Board from proceeding under the
authority granted in Indiana Code, § 36-9-27-22 as to regulated drains as
defined in Indiana Code, § 36-9-27-2 or from proceeding under Indiana Code,
§ 36-9-27-98 if the Town Council appropriates the funds required to proceed
thereunder; provided further, that nothing herein shall be interpreted as
limiting the right of the Town Council to levy a tax for drainage purposes
the proceeds of which are to be used and administered by the Board.  (Ord.
No. 92-4, § 38, 2-10-92)



Sec. 7-44 through Sec. 7-49  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. BUILDING CODE. 1



                 



1   I.C., § 36-7-2-9, addresses building standards.



Division I. Background Provisions.



Sec. 7-50  Title.



This Article, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto, shall be
known as the “Building Code of the Town of Dyer, Indiana”, may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code” (Ord. No. 8-11, §
1, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-51  Purpose.



The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the protection
of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare, and for the
conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and
structures. (Ord. No. 88-11, § 2, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-52  Authority of Building Commissioner.



The Building Commissioner is authorized and directed to administer and
enforce all of the provisions of this code. Whenever in this code, it is
provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the
direction of the Building Commissioner or any other officer of the Town of
Dyer, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of
determining whether this code has been complied with; and no such provision
shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this
code shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or
to enforce this code in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Ord. No.
88-11, § 3, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-53  Scope.



The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alteration, repair,
use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings, structures, and
fences in the Town of Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 88-11, § 4, 3-8-88)



Sec. 7-54  Adoption Of Rules By Reference.



   (a)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are incorporated by reference in this ordinance
and shall include later amendments to those Articles as the same are
published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein:



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes



   (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards



         (b)   Indiana Building Code



   (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards



   (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes



         (a)   Indiana Residential Code



         (b)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes



      (3)   Article 15 - Industrialized Building Systems



      (4)   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes



         Indiana Plumbing Code



      (5)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes



   (a)   Indiana Electrical Code



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities



      (6)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes



         Indiana Mechanical Code



      (7)   Article 19 – Energy Conservation Codes



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code



      (8)   Article 20 – Swimming Pool Codes



         (a)   Indiana Swimming Pool Code



         (b)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and
standards are on file in the office of the Building Department of the Town of
Dyer, Indiana.



      (9)   Indiana Fire Code.



(Ord. No. 88-11, § 5, 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-55  Application For Permits.



No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless the
application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the proposed
location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications showing the
work to be done.  In addition, a copy of a Design Release, issued by the
State Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Indiana
Code § 22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before
issuance of a permit for construction covered by such Design Release. (Ord.
No. 88-11, § 6, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-56  Permit Required.



A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration or
repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00), using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner, and
all fees required by this Code shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town of Dyer. Electrical and Plumbing permits shall be issued only to duly
licensed electrical and plumbing contractors, or the property owner. (Ord.
No. 90-35, § 7, 11-13-90)



Sec. 7-57  Other Ordinances.



All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other
ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits, there
shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances. (Ord. No. 88-11, § 8,
2-2-88)



Sec. 7-58 and Sec. 7-59 Reserved for Future Use.



Division II.  Fees and Exemptions.



Sec. 7-60  Building and Moving Fees.



   (a)   Building and moving permits shall be as follows:



      (1)   For a total valuation from $0.00 to $1,000.00   $25.00



         For each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof   $ 7.00



         Building Inspection Fee (to be added to cost of building
permit)    $25.00



         Building Inspection Fee (for inspection requested by person
or



         firm other than the permit holder)   $100.00



      (2)   Reinspection required in addition to the three regular
inspections shall be at the owner or contractor's expense at the rate of
$50.00 for each reinspection. Said charge shall be paid prior to reinspection.



      (3)   In the event a "red tag" is issued for work in progress
without a permit, a fee of $350.00 shall be charged in addition to the
scheduled permit fee before any additional work may be done. Said fee is
reasonably related to the administrative cost required thereto and is
established pursuant to the Home Rule Authority of the Town.



      (4)   For purposes of determining the amount of the Building
Permit Fee, the Total Valuation shall be established by multiplying the
number of square feet of the ground floor living area by $100.00 per square
foot, exclusive of garages, breezeways, and open porches. The second level,
whether it be the lower area of a tri-level structure, lower level of a
bi-level or split level, or second floor of a two-story shall be computed at
$60 per square foot. In addition, open porches, garages, and breezeways shall
be computed at the rate of $20 per square foot.



For example, the Total Valuation of a tri-level with 1,500 square feet on the
main floor, 750 square feet on the lower level, 600 square feet in the
garage, and a breezeway consisting of 200 square feet would be computed as
follows:



         1,500 sq. ft.      x   $100.00   $150,000.00



         750 sq. ft.      x   $60.00   $45,000.00



         600 sq. ft.      x   $20.00   $12,000.00



         200 sq. ft.      x   $20.00   $4.000.00



(Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[A], 3-8-88; Am.  Ord. 88-29, § 9[A], 5-10-88; Am.
Ord. No. 95-5, § X, 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 98-11, § 1, 7-14-98; Am. Ord. No.
2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08; Am. Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13-14)



Sec. 7-61  Wrecking and Other Building Permits.



Wrecking and other building permit fees shall be as follows:



   1000 square feet or less   $25.00



   Over 1000 square feet to 2500 square feet   $30.00



   Over 2500 square feet, for each 2500 square feet or major fraction
thereof   $35.00



   Occupancy, original certificate   $10.00



   Renewal of Certification   $20.00



   Issuance of copy of Certificate   $1.00



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[B], 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-62  Driveway Permits.



Driveway Permit Fees shall be as follows:



   Residential and Commercial   $40.00



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[C], 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-63  Sign Permits.



Sign Permit Fees shall be as follows:



   (1)   For a total valuation of$0 to $500   $25.00



      For each $500 or fraction thereof   $10.00



      Reinspection fee   $15.00



      Temporary Sign (per sign)   $10.00



      Annual banner permit fee is prorated at $10.00 per month, from
the first day of the month in which the permit is issued.



   (2)   A fee shall not be charged for installation of a temporary
sign by a religious or charitable organization. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[D],
2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 2005-3, 2-16-05)



Sec. 7-64  Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer Work.



Plumbing, House Drainage and Sewer Fees shall be as follows:



   (1)   Permit cost shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00), plus an
additional ten dollars ($10.00) for each sink, closet, lavatory, bath tub,
shower, drainage fountain, urinal, laundry tray, automatic washer, garbage
disposal, dishwasher, slop sink, sump pump, sill cock, floor drain, inside
down spout, range boiler and/or side arm heater, water heater, storage tank,
air conditioning unit requiring water connection, and humidifier requiring
water connection, plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional outlet
provided for future rough in.  (Am. Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13-14)



   (2)   The minimum plumbing permit fee shall be one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00), which shall include the administration fee of seventy-five
dollars ($75.00). (Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[E], 2-8-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 2,
7-14-98; Am. Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13-14)



   (3)   Reinspection or inspection subsequent to “red tag” shall
be at the expense of the owner or applicant at the rate of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each reinspection. Said charge shall be paid prior to
reinspection.  (Am. Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13-14)



   (4)   Permit fee for plumbing work valued at less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), and shall require one
inspection at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00). Reinspection shall be at
the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) each. (Ord. No. 88-29, § 9[E], 5-10-88;
Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 2, 7-14-98; Am. Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08; Am.
Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13-14)



   (5)   Plumbing work outside of a building foundation and plumbing
work on any connections outside of a building foundation up to the main town
sanitary sewer line servicing the building including, but not limited to, the
installation, repair, or replacement of the line or sanitary clean out are
excluded from the permit requirements and fees in Sections 7-64(1) through
(4) above.  The permit fee for such work shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
The inspection for this work shall be performed by personnel from the Public
Works Department.  Re-inspection or inspection subsequent to a “Red Tag”
shall be at the expense of the owner or applicant at the rate of forty
dollars ($40.00) for each re-inspection.  The fees shall be paid prior to
re-inspection.  (Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 5-10-12)



Sec. 7-65  Electrical Installation.



Electrical installation fees shall be as follows:



Permit cost shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for issuance or permit,
plus inspection expense as follows:



   (1)   All residential services any size will be at the rate of one
dollar ($1.00) per ampere. All commercial and industrial services will be at
one dollar ($1.00) per ampere. All three phase services will be at the rate
of one dollar and fifteen cents ($1.15) per ampere. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 9
[F][1], 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 7-14-98)



   (2)   Temporary pole permit shall be at the rate of twenty-five
dollars ($ 25.00) for permit, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one
inspection. Reinspection shall be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
reinspection.  In the event a temporary service, other than a temporary
pole, is converted to a permanent service, credit shall be given for the cost
of the temporary service. (Ord. No. 90-13, § 9 [F][2], 3-13-90; Am. Ord. No.
98-11, § 3, 7-14-98)



   (3)   All room additions, remodels, etc., without a change of
service shall be at the rate of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per inspection.



   (4)   Normal inspections shall consist of one rough and one final
inspection. All additional inspections caused by improper installation shall
be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inspection.



   (5)   Minimum inspection fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[F][3]-[5], 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 7-14-98)



   (6)   Permit and inspection shall be required for all electrical
signs and burglar alarms monitored by the town at the rate of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) per sign or burglar alarm inspection. (Ord.No. 88-11, § 9
[F][6], 3-8-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 7-14-98)



   (7)   In the event an application for permit shall be made for which
the foregoing fee schedule is not applicable, the application shall be
reviewed by the inspector and a fair and equitable fee will be determined
consistent with the foregoing fee schedule, subject to review by the Town
Council at the rate of the electrical inspector or the applicant. (Ord. No.
88-1, § 9 [F][7], 2-2-88)



   (8)   Electrical permit cost for installation or construction of
central air conditioning, above ground swimming pool, fireplace, or
unattached garage, shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00); and shall require
one inspection at a cost of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Reinspection, if
necessary, shall be at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) each.



(Ord. No. 88-29, § 9 [F][8], 5-10-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 7-14-98; Am.
Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08; Am. Ord.  No. 2014015, 11-13-14)



Sec. 7-66  Payment Fees.



The amount so required for each permit shall be paid by the party or parties
contemplating such erection, construction, repair, changes or additions,
electrical, or plumbing installations, to the Clerk-Treasurer of said Town at
his/her office in the Town Hall. The electrical and plumbing permit fees in
the amount of $25.00 each, together with all permit fees for building and
moving permits, and wrecking and other building permits, collected by the
Clerk-Treasurer shall be reported to the Town Council on a monthly basis
after having been paid into the Clerk Treasurer's office, and shall be and
become a part of the General Fund of the Town. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [G],
2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 4, 7-14-98)



Sec. 7-67  Reinspection Fees.



An amount equal to three-quarters (¾) of the electrical inspection fee shall
be paid to the electrical inspector as his/her inspection fee. An amount
equal to three-quarters (¾) of the plumbing inspection fee shall be paid to
the plumbing inspector as his/her inspection charge. The entire reinspection
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per reinspection shall be paid to the
Clerk-Treasurer, with twenty-five dollars ($25.00) being kept for
administrative expenses and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) being paid to the
inspector who makes the reinspection. The permit fee, and the balance of the
electrical and plumbing inspection fees, shall be used to offset the
administration expenses incurred by the Town in issuing the permit, and to
provide for other miscellaneous expenses of the building department including
salaries of the Building Commissioner, office help, and for adequate space.
All such fees shall be paid out upon sworn statements or claims filed with
the Town Council, as other claims against said Town of Dyer are paid. In the
event the Building Commissioner or Building Inspector performs the plumbing
inspection, the entire plumbing permit fee shall be payable to the Town of
Dyer to cover a portion of the salary of the Building Commissioner.  (Am.
Ord. No. 2014-15, 11-13- 14)



Sec. 7-68  Swimming Pools.



Permit Fees for Swimming Pools shall be as follows:



   Above ground swimming pools   flat fee of $25.00



   Inground pools:



   For a valuation of $ 0 - $1000   $25.00



   For each additional $1,000 valuation or portion thereof   $ 7.00



Plumbing and Electrical Permits and inspection fees shall be additional.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [I], 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 5, 7-14-98; Am. Ord.
No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-69  Water.



Permit Fees for Water shall be as follows:



   Construction Water (4 months or less)   $ 70.00



Construction Water (each additional month to date of occupancy permit)   $
28.00



   (Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[J], 2-2-88)



   Water Tap 5/8" - ¾"   $375.00



   Water Tap 1"   $450.00



   Larger than 1"   Cost of meter larger than 1" but not less than
$450.00



   (Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94)



   Automatic fire sprinkling system   $ 30.00



   Plus $1.00 per head.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [J], 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-70  Exemptions.



The Town and all political subdivisions thereof, the County of Lake, the
State of Indiana, and the United States  of America shall obtain all
required permits prior to constructing, remodeling, renovating, improving, or
demolishing any building or structure on their properties.



The Town and all political subdivisions thereof, the County of Lake, the
State of Indiana, and United States of America shall be exempt from paying
any fee for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, and
occupancy permits.



Religious organizations shall obtain all required permits prior to
constructing, remodeling, renovating, improving, or demolishing any building
or structure on their properties.



Religious organizations shall be exempt from paying any fee for building
permits, certificates of zoning compliance, and occupancy permits.



The Town and all political subdivisions thereof, the County of Lake, the
State of Indiana, the United States of America, and religious organizations
shall also be exempt from payment of the Town's portion of plumbing and
electrical permit fees.



   (1)   All political subdivisions and religious organizations, or
their contractors, shall be required to pay inspection fees to the plumbing
and electrical inspectors.



   (2)   All political subdivisions and religious organizations, or
their contractors, shall be required to pay the cost of sanitary and/or
stormwater and water tap-in fees.



   (3)   The political subdivisions, religious organizations, or their
contractors shall provide the Town of Dyer with a two (2) year performance
bond or letter-of-credit, in an amount equal to five percent (5%) of the
estimated cost of Construction or improvements.



Indiana Public School Corporations may apply to the Town Council for an
exemption from paying any fee for building permits, certificates of zoning
compliance, and occupancy permits.  The Town Council may, in its sole
discretion, grant a full or partial exemption from said fees upon submission
of a written request for the same.



(Ord. No. 92-17), § 9 [K], 5-12-92; Am. Ord. No. 2012-12, 8-13-12)



Sec. 7-71  Occupancy Escrow Fee.



   (a)   The Town Council of the Town of Dyer finds it necessary to
establish an occupancy escrow fee in an effort to reduce the number of
structures being inhabited prior to their obtaining an occupancy permit.



   (b)   The occupancy escrow fee will apply only to new construction
the following fee schedule shall apply:



      Residential Construction   $1,000.00



      Commercial Construction which includes schools, churches,
hospitals, etc. $1000.00 for the first 3,000 square feet and $250.00 for
every 500 square feet thereafter.



   (c)   These escrow fees will be refunded to the applicant as long as
they do not occupy their structure prior to receiving an occupancy permit to
do so.



   (d)   In the event that a structure is occupied prior to receiving
an occupancy permit, then that amount held in escrow shall be forfeited to
the general fund of the Town of Dyer.



   (e)   It is further necessary to amend Ordinance 88-1 to provide for
a fee in the event that a permit applicant makes significant changes to a
permit such that the original permit becomes void and a new permit must be
issued.



   (f)   It is established that a fee of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00)
shall be charged to the applicant in the event of the foregoing.



(Ord. No. 93-10, 5-11-88; Am. Ord. No. 98-11, § 6, 7-14-98; Am. Ord. No.
2003-23, 10-21-03; Am. Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-72 through Sec. 7-74  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Permit Procedures and Related Regulations.



Sec. 7-75  Review Of Application.



   (a)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Commissioner shall:



      (1)   Review all building permit applications to determine
full compliance with the provisions of this code.



      (2)   Review all building permit applications for new
construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.



      (3)   Review building permit applications for major repairs
within the flood plain area having special flood hazards to determine that
the proposed repair:



         a.   Uses construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



         b.   Uses conduction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



   (b)   All new construction improvement location permit applications
shall be accompanied by 2 copies of a Plat of Survey of the subject real
property, which shall which shall identify the proposed lot corner elevations
as well as the building corner elevations. These proposed elevations shall be
in conformance with the development’s approved grading plan.  In the
absence of an approved grading plan, elevation data for new construction
shall not exceed the elevation of surrounding properties unless the natural
contour of the real property necessitates the contrary.



   (c)   Erosion and sediment control measures shall be in place prior
to the issuance of an improvement location (building) permit. This includes
construction of a barrier such as a silt fence to prevent soil erosion from
leaving the site as well as placing a stone driveway of a sufficient width to
allow construction vehicles and equipment to access the site without dragging
mud and debris off of the site and onto the roads.



   (d)   All new construction shall be required to provide a plat of
survey to be submitted to the building department at the time that the
foundation is constructed. This plat of survey will be used to determine that
the foundation complies with the grading plan for the development as well as
to ensure that the foundation is properly located in compliance with the
setback regulations for the particular zoning district in which it is located.



   (e)   All new construction shall be required to provide an as-built
plat of survey indicating the lot corner elevations as well as the building
corner elevations.



   (f)   All new construction shall be required to have a dumpster and
portable bathroom on site during the construction of the building. Both items
are to be kept on the property that they serve and shall not be placed in the
street. In the event that a contractor has more than one lot under
construction in the same development he or she shall be allowed to provide
one dumpster for multiple lots to the extent that said dumpster can
accommodate the debris that results from the construction activity.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 10, 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 2002-11, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No.
2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-76  Inspection and Reinspection Procedures.



   (a)   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work
being done as are necessary to insure full compliance with the provisions of
the Article and the terms of the permit. The permit holder shall call for
each inspection. The inspector shall have forty-eight (48) hours (exclusive
of weekends and/or holidays) from time of notification to make the requested
inspection. Reinspection of work found to be incomplete or not ready for
inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in
the Code.



   (b)   Upon completion of the Project and prior to any request for
any final inspection, an as-built Plat of Survey shall be submitted with the
as-built elevations of the lot corners as well as the as-built elevations of
the structure corners.  These elevations shall be in conformance with the
development’s approved grading plan.



(Am. Ord. No. 2002-11, 4-16-01)



Sec. 7-77  Inspection Assistance.



   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designated representative,
shall assist the Building commissioner in the inspection of fire suppression,
detection and alarm systems and shall provide reports of such inspection to
the Building Commissioner. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 12, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-78  Entry.



Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or his
duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any building,
structure or premises in the Town of Dyer to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this code. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 13, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-79  Stop Order.



Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the
Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in writing served
on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any
such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building
Commissioner to proceed with the work. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 14, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-80  Certification Of Occupancy.



   (a)   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure
erected, altered or repaired after the adoption of this Article shall be
issued unless such building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of the ordinance. It shall be unlawful to
occupy any such building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner.



   (b)   In addition, lot inspections shall be required prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the same shall be conducted by the
Public Works Department.  Upon the request of the permit holder for the
first final inspection of a given discipline (plumbing, electrical or
building), the lot inspection request shall be forwarded by the Dyer Building
Department to the Dyer Public Works Department whereupon the lot inspection
shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the request (exclusive of
weekends and/or holidays) in the same manner as all other inspections.



   (c)   Some lot improvements are weather dependent such as the
installation of sidewalks and driveways, final grading, sodding, seeding, and
the like.  In the event that weather is a genuine factor in a lot lacking
all of the final required improvements, an occupancy permit may be issued
subject to the withholding of the occupancy escrow, until such time as all of
the conditions required for a satisfactory lot inspection have been met.
Failure to complete all final required lot improvements within one year of
the initial lot inspection shall result in the forfeiture of the escrow as
required by the building permit application. Forfeiture of the escrow does
not void the builder’s responsibility to complete the lot improvements.
Forfeited escrows will be used to help complete the lot improvements to the
extent they are able to do so.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 15, 2-2-88; Am. Ord. No. 2002-11, 4-16-02; Am. Ord. No.
2008-03, § 1, 3-19-08)



Sec. 7-81  Workmanship.



All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 16, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-82  Violations.



It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
leassee, subleassee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the Town of Dyer or cause or
permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of
this Code.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 17, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-83  Right Of Appeal.



All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building Commissioner's
decision first through the Board of Zoning Appeals and then to the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana in accordance with the
provisions of Indiana Code, §§ 4-21-13-2-7 and 4-21.5-3-7.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 18, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-84  Remedies.



The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the Town of Dyer bring actions
in the Criminal or Civil Courts of Lake County, Indiana, for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any
order or orders made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for
mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the
penalties provided for in this Article. (Ord. No. 88-1, § 19, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-85  Penalties.



If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of
this ordinance, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the
Building Commissioner, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful
order given by the Building Commissioner in connection with the provisions of
this Article for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm
or corporation shall be fined in any sum not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00)
payable through the Ordinance Violations Bureau for the first violation, and
not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) thereafter. Each day of such
unlawful activity as in prohibited by the first sentence of this section
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 88-1, § 20, 2-2-88)



Sec. 7-86 through Sec. 7-89  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Enforcement Of Building Standards Procedures.



Sec. 7-90  State Law Adopted By Reference.



Indiana Code, § 36-7-9, et seq., is adopted by the Town of Dyer for
enforcement of building standards. (Ord. No. 89-20, § 1, 6-13-89)



Sec. 7-91  Role of Building Commissioner.



The Building Commissioner is appointed by the Town Council as the executive
department responsible for the administration of building standards in the
Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 89-20, § 2, 6-13-89)



Sec. 7-92  Hearing Authority.



The Town Manager is hereby appointed as the hearing authority for all
purposes of Indiana Code, § 36-7-9-7, et seq. (Ord. No. 89-20, § 3,
6-13-89; Am. Ord. No. 2007-05, 2-21-07)



Sec. 7-93  Substantial Property Interest.



A person shall be deemed to have a “substantial property interest” if he
or she is the holder of the fee simple title, or a portion thereof, or is
purchasing the subject property on contract, which has been duly recorded in
the Recorder's Office of Lake County, Indiana. (Ord. No. 89-20, § 4, 6-13-89)



Sec. 7-94 through Sec. 7-97  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. MISCELLANEOUS BUILDING REGULATIONS.



Sec. 7-98  Registration of Contractors and Subcontractors and Penalties.



   (a)   Sections 4-98 through 4-110 of the Dyer Town Code set forth
the requirements for certification registration procedures for contractors
and subcontractors.



   (b)   A person who violates any of the provisions of Sections 4-98
through 4-109 in a calendar year shall be fined for the first violation the
sum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) payable through the Ordinance Violations
Bureau. All subsequent violations shall be pursued consistent with the
provisions of Section 4-110 of this Code.



Sec. 7-99  Restricting The Size of Residential Water Closets.



   (a)   All future residential construction be required to install not
larger than 1.6 gallons water closets (toilet tank) in any bathroom
hereinafter constructed in the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



   (b)   This ordinance shall take effect June 1, 1993. (Ord. No. 93-3,
2-8-93)



Sec. 7-100 through Sec. 7-118  Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 8
TRAFFIC AND PARKING REGULATIONS



ARTICLE 1. REGULATIONS ADDRESSING OFF-ROAD AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES.



Sec. 8-1   Definitions and Interpretation.



Sec. 8-2   Regulations for Snowmobiles and Off-Road Vehicles.



Sec. 8-3   Violations.



Sec. 8-4   Traffic Regulations for Motorized Bicycles.



Sec. 8-5   Reserved.



Sec. 8-6   Miscellaneous Rules and Regulations.



Sec. 8-7 Through Sec. 8-9 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. BICYCLE REGULATIONS.



Sec. 8-10   Bicycle Usage Regulations.



Sec. 8-11   Equipment Requirements.



Sec. 8-12   Compliance with Traffic Code.



Sec. 8-13   Reserved.



Sec. 8-14   Reserved.



Sec. 8-15   Penalty.



Sec. 8-16 Through Sec. 8-19 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. TRAFFIC CODE OF THE TOWN OF DYER.



   Division I. In General.



Sec. 8-20   Definitions.



   Division II. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations.



Sec. 8-21   Authority of Police Department and Fire Department Officials.



Sec. 8-22   Obedience to Personnel.



Sec. 8-23   Permits for Parades.



Sec. 8-24 and Sec. 8-25 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Pedestrian Obedience to Traffic Signals.



Sec. 8-26   Pedestrians to Comply.



Sec. 8-27 and Sec. 8-28 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Method of Parking.



Sec. 8-29   Standing or Parking Close to Curb.



Sec. 8-30   Angle Parking Prohibited.



Sec. 8-31 and Sec. 8-32 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V. Miscellaneous Driving Rules.



Sec. 8-33   Funeral Processions.



Sec. 8-34   Driving Through Funeral Procession.



Sec. 8-35   Restrictions on Backing.



Sec. 8-36   Vehicles Shall Not Be Driven on Sidewalks.



Sec. 8-37   Boarding or Alighting from Vehicles.



Sec. 8-38   Unlawful Riding.



Sec. 8-39 and Sec. 8-40 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VI. Traffic Control Devices.



Sec. 8-41   Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.



Sec. 8-42   Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control.



Sec. 8-43   Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices Located Within
the Town and Within Construction Areas in the Town.



Sec. 8-44   When Traffic Control Devices are Required for Enforcement
Purposes.



Sec. 8-45   Traffic Control Signal Legend.



Sec. 8-46   Flashing Signals.



Sec. 8-47   Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.



Sec. 8-48   Interference with Official Traffic Control Devices or Railroad
Signs or Signals.



Sec. 8-49   and Sec. 8-50 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on
Certain Streets.



Sec. 8-51   Application of Division.



Sec. 8-52   Regulation Not Exclusive.



Sec. 8-53   Special Regulations for Street Work and Snow.



Sec. 8-54   Illegally Parked or Abandoned Vehicles.



Sec. 8-55   Parking on Private Property Prohibited.



Sec. 8-56   Impounding of Vehicles of Repeated Offenders.



Sec. 8-57   Towing and Storing Fees.



Sec. 8-58   Storage of Vehicle.



Sec. 8-59   Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets.



Sec. 8-60   Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets,
Except Sunday and Legal Holidays.



Sec. 8-61   Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets - to 15 Minutes - 8:00
am to 6:00 pm.



Sec. 8-62   Parking Limited on Certain Streets - Two Hours - 8:00 am to
6:00 pm.



Sec. 8-63 and Sec. 8-64 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VIII. Restricted Streets.



Sec. 8-65   Deliveries on Restricted Streets by Trucks.



Sec. 8-66 and Sec. 8-67 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IX. Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specific Places.



Sec. 8-68   Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited. No Signs Required.



Sec. 8-69   Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.



Sec. 8-70   Parking in Alleys.



Sec. 8-71 and Sec. 8-72 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division X. Freight and Passenger Loading Zones.



Sec. 8-73   Freight and Passenger Loading Zones.



Sec. 8-74   Permits for Freight Loading Zones.



Sec. 8-75   Permanent Freight Loading Zones.



Sec. 8-76 and Sec. 8-77 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XI. Through Streets.



Sec. 8-78   Through streets.



Sec. 8-79   Stop Signs.



Sec. 8-80   Four Way Stop Signs.



Sec. 8-81   Stop When Traffic Obstructed.



Sec. 8-82 and Sec. 8-83 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XII. U-Turns.



Sec. 8-84   U-Turns Prohibited.



Sec. 8-85   Safety Belts.



Sec. 8-86   Exceptions.



Sec. 8-87 and Sec. 8-88 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XIII. One Way Streets and Alleys.



Sec. 8-89   Authority to Post Signs.



Sec. 8-90   One Way Streets and Alleys.



Sec. 8-91 and Sec. 8-92 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XIV. Speed Regulations.



Sec. 8-93   Speed Laws of State Statute Applicable-Exception.



Sec. 8-94   Special Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-95 and Sec. 8-96 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XV.  Penalties and Procedure on Arrest.



Sec. 8-97   Procedure on Arrest.



Sec. 8-98   Forms and Notices of Arrest or Appearance.



Sec. 8-99   Failure to Obey Notice or Summons.



Sec. 8-100   Notice of Illegally Parked Vehicles.



Sec. 8-101   Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.



Sec. 8-102 and Sec. 8-103 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XVI. Fines and Forfeitures.



Sec. 8-104   Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures.



Sec. 8-105   Failure to Comply or Destroying Notice.



Sec. 8-106   Moving Offenses.



Sec. 8-107   Town Deferral Program.



Sec. 8-108 Through Sec. 8-114 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XVII. Traffic Surveys and Authority to Post Temporary Signs.



Sec. 8-115   Surveys and Posting of Temporary Signs.



Sec. 8-116 Through Sec. 8-119 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XVIII. Penalties, Severability, Short Title and Repeal.



Sec. 8-120   Penalties.



Sec. 8-121   Severability.



Sec. 8-122   Short Title.



Sec. 8-123   Repeal.



Sec. 8-124 Through Sec. 8-129 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division XIX. Schedules.



Sec. 8-130   Schedule 1 - Traffic Control Signals at Intersections.



Sec. 8-131   Schedule 2 - Parking Prohibited After Snow is Two (2) inches
Deep.



Sec. 8-132   Schedule 3 - Parking Prohibited at All Times.



Sec. 8-133   Schedule 4 - Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets Two
Hours - 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.



Sec. 8-134   Schedule 5 - Restricted Streets.



Sec. 8-135   Schedule 6 - Through Streets.



Sec. 8-136   Schedule 7 - Single Stop Streets.



Sec. 8-136A   Schedule 7A - Two Way Stop Streets.



Sec. 8-137   Schedule 8 - Three Way Stop Streets.



Sec. 8-138   Schedule 9 - Four Way Stop Streets.



Sec. 8-139   Schedule 10 - 15 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-139A   Schedule 10A - 20 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-139B   Schedule 10B - 30 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-140   Schedule 11 - 35 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-140A   Schedule 12 - 45 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



Sec. 8-141   Schedule 13 - One Way Streets.



Sec. 8-142   Schedule 14 - Secondary Arteries.



Sec. 8-143 Through Sec. 8-149 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. OTHER VEHICLES AND ROAD REGULATIONS.



   Division I. Fire Lanes.



Sec. 8-150   Fire Lanes - Definition and Marking.



Sec. 8-151   Designated Fire Lanes - Size and Markings.



Sec. 8-152   Penalties.



Sec. 8-153   Parking Prohibited by Building Fire Lanes - Penalty.



Sec. 8-154 and Sec. 8-155 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Towing and Storage of Vehicles.



Sec. 8-156   Towing of Vehicles.



Sec. 8-157   Towing Contractors and Garage Keepers.



Sec. 8-158   Delivery of Vehicles Towed Due to a Public Safety Violation.



Sec. 8-159   Disposition of Unclaimed Impounded Vehicles.



Sec. 8-160   Fees and Charges.



Sec. 8-161   Towing Fee Schedule.



Sec. 8-162   Tow Release Services Fee.



Sec. 8-163 Through Sec. 8-164 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Parking for the Disabled.



Sec. 8-165   Definitions.



Sec. 8-166   Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces.



Sec. 8-167   Penalties.



Sec. 8-168   Business Establishments to Provide Handicap Parking-Penalties.



Sec. 8-169 Through Sec. 8-173 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Weight Limits.



Sec. 8-174   Weight Limits on Sheffield Avenue.



Sec. 8-175   Penalty.



Sec. 8-176   Ten (10) Ton Gross Weight Limit Streets.



Sec. 8-177   Exceptions Require Permit.



Sec. 8-178   Bond Requirements.



Sec. 8-179   Damage to Streets.



Sec. 8-180   Form of Temporary Permit



Sec. 8-181   Display of Permit.



Sec. 8-182   Penalty.



Sec. 8-183   Weight Limit on Keilman Street.



Sec. 8-184 Through Sec. 8-187 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V. Miscellaneous Regulations.



Sec. 8-188   Driving on Sidewalk Prohibited.



Sec. 8-189   Parking Limitation for Parking Vehicles With Live Animals.



Sec. 8-190   Obedience and Stopping at Railroad Crossings.



Sec. 8-191   Non-moving Trains Prohibited from Blocking Streets at Railway
Crossings.



Sec. 8-192   Penalty.



Sec. 8-193 Through Sec. 8-200 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VI. Renaming Streets.



Sec. 8-201   Renaming Streets Within Pinewood Estates.



Sec. 8-202 Through Sec. 8-207 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Local Roads and Streets.



Sec. 8-208   Acceptance of Local Roads and Streets.



Sec. 8-209 Through 8-214 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VIII. Vehicle Identification.



Sec. 8-215   Motor Vehicle Inspections Fees.



Sec. 8-216   and Sec. 8-217 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1. REGULATIONS ADDRESSING OFF-ROAD VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES.



Sec. 8-1  Definitions and Interpretation.



   (a)   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



      (1)   Motorized Bicycle.1 A bicycle with or without operable
pedals and an internal combustion engine or battery-powered motor which may
be propelled by human power or by an internal combustion engine or
battery-powered motor, or by both, and, when powered by an internal
combustion engine, having a rating of no more than one and five tenths (1.5)
brake horsepower, and a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (50) cubic
centimeters, an automatic transmission, and a maximum design speed of not
more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour on a flat surface.



      (2)   Off-Road Vehicle. Any motor driven vehicle capable of
cross country travel, without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately
over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. It
includes, but is not limited to, a multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire
vehicle, amphibious vehicle, ground effect air cushion vehicle, mini-bike,
snowmobile, or other means of transportation deriving motive power from a
source other than muscle or wind.  It does not include a farm vehicle used
for military or law enforcement purposes, construction, mining, or other
industrial related vehicles used in performance of its common function or a
registered aircraft.



      (3)   Operate.2 The word “operate” or any form or tense
thereof shall mean to ride in or on, to drive, to use, to put into action,
cause to function, or to be in actual physical control of a vehicle as
defined herein.



      (4)   Operator.3 Any person who drives, operates, or is in
actual physical control of a vehicle defined herein.



      (5)   Owner.4  A person who holds the legal title of a
vehicle, or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the
conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance
of the conditions stated in the agreement, and with an immediate right of
possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a
mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional
vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of
this article.



      (6)   Pedestrian. Any person afoot.



      (7)   Snowmobile. An off-road vehicle designed for travel
primarily on snow or ice, of any type, which utilizes sled type runners or
skis, or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other similar
means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated. (Ord. No. 91-25,
§ 1, 10-8-91; Ord. No. 95-21, 8-8-95)



                   



1   I.C., § 9-13-2-109, defines “motorized vehicle”.



2   I.C., § 9-13-2-117.5, defines “operate”.



3   I.C., § 9-13-2-118, defines “operator”.



4   I.C., § 9-13-2-121, defines “owner”.



Sec. 8-2  Regulations for Snowmobiles and Off-Road Vehicles. 5



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile or
off-road vehicle under the following circumstances:



      (1)   On private property of another without the express
permission to do so by the owner or occupant of said property.



      (2)   On public school ground, park property, playgrounds and
recreational areas without express provision or permission to do so by the
proper public authority and the execution of a waiver of liability form.



      (3)   On any street or sidewalk within the town; provided,
however, that the police department may authorize use of a snowmobile or
off-road vehicle on the public streets, highways, and rights-of-way within
its jurisdiction during emergencies when conventional motor vehicles cannot
be used for transportation due to snow or other extreme highway conditions.



      (4)   In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary, or
unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the reasonable peace and
quiet of other persons.



      (5)   In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to
endanger the safety of any person or the property of any other person.



      (6)   While under the influence of intoxicating liquor,
fermented malt beverages, or controlled substances on drugs.



   (b)   All snowmobiles and off-road vehicles operated within the town
shall have the following equipment:



      (1)   Mufflers which are properly attached and which reduce
the noise of operation of the vehicle to the minimum noise necessary for
operating the vehicle and no person shall use a muffler cut out, bypass, or
similar device on said vehicle.



      (2)   Adequate brakes in good working condition and at least
one headlight and one taillight.



      (3)   A safety or-called “deadman” throttle in operating
condition; a safety or “deadman” throttle is defined as a device which
when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle causes a motor to
be disengaged from driving tract.



   (c)   It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a snowmobile or
off-road vehicle to leave or allow said vehicle to be or remain unattended on
public property while the motor is running or with the keys for starting the
vehicle left in the ignition. (Ord. No. 91-25, § 2, 10-8-91)



                       



5   I.C., § 14-1-3-1, et seq., addresses off-road vehicles including
snowmobiles.



Sec. 8-3  Violations.



   (a)   Motorized Bicycles:



      (1)   No person, including, but not limited to a parent, a
child, a teenager, or an adult shall violate any of the provisions of this
article relating to motorized bicycles, including, but not limited to,
Sections 8-4, 8-5, and 8-6, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   No parent or guardian shall authorize or knowingly
permit his or her child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
article relating to motorized bicycles, including, but not limited to,
Section 8-4, 8-5, and 8-6, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   Any person violating any section of this article, as set
forth in sub-paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) hereinabove, in lieu of being charged
for said violation in a Court of competent jurisdiction, may pay within five
(5) days after receiving notice of a violation to the Town Clerk-Treasurer,
as Clerk of the Town Violations Bureau, a fine in the sum of Fifty Dollars
($50.00).  In the event that this fine is not paid by a person notified of a
violation of a provision of this article within five (5) days after being
notified and advised of the violation and right to pay said fine to the Clerk
of the Town Violations Bureau in lieu of being charged, that person shall be
charged with the violation in a Court of competent jurisdiction. Twenty-Five
Dollars ($25.00) of the fine shall be deposited into the Town Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund (LECEF) for the purposes as set forth and permitted
by the Town Code Section 2-187 as amended from time to time.  The remaining
portion of the fine in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) shall be
deposited to the Town General Fund.  Each offense of violation of this
article shall be deemed a separate offense, with separate fines for each as
set forth herein.  All such fines shall be paid to the Local Ordinance
Violations Bureau, administered by the Clerk- Treasurer of the Town.



   (b)   Off-road vehicles.



      (1)   No person, including, but not limited to a parent, a
child, a teenager, or an adult shall violate any of the provisions of this
article relating to off-road vehicles, including, but not limited to,
Sections 8-2 and 8-6, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      (2)   No parent or guardian shall authorize or knowingly
permit his or her child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this
article relating to off-road vehicles, including, but not limited to, Section
8-2 and 8-6, as the same may be amended from time to time.



      (3)   Any person violating any section of this article, as set
forth in sub-paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) hereinabove, in lieu of being
charged for said violation in a Court of competent jurisdiction, may pay
within five (5) days after receiving notice of a violation to the Town
Clerk-Treasurer, as Clerk of the Town Violations Bureau, a fine in the sum of
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).  In the event that this fine is not paid by a
person notified of a violation of a provision of this article within five (5)
days after being notified and advised of the violation and right to pay said
fine to the Clerk of the Town Violations Bureau in lieu of being charged,
that person shall be charged with the violation in a Court of competent
jurisdiction. Fifty Dollars ($50.00) of the fine shall be deposited into the
Town Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund (LECEF) for the purposes as
set forth and permitted by Town Code Section 2-187 as amended from time to
time. The remaining portion of the fine in the amount of Fifty Dollars
($50.00) shall be deposited to the Town General Fund. Each offense of
violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense, with separate
fines for each as set forth herein. All such fines shall be paid to the Local
Ordinance Violations Bureau, administered by the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town.



(Ord. No. 91-25, § 3, 10-8-91; Am. Ord. No. 2000-14, 6-20-00; Am. Ord. No.
2001-17, § 1, 8-21-01)



Sec. 8-4  Traffic Regulations for Motorized Bicycles.



   (a)   Operators of motorized bicycles on a public highway or public
path shall be subject to the provisions of traffic laws of the state and the
town applicable to the operation of motor vehicles generally, subject to the
special regulations in this section, and excepting those provisions of the
traffic laws which by their nature can have no application.



   (b)   A motorized bicycle shall not be operated by any person under
the age of fifteen (15) years.



   (c)   Operators of a motorized bicycle shall obey the directions and
instructions of official traffic-control devices and signals, signs, and
other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.



   (d)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or “U” turns are permitted, no persons operating a motorized
bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such
person dismounts from the vehicle to make such turn, in which event the
person shall obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



   (e)   A person operating a motorized bicycle shall not drive, other
than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall the
operator permit any passengers in excess of the number allowed for by the
design and number of seats of the vehicle.



   (f)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, and the
operator of a motorized bicycle may not exceed the speed of twenty-five (25)
miles per hour or the speed limit, whichever is lesser.



   (g)   Every person operating a motorized bicycle shall drive as near
to the right hand side of the roadway as is possible, and in single file when
passing other vehicles, parked or moving, or any other considerable object on
the highway.



   (h)   The operator of a motorized bicycle emerging from an alley,
driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk
area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles on the roadway close enough to constitute a hazard.



   (i)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall attach the same
or himself to any vehicle upon a public highway or public path.



   (j)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article which prevents the operator from keeping both
hands upon the handlebars.



   (k)   Trick riding is prohibited. The hands of the operator of a
motorized bicycle shall be on the handlebars at all times, except while in
the act of signaling.



   (l)   No operator of a motorized bicycle shall cause or permit a
motorized bicycle to curve side to side.



   (m)   No person shall park a motorized bicycle in such a manner as
to interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian traffic, vehicular parking or
vehicular flow of traffic.



   (n)   The operation of motorized bicycles upon sidewalks is
prohibited.



   (o)   Every motorized bicycle, operated on a public highway, during
the period from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before
sunrise, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front and
with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of
five hundred (500) feet to the rear. In lieu of such rear lighted red lamp on
motorized bicycles, a red reflector glass button not less than one and
one-half (1½) inches in diameter, or red reflecting tape of not less than
four (4) square inches may be mounted securely on the rear mudguard, or
lacing a mudguard on the rear of the saddle.



   (p)   No person shall ride a motorized bicycle unless it is equipped
with a horn or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance
of one hundred (100) feet or more.



   (q)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, or
clean pavement.



   (r)   Every person operating a motorized bicycle shall employ the
use of hand signals in the manner provided by state law for turning or
changing lanes if such vehicle is not equipped with a lighted turn signal
device. (Ord. No. 91-25, § 4, 10-8-91)



Sec. 8-5  Reserved.



Sec. 8-6  Miscellaneous Rules and Regulations.



   (a)   No person shall board or alight from any off road vehicle or
motorized bicycle while such vehicle or bicycle is in motion, and no person
shall alight on the roadway side from any off road vehicle or motorized
bicycle.



   (b)   No person shall ride on any off road vehicle or motorized
bicycle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of
passengers.



   (c)   No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall ride upon
or operate a motorized bicycle without:



      (1)   Wearing protective headgear meeting the standards
established by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 CFR
571.218 in effect January 1, 1979; and



      (2)   Wearing protective glasses, goggles, or a transparent
face shield. (Ord. No. 91-25, § 6, 10-8-91)



Sec. 8-7 through Sec. 8-9 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2.  BICYCLE REGULATIONS. 6



                                         



6I.C., § 9-13-2-4, defines bicycle and related equipment.



Sec. 8-10  Bicycle Usage Regulations.



   (a)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
the permanent and regular seat attached thereto; nor carry any other person
upon such bicycle otherwise than upon a firmly attached and regular seat
thereon; nor shall any person ride upon a bicycle, otherwise than as above
stated.



   (b)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it was equipped.



   (c)   Any person upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates or toy
vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any streetcar or vehicle upon
a roadway.



   (d)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two (2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (e)   No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands upon the handlebars.
(Ord. No. 903, § 1-5, 7-9-74)



Sec. 8-11  Equipment Requirements.



   (a)   Lamps:  Every bicycle operating upon a highway from one-half
hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise, shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to
the rear; except that a red reflector meeting the requirements of this
section may be used in lieu of a rear light.



   (b)   Brakes:  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which
will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on a dry, level,
clean pavement. (Ord. No. 903, § 6, 7, 7-9-74)



Sec. 8-12  Compliance With Traffic Code. 7



   (a)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject
to the provisions of the Traffic Code of the Town of Dyer, Lake County,
Indiana, which is made a part hereof by reference, except as to those
provisions of that code which by their nature can have no application to this
ordinance.



   (b)   The operator of any bicycle upon any public highway shall
observe each and all of the regulations and requirements of the Uniform Act
regulating traffic on highways of the State Of Indiana and the rules of the
road of the State of Indiana as these apply to the usage of the right lane of
the highway in travel, the stoppage and proceeding in accord with traffic
signals, and the utilization of prescribed manual signs for the guidance of
other traffic.



   (c)   The parent of any child and the guardian or any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this act.



   (d)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever
a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated herein. (Ord.
No. 903, § 8-11, 7-9-74)



                                         



7 I.C., § 9-2-1-3, authorizes the regulation of bicycles including licensing
and registration fees.



Sec. 8-13  Reserved.



Sec. 8-14  Reserved.



Sec. 8-15  Penalty.



It is an ordinance violation for any person to do any act forbidden by this
ordinance or fail or perform any act by this ordinance. (Ord. No. 903, § 15,
7-9-74)



Sec. 8-16 through Sec. 8-19  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. TRAFFIC CODE OF THE TOWN OF DYER.8



                   



8   I.C., § 9-21-1-2, authorizes local authorities to adopt by ordinance
additional traffic regulations.



Division I. In General.



Sec. 8-20  Definitions.



The words and phrases used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning and
definitions as defined in Indiana Code § 9-13-1-1, et seq. addressing
“definitions”. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. I, § 1, 4-1-81)



Division II. Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations.



Sec. 8-21  Authority of Police Department and Fire Department Officials.



It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department of this Town to
enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and all state laws applicable to
street traffic in this Town. The Chief of Police and his officers are
authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or
audible signal in conformance with all traffic laws and ordinances, provided
that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or Fire Department
may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions
of this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. II, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-22  Obedience to Personnel.



The Chief of Police and his officers are herein sometimes referred to as a
police officer and it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a Chief of Police, or
police officer, or fireman, when acting in accordance with Section 8-21.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. II, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-23  Permits for Parades.



No procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or
Navy or the Military Forces of the State of Indiana and the forces of the
Police Department and Fire Department, shall occupy, march or proceed along
any street except and in accordance with a permit issued by the Chief of
Police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which apply. (Ord.
No. 81-8, Art II, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-24 and Sec. 8-35  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Pedestrian Obedience to Traffic Signals.9



                   



9   I.C., §§ 9-21-17-1 through 9-21-17-24, address pedestrians.



Sec. 8-26  Pedestrians to Comply.



At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, the
movement of pedestrians shall be regulated by such traffic signals as
hereinafter set out.



   (a)   At intersection controlled by traffic control signals
exhibiting the words “Go”, “Caution”, or “Stop”, or exhibiting
different colored lights successively, pedestrians shall move as follows:



      (1)   Pedestrians facing a traffic control signal showing
green or exhibiting the word “Go” may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



      (2)   Pedestrians taking a traffic control signal exhibiting
or showing yellow or exhibiting the word “Caution” are advised that there
is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting
to cross shall yield the right-of-way.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing the traffic control signal showing
red or exhibiting the word “Stop” shall not enter the roadway unless it
can be done safely and without interfering with vehicular traffic.



   (b)   Pedestrian Walk and Wait Signal. Whenever pedestrian control
signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or “Wait” are in place such
signals shall indicate as follows:



      (1)   WALK - Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across
the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the
right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.



      (2)   WAIT or DON'T WALK - No pedestrians shall start to cross
the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has
partially completed his crossing on the WALK signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk while the WAIT or DON'T WALK signal is showing. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art.
III, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-27 and 8-28  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Method of Parking.



Sec. 8-29  Standing or Parking Close to Curb.



Except where angle parking is prohibited, no person shall stand or park a
vehicle on a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed
in the direction of the lawful traffic movement and with the right hand
wheels within twelve (12) inches of the curb or the edge of the roadway,
except as otherwise provided in the following paragraph and in this Article.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IV, § 1(a), 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2014-03, 4-10-14)



Sec. 8-30  Angle Parking Prohibited.



Angle parking in any area of the Town of Dyer is allowed only upon written
approval of the Town of Dyer Police Department, Town of Dyer Fire Department,
and the Town of Dyer Department of Public Works. Whenever a vehicle is
lawfully parked at night upon any street within a business or residence
district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.  (Ord. No.
81-8, Art. IV, § 1(b), 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2014-03, 4-10-14)



Sec. 8-31 Through Sec. 8-32  Reserved for Future Use.



Division V. Miscellaneous Driving Rules.



Sec. 8-33  Funeral Processions. 10



   (a)   A funeral procession composed of vehicles may be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a paint of the type
designated by the Chief of Police, or shall drive with headlights turned on.



   (b)   Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the
right hand edge of the roadway as practicable and safe.



   (c)   Each mortician shall notify the Police Department of the day
and the hour of each funeral procession to be had by him in the Town of Dyer
together with the proposed route thereof, as far ahead of the proposed time
as possible. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, § 1, 4-1-81)



                     



10   I.C., §§ 9-21-13-1 through 9-21-13-7, address funeral processions.



Sec. 8-34  Driving Through Funeral Procession.



   (a)   No driver of a vehicle, except an emergency vehicle, shall
drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or other
authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this ordinance.



   (b)   This provision shall not apply at an intersection where
traffic is controlled by a traffic-control signal or a police officer and
shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-35  Restrictions on Backing.



The driver of any vehicle shall not back such vehicle into an intersection or
over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle
against the current of traffic, except to back into a parallel parking space
of to back out of a designated angle parking place. No vehicle shall be
backed over a public sidewalk except where necessary; and where it is
necessary the driver shall either sound his horn or halt before crossing the
sidewalk. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-36  Vehicles Shall Not Be Driven on Sidewalk.



The driver of any vehicle shall not drive over any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway, or park within such area. No vehicle shall
be driven over or across the curb of any street except as above provided.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, § 4, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-37  Boarding or Alighting from Vehicles.



No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in
motion, and no person shall alight on the roadway side from any vehicle.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, § 5, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-38  Unlawful Riding.



No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art.
V, § 6, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-39 Through Sec. 8-40  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VI. Traffic Control Devices.11



               



11   I.C., §§ 9-21-4-1 through 9-21-4-19, address traffic control
devices.



Sec. 8-41  Authority to Install Traffic Control Devices.



   (a)   The Chief of Police and Superintendent of Public Works
pursuant to the order of the Town Council shall cause to be placed and
maintained traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of this Town to make effective the provisions of
said ordinances.



   (b)   In the case of the identification and/or existence of a
dangerous traffic situation, as determined by the Chief of Police, he or she
is hereby authorized to install traffic control signs, signals and/or devices
on a temporary basis after collaboration with the Superintendent of Public
Works and until such time as the installation of said traffic control signs,
signals and/or devices can be approved by the Town Council.



      (1)   When a temporary traffic sign, signal or device is
authorized to be installed by the Chief of Police, he or she shall be
required to provide a written report with an accompanying recommendation to
the Town Council regarding the same.  Said written report and recommendation
shall be provided to the Town Council no later than three (3) days after the
installation of the temporary traffic control device.



      (2)   The Town Council shall review the written report and
recommendation of the Chief of Police and shall take official action
regarding said recommendation at its next regularly scheduled public
meeting.  In no case shall the recommendation of the Chief of Police
regarding the temporary placement of a traffic control device remain pending
for longer than sixty (60) days without official action approving or denying
the recommendation by the Town Council.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 1, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2002-07, 3-19-02)



Sec. 8-42  Manual and Specifications for Traffic Control Devices.



All Traffic Control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual
and specifications approved by the State Highway Commission. All signs and
signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall, so far as
practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the Town.  All
traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of State law or this Ordinance shall be official traffic-control devices.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-43  Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices Located Within the
Town of Dyer and Within Construction Areas in the Town.



   (a)   The driver of every vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance
with the ordinances of this Town, as amended from time to time, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (b)   The driver of every vehicle shall obey the instructions of any
traffic control devices including, but not limited to, signals, signs,
warnings, and all directions, signs, or warning devices that may be given or
displayed by a police officer or flagman to safely control traffic movement
in a construction area and to promote safety in the construction area.



   (c)   Any violation of the provisions of this Section is punishable
by fines and penalties in accordance with, and as provided by Sections 8-120,
et. seq., and 2-221(c), as amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 3, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2001-18, § 1, 8-21-01)



Sec. 8-44  When Traffic Control Devices Are Required for Enforcement
Purposes.



No provision of this Ordinance for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time of the alleged violation an
official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 4, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-45  Traffic Control Signal Legend.



Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals, exhibiting the
words “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored
lights successively, the following colors only shall be used and said terms
and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles as follows:



   (a)   GREEN alone or “GO” - Vehicular traffic facing the signal
may proceed straight through or turn right of left, unless a sign at such
place prohibits either such turn. Vehicular traffic shall yield right-of-way
to other vehicles and to pedestrians, lawfully within the intersection at the
time such signal is exhibited.



   (b)   YELLOW or “CAUTION” - When shown with or following the
green or “Go” signal: Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop
cannot be made, in safety, vehicle may be driven cautiously through the
intersection.



   (c)   RED alone or “STOP” - Vehicular traffic facing the signal
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at
such other point as may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall
remain standing until GREEN or GO is shown.



   (d)   GREEN ARROW - Vehicular traffic facing such signal may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a
crosswalk.



   (e)   In the event an official traffic-controlled signal is erected
and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of these
sections of this ordinance shall be applicable except as to those provisions
which by their very nature can have no application. Any stop required shall
be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall
be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be
made at the signal.



   (f)   Traffic control signals shall be located at the intersections
as provided in Schedule 1 attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 5, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-46  Flashing Signals.



Whenever flashing RED or YELLOW signals are used they shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (a)   FLASHING RED or STOP SIGNAL - When a red light is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection of streets and/or streets
and railroads or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before
entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be subject to the
rules applicable alter making a stop at a stop sign.



   (b)   FLASHING YELLOW CAUTION SIGNAL - When a yellow light is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.



(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, § 7, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-47  Display of Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings.



   (a)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking of device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device
or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal. No person
shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any
highway, any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (b)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway
is empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed. (Ord. No. 81-8,
Art. VI, § 7, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-48  Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices or Railroad
Signs or Signals.



No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to, or in fact, alter,
deface, injure, knock down, obscure, or remove any official traffic control
device, sign, or street name sign, or any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.



Sec. 8-49 and Sec. 8-50  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted or Prohibited on
Certain Streets.



Sec. 8-51  Application of Division.



The provisions of this Article prohibiting the standing or parking of a
vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified and as
indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or an official traffic control device. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art.
VII, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-52  Regulations Not Exclusive.



The provisions of this Division imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person from a duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in
specified places or at specified times. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 2,
4-1-81)



Sec. 8-53  Special Regulations for Street Work and Snow Removal.



   (a)   WORK - The Superintendent of Public Works is given the power
to post temporary signs reading “No Parking-Street Work” along any street
which he intends to sweep, clear, or work within the succeeding twenty- four
(24) hours. The Superintendent of Public Works shall post every street that
he intends to work with said signs prior to 4:00 P.M. of the preceding day.



      All vehicles shall be removed before 7:00 A.M. of the day the
street is to be worked. Any vehicle which is illegally parked after 7:00 A.M.
of the day the street is to be worked may be towed away in the manner
provided in Division VII, Section 8-54 of this Traffic Code.



   (b)   SNOW REMOVAL - No person shall park any vehicle on any street
within the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, whenever there is two (2)
inches or more of snow thereon, until said snow is removed.  Any vehicle
which is parked on said streets when the depth of the snow exceeds two (2)
inches, may be towed away in the manner provided in Division VII, Section
8-54 of this Traffic Code. (See Schedule 2) (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 3,
4-1-81)



Sec. 8-54  Illegally Parked or Abandoned Vehicles.



Any motor vehicle found upon the streets, alleys or highways within the Town
of Dyer, Indiana, illegally parked or reasonably appearing to be abandoned
may be removed from said street, alley or highway, under the direction of the
Chief of Police, and be impounded in one (1) of the garages within or without
the Town of Dyer, or in a privately owned garage, as designated by the Chief
of Police. A notice shall be mailed by the Dyer Town Chief of Police by
certified mail to the registered owner if the car is not claimed within three
(3) days. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 4, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-55  Parking on Private Property Prohibited.



No person shall drive, stop, stand or park a vehicle onto or upon privately
owned property or an area developed as an off-street parking facility without
the consent of the owner, lessee, or person in charge of such privately owned
property or facility. A violation of this Section shall place such vehicle in
the status of an illegally parked vehicle and upon complaint of the owner,
lessee, or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility, said
vehicle may be dealt with as described in Division VII, Section 8-54 of this
Ordinance.  (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 5, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-56  Impounding of Vehicles of Repeated Offenders. 12



Any motor vehicle found upon the streets or highways of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana having charged against the State license registration number of said
vehicle an accumulation of four (4) or more offenses may be removed for
impoundment in the manner described in Division VII, Sections 8-53 and 8-54
of this Ordinance. Should the owner of said vehicle appear to claim same, he
will be booked for appearance in a court having jurisdiction on all
outstanding offenses. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 6, 4-1-81)



                     



12   I.C., § 9-22-1-16, addresses towing vehicles.



Sec. 8-57  Towing and Storing Fees.



The owner of any motor vehicle removed and impounded pursuant to the terms of
Division VII, Sections 8-53 and 8-54 of this Ordinance may appear and claim
said motor vehicle upon payment of the towing and storage fees and presenting
a release from the Dyer Police Department, whereupon said vehicle shall be
released to him or his authorized representative. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII,
§ 7, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-58  Storage of Vehicle.



Using streets for storage of vehicles or parking of vehicles for more than
ninety six (96) consecutive hours prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle upon any street or
public highway in the Town of Dyer, Indiana, for a period longer than ninety
six (96) consecutive hours except as hereinafter provided.



Any person who desires to park a motor vehicle upon any street in the Town of
Dyer, Indiana, for a period of more than ninety six (96) consecutive hours
shall apply to the Chief of Police of the Town of Dyer, for a permit to do
so. The Chief of Police shall grant such permit only after determining that:



   (a)   The safety of the persons traveling on the street upon which
it is desired to park such motor vehicle will not be endangered, and



   (b)   The reason stated for parking a motor vehicle for more than
ninety six (96) consecutive hours is such that the granting of such permit is
necessary and reasonable, and



   (c)   A permit granted by the Chief of Police shall state the name
of the person seeking the permit, his address, the address at which the motor
vehicle shall be parked, the model, kind and registration place of the motor
vehicle to be parked, and the expiration date of said permit, and the reason
therefor. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 8, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-59  Parking Prohibited At All Times on Certain Streets.



When signs are erected giving notice thereof no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the streets described in Schedule 3 attached hereto
and made a part of this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-60  Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain Streets,
Except Sundays and Legal Holidays.



When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle on the streets where so posted between the hours specified on
said sign of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art.
VII, § 10, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-61  Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets - to 15 Minutes - 3:00
A.M. to 6:00 P.M.



When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than one (1) hour between the hours of 8:00 A.M.and
6:00 P.M. of any day, except Sunday and legal holidays, upon streets where
posted. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 11, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-62  Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets - Two Hours - 8:00 A.M.
to 6:00 P.M.



When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than two (2) hours between the hours of 8:00 A.M.
and 6:00 P.M. of any day, except Sundays and legal holidays, within the
district or upon any of the streets described in Schedule 4 attached to and
made a part of this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 12, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-63 and Sec. 8-64  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VIII. Restricted Streets.



Sec. 8-65  Deliveries on Restricted Streets by Trucks.



From and after the taking effect of this Ordinance, all streets and alleys of
the Town of Dyer except those set out in Schedule 5 shall be designated as
Restricted Streets, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck
excepting trucks in the following three (3) categories:



   (a)   Those of less than five (5) tons rated capacity,



   (b)   House moving vans, and



   (c)   Construction vehicles, to drive upon same except for the
purpose of making a delivery business in the block in which such vehicle is
being driven.



Any driver making such delivery shall enter same at the first intersection
nearest point of delivery and leave same at first intersection after such
delivery. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VIII, § 1, 41-81)



Sec. 8-66 and Sec. 8-67  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IX. Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places.



Sec. 8-68  Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited - No Signs Required. 13



   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the
law, or the directions of a police officer, or traffic control device, in any
of the following places:



      1.   On a sidewalk.



      2.   In front of a public or private driveway.



      3.   Within an intersection.



      4.   Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.



      5.   On a crosswalk.



      6.   Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



      7.   Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.



      8.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within
thirty (30) feet of points on a curb immediately opposite the ends of a
safety zone unless a different length has been indicated by signs or markings.



      9.   Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of railroad
crossing.



      10.   Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any
fire station.



      11.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.



      12.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge of or curb of a street.



      13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.



      14. At any place where an official sign prohibits parking,
stopping or standing.



      15. Within fifty (50) feet of the center of the gate of any
industrial plant.



      16.   On a grass parkway located alongside or within a
dedicated street or right-of-way.



   (b)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb-such distance as is
unlawful. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, § 1, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2006-26, 12-20-
06)



                   



13   I.C., § 9-21-16-5, addresses stopping, standing and parking.



Sec. 8-69  Parking Not to Obstruct Traffic.



No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, §
2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-70  Parking in the Alleys.



No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of space for
vehicular travel, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within
an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-71 and Sec. 8-72  Reserved for Future Use.



Division X. Freight and Passenger Loading Zones.



Sec. 8-73  Freight and Passenger Loading Zones.



For the purpose of alleviating acute traffic congestion the Chief of Police
is authorized to determine the location of temporary passenger and freight
loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the
same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this Section are
applicable. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. X, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-74  Permits for Freight and Passenger Loading Zones.



The Chief of Police shall not hereafter designate or assign any freight and
passenger loading zone upon special request of any person, unless such person
makes application for a permit for such zone, and have two (2) signs to
indicate the ends of each zone. The Chief of Police upon granting a permit
and approving such signs, shall require the applicant to deposit with the
Town Clerk-Treasurer, a fee of Five Dollars ($5.00) per year and may, by
general regulations, impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for
reimbursement by the Town for the value thereof in the event of their loss or
damage. Every such permit shall expire at the expiration of the time stated
therein, not to exceed ten (10) days over the one (1) year period. (Ord. No.
81-8, Art. X, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-75  Permanent Freight Loading Zones.



From and after the taking effect of this Ordinance the areas and portions of
streets and highways as  shall be designated by the Chief of Police and as
posted shall be known as permanent freight loading zones, and no person shall
stop and park a vehicle for any purpose or for any period of time in any such
zone except for the expeditious loading or unloading of freight and
merchandise. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. X, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-76 and Sec. 8-77  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XI. Through Streets.



Sec. 8-78  Through Streets.



   (a)   Those streets and parts of streets designated in Schedule 6
attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance are declared to be through
streets for the purpose of this Section. Through streets shall have the right
of way over all other streets except intersecting through streets, in which
case the State Law governing right of way shall govern unless the right of
way at said intersection is governed by traffic signals or stop signs under
this Ordinance.



   (b)   Whenever any Ordinance of this Town designates and describes a
through street, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to
place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such
through street unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 81-8,
Art. XI, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-79  Stop Signs.



When stop signs are erected upon streets intersecting a through street at the
entrance thereto or at the entrance to any intersection designated in
Schedule 7, attached hereto and made a part hereof, every driver of a vehicle
shall stop at every sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the
intersection. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-80  Four Way Stop Signs.



When stop signs are erected upon all four streets at any intersection
designated in Schedule 8, attached hereto and made a part hereof, every
vehicle shall stop at every sign or at a clearly marked stop line before
entering the intersection. The first vehicle reaching an intersection shall,
after stopping, have the right of way to proceed. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, §
3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-81  Stop When Traffic Obstructed.



No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, § 4, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-82 and Sec. 8-83  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XII. U-Turns and Passenger Restraints.



Sec. 8-84  U-Turns Prohibited. 14



No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-TURN on any street or at any
intersection within the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 88-42, 9-13-88)



                         



14   I.C., § 9-21-8-19, addresses U-Turns.



Sec. 8-85  Safety Belts.



The regulation of the use of safety belts shall b e as directed by the
statutes of the State of Indiana. (Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XII, § 2, 8-16-88;
Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-86  Exceptions.



The terms of Section 8-85 do not apply to a front seat occupant who:



   (a)   for medical reasons should not wear safety belts;



   (b)   is required to be restrained under the child passenger
restraint law Indiana Code, § 9-8-13;



   (c)   is traveling in a commercial or a United States Postal Service
vehicle that makes frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of
goods or services;



   (d)   is a rural carrier of the United States Postal Service and is
operating a vehicle while serving a rural postal route;



   (e)   is a newspaper motor route carrier or newspaper bundle hauler
who stops to make deliveries from his vehicle; or



   (f)   is a driver examiner designated and appointed under Indiana
Code, § 9-1-4-35 and is conducting an examination an applicant for a permit
or license under Indiana Code, § 9-1-4- 34.1. (Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XII, §
3, 8-16-88)



Sec. 8-87 and Sec. 8-88  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XIII. One Way Streets and Alleys.15



                               



15     I.C., § 9-21-4-14, addresses one way highways.



Sec. 8-89  Authority to Post Signs.



Whenever this ordinance designates any one-way street or alley, the Chief of
Police shall direct the placement of signs giving notice thereof, and no such
regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs
indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every
intersection where movement of traffic is permitted in one direction only.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XIII, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-90  One Way Streets and Alleys.



Upon those streets and alleys hereafter designated by the Town Council,
vehicles shall move only in the indicated direction of travel. (Ord. No.
81-8, Art. XIII, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-91 and Sec. 8-92  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XIV. Speed Regulations.16



                     



16   I.C., § 9-21-1-2, authorizes local authorities to adopt local police
regulations regulating traffic.



Sec. 8-93  Speed Laws of State Statute Applicable-Exception.



The speed limits as set forth in the State Statutes shall be applicable upon
all streets within the Town of Dyer, except as this Ordinance, as authorized
by State Law, declares and determines upon the basis of engineering and/or
traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon
specified streets, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any
person to drive a vehicle in excess of any speed so declared in this
Ordinance, when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. No. 81-8,
Art. XIV, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-94  Special Speed Zones.



No driver of any vehicle shall exceed the prima facie speed limit or portions
thereof described in Schedules 10, 10A, 10B, 11 and 12 of Section 8. All
streets not listed in Schedules 10, 10A, 10B, 11, and 12 shall have a 25
m.p.h. speed limit. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XIV, § 2, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No.
2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-95 and Sec. 8-96  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XV. Penalties and Procedure on Arrest.



Sec. 8-97  Procedure on Arrest.



Except when authorized or directed by State law to immediately take a person
arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws of the State or of the
Ordinances of the Town of Dyer, before a Chief of Police or officer or other
law enforcement officer upon making an arrest for violation of the traffic
laws of the State or the Town, shall take the name and address and operator's
license number of the alleged violator, and the registration number of the
vehicle involved, and shall issue to him on the form prescribed in this
ordinance, a notice to answer to the charge against him, at a place and at a
time to be specified in the notice to appear. The officer upon receiving the
written promise to appear of the alleged violator, providing such violator is
a resident of the State of Indiana, shall release such person from custody.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-98  Forms and Notices of Arrest or Appearance.



The Chief of Police shall provide suitable, serially numbered forms for
notifying violators to appear and answer to the charges of violating traffic
laws and ordinances. The Chief of Police shall report each month to the Town
Council the disposal made by his office of all arrest forms issued to them.
(Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, § 2, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-99  Failure to Obey Notice or Summons.



Any person who violates his written promise to appear given to any officer
upon an arrest for any traffic violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of the disposition of the charge of which he was originally
charged. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-100  Notice of Illegally Parked Vehicle.



Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this Ordinance and other
ordinances relating to traffic, then the officer finding such vehicle shall
take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on
such vehicle which may identify its owner or user, and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a notice in writing on a form provided by the Chief of
Police for the driver to answer to the charge against him within seventy two
(72) hours, during the hours and at the place specified in the notice. (Ord.
No. 81-8, Art. XV, § 4, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-101  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.



In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the parking or standing of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the notice to appear was parked in violation of any such law or
regulation together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was
at the time of such violation the registered owner of such vehicle, will
constitute prima facie evidence that such registered owner was the person who
parked such vehicle at the time and place and for the time during which such
violation occurred.  (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, § 5, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-102 and Sec. 8-103  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XV. Fines and Forfeitures.



Sec. 8-104  Disposition of Traffic Fines and Forfeitures.



Any person, firm or corporation violating and found guilty by plea of any
portion of this Traffic Code of the Town of Dyer which regulates the use,
standing or parking vehicles upon streets, alleys, or other public places,
may, in lieu of being charged for such violation in Lake County Court, pay to
the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer a penalty in an amount as set forth
in Section 2-221 of the Dyer Town Code.  In addition, the violator shall be
assessed court costs and any other fees as shall be set and required by state
statute.  The payment of fine shall be  deposited  in  general  fund 
of the town.  The Clerk-Treasurer  shall  forward  court  costs and any
other state-mandated fees to the Clerk of the Lake County Court for
distribution in accordance with Indiana State Statutes.  Such penalties
shall be paid within ten (10) days of the date of the violation.  Upon
failure of the payment of the penalty herein prescribed in accordance with
the provisions hereof, such violators shall be charged forthwith in the Lake
County Court pursuant to State Law. (Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XV, § 7, 8-16-88;
Ord. No. 95-33, 12-12-95; Ord. No. 97-15, 8-12-97)



Sec. 8-105  Failure to Comply or Destroying Notice.



   (a)   If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or
parking under this Ordinance or other ordinances relating to traffic of this
Town, does not appear in response to the notice affixed to such vehicle, a
complaint shall be filed and a warrant of arrest issued.



   (b)   No person, whether the recipient thereof or otherwise, shall
willfully throw away, alter, mar, mutilate, destroy, or discard the written
notice described in this Ordinance.



(Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-106  Moving Offenses.



Whenever a person commits a violation of any moving offense on a State
Highway within the Town, then the prosecution shall be under the applicable
state statute, if any, and not under the provisions of this Ordinance. In all
other cases, violators of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be charged
and prosecuted under this Ordinance.



Sec. 8-107  Town Deferral Program.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, hereby establishes a
Town Deferral Program pursuant to I.C. § 34-28-5-1, and amended from time to
time, to be known as the “Town Deferral Program.”



   (b)   An individual who has been issued a citation for a moving
traffic violation in the Town of Dyer shall be eligible to participate in the
Town Deferral Program if the individual:



      1.   Has not been charged with a moving traffic violation that
is associated with property damage, personal injury, or other related
criminal charges;



      2.   Has not been charged with any other moving violation in
any state within the last year; and



      3.   Has not been charged with an offense of speeding in
excess of thirty (30) miles per hour over the posted speed limit.



   (c)   An individual who is eligible and seeks to participate in the
Town Deferral Program (hereinafter “Applicant”) shall complete the Town
Deferral Program Application Agreement located in the Town Police Department.
The Town Police Department shall verify that the Applicant is eligible for
the Town Deferral Program.



   (d)   1.   At the time of the application submission, the
Applicant shall pay for the following:



         a.   Current Court costs, pursuant to the provisions of
Indiana Code, as amended from time to time;



         b.   An initial user fee of $52.00; and



         c.   Monthly user fees of $10.00 per month of each of
the six (6) months the Applicant is in the Town Deferral Program.



      2.   The total amount of the Court costs and fees identified
above shall be made payable to the “Clerk, Lake Superior Court” in the
form of a certified check, money order, or cashier’s check. The fees paid
by the Applicant are non-refundable and shall not be applied to the fine in
the event that the Applicant fails to properly and successfully follow and
complete the requirements of the Town Deferral Program. The Court costs shall
be distributed as required for traffic violations. The initial user fee and
monthly user fees shall be deposited in the Police Department Special Revenue
Fund upon proper processing.



   (e)   The Town Police Department shall file the Applicant’s
citation with the Lake County Court. After assignment of a cause number and
at the next regularly scheduled Town Court date, the Town Attorney shall file
the executed Deferral Program Application Agreement in the Lake County Court
together with the Court costs and fees. The Town Police Department shall
review the Applicant’s driving record six (6) months after the filing of
said Agreement (hereinafter “Review Period”). In the event that no new
moving traffic violations  have been issued to the Applicant, the Town
Attorney shall dismiss the original moving traffic violation citation. In the
event that the Applicant has been issued a moving traffic violation citation
within the Review Period, or otherwise does not comply with terms of the Town
Deferral Program, the Town Attorney shall institute further proceedings
against the Applicant based upon the original citation.



   (f)   The Town Attorney, Town Police Department, and Town
Clerk-Treasurer are hereby authorized to develop the appropriate forms and
related materials necessary to facilitate the Town Deferral Program.



(Ord. No. 2008-09, §§  1- 6, 8-20-08)



Sec. 8-108 through Sec. 8-114  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XVI. Traffic Surveys and Authority to Post Temporary Signs.



Sec. 8-115  Surveys and Posting of Temporary Signs.



Whenever the Chief of Police and the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, in the
course of the traffic study deem it advisable to delete or to add other
streets to the schedules attached to this Ordinance they may do so on a
temporary basis and such streets and locations, when posted by signs, shall
be deemed for said temporary period to be incorporated within the terms of
this Ordinance, and persons violating the same shall be deemed guilty of an
offense as if they were incorporated within the respective sections scheduled
herein. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVI, § 1, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-116 through Sec. 8-119  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XVII. Penalties, Severability, Short Title and Repeal.



Sec. 8-120  Penalties.



Any person violating one or more of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
upon conviction before any court of law, pay a fine of not less than One
Dollar ($1.00) or more than Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00)
Dollars for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



The Dyer Chief of Police after consultation with the Dyer Metropolitan Police
Commission and the Dyer Town Council, shall have the authority, at his
option, to designate to the Dyer Town Attorney the amount of any fine to be
requested of the Court in any matter of the trial of any violation of this
Ordinance in which the defendant is found liable. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII,
§ 1, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. 97-7, 3-11-97)



Sec. 8-121  Severability.



If any Section, Subsection, sentence, clause or portion of this Ordinance is
held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The Town
Council declares that it intended this Ordinance to be severable. (Ord. No.
81-8, Art. XVII, § 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-122  Short Title.



This Ordinance may be known and cited as the Traffic Code of the Town of
Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 3, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-123  Repeal.



All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with
the provisions of this Ordinance are repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the
violation of any Ordinance, repealed, prior to the taking effect of this
Ordinance. (Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 4, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-124 through Sec. 8-129  Reserved for Future Use.



Division XVIII. Schedules.



Sec. 8-130  Schedule 1-Traffic Control Signals at Intersections.



Pursuant to Section 8-4, et seq., the following traffic control signals as
intersections are designated:



   (1)   U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet St.) and Hart St.



   (2)   U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet St.) and Great Lakes Drive.



   (3)   Sheffield Avenue at 213th Street.



   (4)   U.S. 30 and Calumet Avenue.



   (5)   U.S. 30 and Meredith Way.



   (6)   Calumet Avenue and 213th Street.



   (7)   Calumet Avenue and Harrison Avenue.



   (8)   Sheffield Avenue and 81st Avenue. (Ord. 81-8, Schedule 1,
4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-131  Schedule 2 - Parking Prohibited After Snow is Two Inches Deep.



Pursuant to Section 8-53et seq, all streets in the Town of Dyer shall have
parking prohibited thereon after snow is two (2) inches deep. (Ord. 81-8,
Schedule 2, 4-1-81)



Sec. 8-132  Schedule 3 - Parking Prohibited at All Times.



Pursuant to Section 8-59, parking is prohibited at all times in the following
areas:



   (1)   In front of public buildings when signs or curb markings so
prohibit.



   (2)   Any place where signs or curb markings indicate.



   (3)   West side of Hart Street from U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street)
north to Keilman Street.



   (4)   77th Avenue (Novak Road) from Hart Street to east limits of
Town of Dyer.



   (5)   U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street) both sides from a point 1,040
feet west of Hart Street at the Indiana/Illinois State Line to a point 1,000
feet east of the CSX Railroad.



   (6)   South side of Carnation Street from Sheffield Avenue to Lake
Street.



   (7)   South side of Fagan Street from Hart Street, east to the alley.



   (8)   East side of Hart Street from U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street)
to Schulte Street.



   (9)   Northgate Park on the north side of Northgate Drive.



   (10)   Pheasant Hills Park on the east side of Hart Street from its
southern boundary to Greiving Street. (Ord. 81-8, Schedule 3, 4-1-81)



   (11)   North side of Keilman Street from Hart Street to Church
Street.



   (12)   South side of Keilman Street from Hart Street east to
alleyway.



   (13)   North side of Mary Street from Hart Street to Andrew Drive.



   (14)   East side of Andrew Drive from Mary Street to Cherry Hill
Road.



   (15)   East side of Hart Street from Fagen Street to Keilman Street
except for one (1) handicapped parking space to be designated by the Town.



   (16)   South side of Park Manor Drive from Hart Street to 125 feet
west of the intersection of Hart Street and Park Manor Drive.



   (17)   North side of Park Manor Drive from Hart Street to 125 feet
west of the intersection of Hart Street and Park Manor Drive.



   (18)   South side of Berens Street from Hart Street to 125 feet west
of the Indiana section of Hart Street and Berens Street.



   (19)   North side of Berens Street from Hart Street to 125 feet west
of the intersection of Hart Street and Berens Street.



   (20)   South side of Plum Creek Drive from Hart Street west to the
end of Plum Creek Drive.



   (21)   North side of Plum Creek Drive from Hart Street to 90 feet
west of the intersection of Hart Street and Plum Creek Drive. 



   (22)   West side of Wellington from Main Street to 30 feet south of
the intersection of Main Street and Wellington.



   (23)   North side of Harrison Place from Calumet Avenue to 130 feet
west of the intersection of Calumet Avenue and Harrison Place.



   (24)   South side of Harrison Place from Calumet Avenue to 104 feet
west of the intersection of Calumet Avenue and Harrison Place.



   (25)   North side of Harrison Place from Calumet Avenue to 30 feet
east of the intersection of Calumet Avenue and Harrison Place.



   (26)   South side of Harrison Place from Calumet Avenue to 30 feet
east of the intersection of Calumet Avenue and Harrison Place.



   (27)   South side of Greiving Street from Hart Street to 50 feet
east of the intersection of Greiving Street and Hart Street.



   (28)   East side of Northwinds Drive from U.S. 30 to Fairview Drive.



   (29)   West side of Northwinds Drive from U.S. 30 to 220 feet north
of U.S. 30.



   (30)   West side of Great Lakes Drive from U.S. 30, north 22 feet.



   (31)   East side of Great Lakes Drive from US 30 to Fairview Lane.



   (32)   Pleasant Springs Drive from Fairview Lane to Greenleaf Street
(including roundabout).



   (33)   East side of Lake Street from US 40 to Keilman Street.



   (34)   Sunnyside Avenue from US 30, north 157 feet.



   (35)   North side of Central Park Boulevard from Calumet Avenue to
the Dyer Department of Public Works’ entrance.



   (36)   On the north and south sides of Fairview Drive within 200
feet of the intersection with Great Lakes Drive.



(Ord. No. 2006-26, 12-20-06; Am. Ord. No. 2007-12, 6-20-07; Am. Ord. No.
2010-16, 12-1-10; Am. Ord. No. 2011-04, 5-19-11; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01,
3-12-15; Am. Ord. 2017-06, 7-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-09, 10-12-17)



Sec. 8-133  Schedule 4 - Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets Two Hours -
8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.



Pursuant to Section 8-62, the following parking limits are established:



   (a)   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no
person shall park a motor vehicle for longer than two (2) hours between the
hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6:00 P.M. of any day, except Sundays and Holidays,
upon either side of the following streets:



      (1)   Hart Street from Matteson to Schulte Street.



      (2)   Gettler Street from U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street)
South to Stech Street.



      (3)   West side of Hart Street from U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet
Street) south to Schulte Street.



      (4)   North side of Fagan Street from Hart Street east to the
alley. (Ord. 81-8, Schedule 4, 4-1-81)



      (5)   Reserved.



      (6)   Reserved.



      (7)   Reserved.



      (8)   Reserved.



      (9)   Reserved.



      (10)   Reserved.



Sec. 8-134  Schedule 5 - Restricted Streets (Heavy Duty Streets).



The following streets will be designated as heavy duty roads for the purpose
of making a delivery or carrying on business as prescribed in Division VIII,
Section 8-65:



   (1)   Sheffield Avenue



   (2)   Hart Street.



   (3)   Matteson Street.



   (4)   213 Street.



   (5)   Main Street.



   (6)   77th Avenue (Novak Road). (Ord. 81-8, Schedule 5, 4-1-81)



   (7)   U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street).



   (8)   Reserved



   (9)   Reserved.



   (10) Reserved.



Sec. 8-135  Schedule 6 - Though Streets.



Pursuant to Section 8-78, the following are declared through streets:



   (1)   U.S. Highway 30 (Joliet Street).



   (2)   213th Street.



   (3)   Sheffield Avenue



   (4)   Hart Street.



   (5)   Matteson Street.



   (6)   Lakewood Drive.



   (7)   Lake Street.



   (8)   Edgewood Drive.



   (9)   Enslen Drive.



   (10)   Harrison Avenue.



   (11)   Forest Park Drive.



   (12)   Nondorf Street.



   (13)   Greiving Street.



   (14)   Magnolia Avenue.



   (15)   Greenwood Avenue.



   (16)   77th Avenue (Novak Road).



   (17)   James Drive.



   (18)   Northgate Drive.



   (19)   Jackson Place.



   (20)   Osage Drive.



   (21)   Cherry Hill Road.



   (22)   Monticello Drive.



   (23)   Hickory Drive.



   (24)   Main Street. 



   (25)   Deercreek Drive.



   (26)   Flagstone Drive.



   (27)   Castlewood Drive.



   (28)   Calumet Avenue.



   (29)   Madison Avenue.



   (30)   Sycamore Drive.



   (31)   Howard Castle Drive.



   (32)   Knighthood Drive.



   (33)   Hillcrest Drive.



   (34)   Lancelot Lane.



   (35)   Great Lakes Drive. (Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 6, 4-1-81; Am.
Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-136  Schedule 7 - Single Stop Streets.



Pursuant to Section 8-79, the following STOP streets are declared:



STREET         STOP FOR:



Enslen Drive         Frances Place



Janet Place         Edgewood Drive



Quinn Drive         Edgewood Drive



James Drive         Blaney Drive



Roy Street          James Drive



Peachtree Court      Peachtree Lane



Aspen Drive         Sycamore Drive



Dogwood Drive      Sycamore Drive



Heather Lane         Sycamore Drive



Heather Lane         Hart Street



Chateau Lane         Hart Street



77th Avenue         Hart Street



Deertrail Lane         Hart Street



Brighton Lane         Hart Street



Plum Creek Drive      Hart Street



Ginger Court         Trillium Drive



Primrose Drive      Orchid Drive



Primrose Drive      Hart Street



Lily Lane         Stargrass Lane



Valleyview Lane      81st Street



Austgen Place         81st Street



Austgen Place         Hoffman Court



Hoffman Court      Harvest Lane



Harvest Lane         Harvest Drive



Hawthorne Lane      Summerhill Drive



Hawthorne Lane      Summerhill Drive



Autumn Lane         Summerhill Drive



Summerhill Drive      Hillcrest Drive



Deertrail Lane         Hillcrest Drive



Deertrail Drive      Hillcrest Drive



Autumn Lane         Deertrail Drive



Hawthorne Lane      Deertrail Drive



Deertrail Drive      Forest Park Drive



Chateau Drive         Forest Park Drive



Ridgewood Lane      Forest Park Drive



Wood Drive         Ridgewood Lane



Chateau Lane         Hillcrest Drive



Schmidt Drive         Hillcrest Drive



Hillcrest Drive         Margraf Court



Margraf Court         Hart Street



Cherry Hill Road      Hart Street



Tulip Tree Lane      Cherry Hill Road



Red Oak Drive      Cherry Hill Road



Red Oak Drive      Cherry Hill Road



Park            Greiving St./Nondorf St.



Henry Street         Moeller Street



John Burge Lane      hart Street



John Burge Lane      Gettler Street



Illinois Street         Lake Street



Clark Road         Route 30



Norma Lane         Route 30



Norma Lane         Richard Road



Richard Road         Calumet Avenue



Foliage Lane         Richard Road



Richard Road         Great Lakes Drive



Old Beach Road      Calumet Avenue



Flint Court         Old Beach Road



Boulder Road         Old Beach Road



Rolling Hills Drive      Old Beach Road



Old Beach Road      Foliage Lane



Flat Rock Road      Boulder Road



Dune Sand Court      Rolling Hills Drive



Flat Rock Road      Arrowhead Drive



Rolling Hills Drive      Arrowhead Drive



Arrowhead Drive      Sandy Ridge Road



Tomahawk Road      Sandy Ridge Road



Sandy Ridge Court      Sandy Ridge Road



Fossil Stone Road      Tomahawk Road



Sandy Ridge Road      Fossil Stone Road



Fossil Stone Road      Granite Drive



Galahad Court         Knighthood Drive



Tower Court         Knighthood Drive



Castlewood Drive      Knighthood Drive



Calumet Avenue      77th Avenue



Lancelot Lane         Canterbury Court



Squire Drive         Knighthood Drive



Squire Court         Knighthood Drive



Howard Castle Drive      77th Avenue



Donnet Court         Howard Castle Drive



Prince Drive         Camelot Drive



Prince Drive         Howard Castle Drive



Lancelot Lane         Queens Drive



Perry Court         Castlewood Drive



Kelly Place         Kings Court



Kings Court         Castlewood Drive



East Valley Place      Castlewood Drive



Castlewood Drive      Route 30



North Winds Drive      Route 30



Flagstone Drive      Jewel Property



Rockwell lane         Flagstone Drive



Portrait Place         Flagstone Drive



Saturday Evening Avenue    Flagstone Drive



Saturday Evening Avenue   Great Lakes Drive



Northwinds Drive      Dalemont Way



Fairview Drive      Pleasant Springs Lane



Grunewald Place      Pleasant Springs Lane



Greenleaf Street      Ferndale Drive



Dalemont Way      Pleasant Springs Lane



Stillwater Avenue      Pleasant Springs Lane



West Ridge Drive      Stillwater Avenue



Dalemont Way      Stillwater Avenue



Flagstone Drive      Hearthstone Lane



Ludington Lane      Manistee Avene (Schererville)



Ludington Lane      213th Street



215th Street         Magnolia Avenue



Kaiser Drive         Briar Crossing Drive



Briar Ridge Exit      213th Street



Berkley Drive         212th Place



Berkley Drive         212th Place



Wildflower Lane      Heritage Lane



211th Street         Harrison Avenue



210th Street         Calumet Avenue



209th Street         Jackson Place



Kensington East      Briarwood Drive



Eastern Avenue      205th Place



Eastern Avenue      206th Place



Barberry Place         Tyler Avenue



Seminary Drive      Sheffield Avenue



Old Farm Road      Sheffield Avenue



Blue Jay Way         Old Farm Road



Robin Court         Old Farm Road



Sunflower Lane      Old Farm Road



Rose Bush Lane      Old Farm Road



Meadow Lark         Seminary Drive



Cardinal Court         Seminary Drive



Oriole Court         Blue Jay Way



Blue Jay Way         Seminary Drive



Oak Street         School Property



Elm Street         School Property



Eastbound Fairview Drive      Pleasant Springs Lane



Eastbound Grunwald Place      Pleasant Springs Lane



Eastbound Greenleaf Street      Pleasant Springs Lane



Westbound Pleasant Springs Lane   Westridge Drive



(Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 7, 4-1-81; Am. Ord. No. 2006-26, 12-20-06; Am. Ord.
No. 2015-01, 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 2017-07, 7-13-17)



Sec. 8-136A  Schedule 7A - Two Way Stop Streets.



The following two way stop streets are declared:



   (1)   Prairie Drive and Stargrass Lane



   (2)   Buttercup Lane and Violet Lane



   (3)   Hart Street and High Point Trail



   (4)   Sheffield Avenue and Fagen Street



   (5)   Sheffield Avenue and Reitman Street



   (6)   215th Street and Sheffield Avenue



   (7)   215th Street and Rokosz Lane



   (8)   215th Street and Rosemary Court



   (9)   215th Street and Lake Street



   (10)   Briar Crossing and Stommel Place



   (11)   Briar Crossing Drive and Seberger Way



   (12)   213th Street and Madison Avenue



   (13)   213th Street and Jackson Avenue



   (14)   213th Street and Harrison Avenue



   (15)   Monticello Drive and Lake Street



   (16)   Kentwood Drive and Kentwood Court



   (17)   Harrison Avenue and Audrey Court



   (18)   Northgate Drive and Jackson Court



   (19)   Meadow Lark and Sunflower Lane



   (20)   Seminary Drive and Eagle Court



   (21)   Rose Bush Lane and Daffodil Court



   (22)   Westridge Way at Dalemont Way



   (23)   Dalemont Way at Pleasant Springs Lane



(Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15; Am. Ord. 2017-07, 7-13-17)



Sec. 8-137  Schedule 8-Three Way Stops.



Pursuant to Section 8-79et seq., the following three way stops are declared:



   (1)   South Street at Forest Park Drive.



   (2)   Lakewood Drive at South Street.



   (3)   Blaney Drive at 77th Street.



   (4)   Edgewood Drive at 77th Street.



   (5)   Lakewood Drive at Park Manor Drive.



   (6)   Northgate Drive at Tyler Avenue. (Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 9,
4-1-81)



   (7)   Boulder Road at Calumet Avenue.



   (8)   Quinn Place at Enslen Drive.



   (9)   Calumet Avenue and Arrowhead Drive.



   (10)   Castlewood Drive at Queens Lane.



   (11)   Schmidt Drive at Lakewood Drive.



   (12)   Forest Park Drive at Schmidt Drive.



   (13)   Hickory Drive at Cherry Hill Road.



   (14)   Hickory Drive at Osage Drive.



   (15)   Harrison Avenue at Northgate Drive.



   (16)   Fillmore Avenue at Northgate Drive



   (17)   Van Buren Avenue at 211th Street.



   (18)   Tulip Tree Lane at Osage Drive.



   (19)   James Drive at Osage Drive



   (20)   Greenwood Avenue at 213th Street.



   (21)   Devonshire Lane at Wellington Drive.



   (22)   Stratford Lane at Wellington Drive.



   (23)   206th Street at Fillmore Avenue.



   (24)   206th Place and Fillmore Avenue



   (25)   Kennsington East and Wellington Drive



   (26)   Van Buren Avenue and Harrison Avenue



   (27)   Meadow lark and Rose Bush Lane



   (28)   Capri Lane and Ivy lane



   (29)   Forest Park Drive and Berens Street



   (30)   Ridgewood Lane and Ridgewood Court



   (31)   Ridgewood Lane and Hillcrest Drive



   (32)   Forest Park Drive and Beirlger Drive



   (33)   Hillcrest Drive and Beirlger Drive



   (34)   Deertrail Drive and Windhill Lane



   (35)   Summerhill Drive and Windhill Lane



   (36)   Harvest lane and Stone Ridge Drive



   (37)   Maryann Lane and High Point Trail



   (38)   Harvest Lane and Crestview Drive



   (39)   Harvest Lane and Valleyview Lane



   (40)   Chateau Drive and Wood Drive



   (41)   Brighton Lane and Brampton Lane



   (42)   High Point Trail and Austgen Place



   (43)   Orchid Drive and Coneflower Drive



   (44)   Prairie Drive and Coneflower Drive



   (45)   Laurel Drive and Osage Drive



   (46)   Laurel Drive and Laurel Court



   (47)   Laurel Drive and James Drive



   (48)   Calumet Avenue and Knighthood Drive



   (49)   Camelot Drive and Knighthood Drive



   (50)   Howard Castle Drive and Knighthood Drive



   (51)   Calumet Avenue and Granite Drive



   (52)   Calumet Avenue and Tomahawk Road



   (53)   Corinne Drive and Dalemont Way



   (54)   213th Street and Briar Crossing Drive



   (55)   Greenwood Avenue and Meadow Lane Avenue



   (56)   Greenwood Avenue and 215th Street



   (57)   Great Lakes Drive and Flagstone Drive



   (58)   Orchid Drive and Indigo Drive



(Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-138  Schedule 9 - Four Way Stop Streets.



   (1)   Harrison Avenue at 215th Street



   (2)   Cherry Hill Road at Sycamore Drive



   (3)   Osage Drive at Sycamore Drive



   (4)   Berens Street at Lakewood Drive



   (5)   Lilac Drive at Lake Street



   (6)   215th Street at Capri Lane



   (7)   Lake Street at Carnation Street



   (8)   Lake Street at Ivy Lane



   (9)   Schilling Drive at James Drive



   (10)   Gettler Street at Stech Street



   (11)   Prairie Drive and Primrose Drive



   (12)   High Point Trail and Summit Way



   (13)   Chateau Drive and Hillcrest Drive



   (14)    Lancelot Lane and Knighthood Drive



   (15)   Castlewood Drive and Queens Drive



   (16)   Howard Castle Drive and West Clover Lane



   (17)   Northwinds Drive and Fairview



   (18)    Flagstone Drive and Amber Way



   (19)   Church Street and Keilman Street



   (20)   Seminary Drive and Blue Jay Way



   (21)   Seminary Drive and Blue Jay Way



   (22)   Deercreek Drive and Hearthstone Lane and Court



   (23)   Lake Street and Gardenia Drive



(Am. Ord. No. 2006-26, 12-20-06; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-139  Schedule 10 - 15 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



   1.   Central Park Boulevard East.



   2.   West end of Deercreek Drive.



   3.   Edmond Drive.



   4.   81st Avenue west of Hart Street/Sheffield Avenue.



(Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-139A  Schedule 10A - 20 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



   1.   81st Avenue east of Hart Street/Sheffield Avenue.



   2.   Harrison avenue from 213th Street to Audrey Court.



(Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-139B  Schedule 10B - 30 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



   1.   77th Avenue.



   2.   81st Avenue except as set forth in Sections 8-139 and 8-139A.



(Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-140  Schedule 11 - 35 M.P.H. Speed Zones.



   1.   Sheffield Avenue north from Edmond Drive to Main Street.



   2.   Hart Street south from Osage Drive to Dyer Town Limits.



   3.   Main Street east from Sheffield Avenue to the Dyer Town Limits.



   4.   213th Street east from a point 150 feet east of Fire Station #2
to the Dyer Town Limits.



   5.   77th Avenue (Novak Road) east from Hart Street to Blaney Drive.



(Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-141  Schedule 13 - One-Way Streets.



Pursuant to Section 8-90, the following one-way designations are declared:



   (1)   None.



   (2)   Reserved.



   (3)   Reserved.



   (4)   Reserved.



   (5)   Reserved.



   (6)   Reserved.



Sec. 8-142  Schedule 14 - Secondary arteries.



The following streets are designated as secondary arteries.



   (1)   Harrison Avenue from Northgate Drive to Edmond Street.



   (2)   Calumet Avenue from U.S. 30 to 77th Avenue.



   (3)   Lake Street from Potomac Street to U.S. 30.



   (4)   Castlewood Drive from U.S. 30 to Knighthood.



(Ord. No. 97-15, 8-12-97)



Sec. 8-143 through Sec. 8-149  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. OTHER VEHICLE AND ROAD REGULATIONS.



Division I. Fire Lanes.



Sec. 8-150  Fire Lanes-Definition and Markings.



“Fire Lanes” shall mean those lanes of travel immediately adjacent to a
building or structure within the Town of Dyer which are so designated by the
Fire Chief of the Town of Dyer, and so marked with a sign which shall read
“No Parking Or Standing At Any Time - Fire Lane” or contain other
information to that effect, which sign shall be installed at the expense of
the property owner along whose building the fire lane is so designated. (Ord.
No. 87-14, 6-9-87)



Sec. 8-151  Designated Fire Lanes-Size and Markings. 17



Designated fire lanes shall be marked with diagonal stripes of yellow paint,
which stripes shall be approximately 4 inches wide, 10 feet in length, and 18
inches apart; signs shall be permanently affixed to a building or a
stationary object located along the fire lane, not more than 75 feet apart
unless otherwise designated by Police and Fire Chief. Such signs shall be not
less than 288 square inches, the bottom of which shall be not lower than 36
inches from the ground and the top not more than 72 inches from the ground,
which shall be clearly marked in black letters on a white background or red
letters on white background with the following words: NO PARKING OR STANDING
AT ANY TIME FIRE LANE.



The designated fire lane shall not be used for pick-up or deliveries. The
curb or sidewalk edge adjacent to the fire lane shall be painted in yellow.
(Ord. No. 87-14, 6-9-87)



                     



17   I.C., § 9-21-12-7, addresses fire emergency areas.



Sec. 8-152  Penalties.



Any person who shall block, obstruct, park in, or otherwise abandon a vehicle
in a designated fire lane, shall be subject to a fine and penalty of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as imposed by the Dyer Metropolitan Police
Department. Each individual occurrence shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 87-14, 6-9-87)



Sec. 8-153  Parking Prohibited By Building Fire Lanes-Penalty.



Each business establishment, hospital, school, church, library, state,
federal, or city structure required by the Dyer Fire Chief and Police Chief
to provide a fire lane or lanes shall not permit parking or other
obstructions in such designated fire lanes. Any person or firm violating this
section shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) as
imposed by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department. (Ord. No. 87-14, 6-9-87)



Sec. 8-154 through Sec. 8-155  Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Towing and Storage of Vehicles.



Sec. 8-156  Towing of Vehicles.



Whenever there is a violation of an ordinance of the Town of Dyer under which
a vehicle is to be towed, or public safety requires a vehicle to be towed, it
shall be the duty of the police department of the Town forthwith to employ a
qualified towing contractor to tow and remove such vehicle from the streets
or public property of the Town or from any other place in which it is a
violation to park or locate a vehicle. Said qualified towing contractor shall
tow the vehicle to a vehicle storage pound established by the Town or a
specifically designated storage area operated by a qualified storage keeper.
(Ord. No. 88-13, § 1, 3-8-88)



Sec. 8-157  Towing Contractors and Garage Keepers.



Any towing contractor or garage keeper who desires to perform towing and/or
storage services within the Town for the amounts set forth in the Schedule of
Towing and Storage Fees hereinafter established, and files with the Town, a
certificate of insurance naming the Town of Dyer as additional insured with
liability limits of not less than $250,000/$500,000, for personal injury and
$50,000 for property damage, and receives approval of the Dyer Police
Commission, shall be deemed a qualified person for the purposes of this
Section. The Police Department shall employ towing contractors and garage
keepers pursuant to recommendation and approval of the Dyer Police
Commission. (Ord. No. 88-13, § 2, 3-8-88)



Sec. 8-158  Delivery of Vehicles Towed Due to a Public Safety Violation.



When a vehicle has been towed by reason of the requirement of public safety
or for violation of a Town Ordinance, such vehicle shall be delivered only to
the duly registered owner thereof, as determined by gestation of said
vehicle, or a person otherwise lawfully entitled to possession thereof, upon
payment to the qualified towing contractor of the reasonable costs of such
removal, towing and accumulated storage, pursuant to the schedule of fees and
charges hereinafter established. (Ord. No. 88-13, § 3, 3-8-88)



Sec. 8-159  Disposition of Unclaimed Impounded Vehicles.



If the impounded vehicle has not been reclaimed within seventy-two (72) hours
of the date of its impoundment, the qualified towing contractor shall proceed
with appropriate enforcement of its claim against the vehicle owner as
provided by Indiana law, including provisions concerning notice to the
registered owner, and abandonment of motor vehicles in the State of Indiana.
(Ord. No. 88-13, § 4, 3-8-88)



Sec. 8-160  Fees and Charges.



The duly registered owner or person otherwise lawfully entitled to possession
of the impounded vehicle may obtain release of said vehicle pursuant to the
provisions set forth above and upon payment of posted and approved fees and
charges to the qualified towing contractor. Charges shall include but not be
limited to the following services:



   Towing of Vehicles (6:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.)



   Towing of Vehicles (6:00 p.m. - 6:00 a.m.)



   Use of Flat Bed Trailer



   Inside and/or Outside Storage of Vehicles, per 24 hours period or
fraction thereof:



Payment shall be made at the office of the qualified towing contractor.



Sec. 8-161  Towing Fee Schedule.



   (a)   The towing firm with whom the Town has contracted for towing
and storage services may charge for towing or removing the vehicle in the
Town as follows, namely:



Services Provided   Current Rate    Newly Effective Imposed Rate Per
Vehicle Fee



Daytime tow    $85.00    $100.00



Daytime tow with flatbed      $125.00



Nighttime tow    $100.00    $150.00



Nighttime tow with flatbed      $175.00



Daytime winch and tow (in addition to tow)      Up to $50.00



Nighttime winch and tow (in addition to tow)      Up to $100.00



Daytime winch only    $65.00   $75.00



Nighttime winch only    $75.00   $125.00



Flatbed       As applicable



Disconnect linkage (no keys)       $20.00



Storage per day



   Outside   $20.00   $40.00



   Inside   $25.00   $45.00



Two or more trucks used      Two call-outs



Vehicles over 1 ton      As applicable



After hours vehicle release      $25.00



   (b)   The Contract for Towing and Recovery Services by and between
the Town and Stan's Towing & Recovery Service, dated April 11, 1995, is
hereby modified and amended to provide for the newly established towing rate
fee scheduled established hereby, with all other terms and provisions
contained therein ratified and reaffirmed.  (Ord. No. 2000-13, 6-20-00; Ord.
No. 2012-03, § 1, 3-8-12)



Sec. 8-162  Tow Release Services Fee.



   (a)   A fee in the sum of forty-five dollars ($45.00) for tow
release services is hereby established, as a policy for and within the Town
of Dyer.



   (b)   Any monies received for providing tow release services shall
be deposited into the “Police Department Special Revenue Fund.”



(Ord. No. 2008-13, 9-17-08; Am. Ord. No. 2010-11, 11-3-10)



Sec. 8-163 through Sec. 8-164  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Parking for Disabled.18



                       



18   I.C., § 9-14-5-1, et seq., addresses parking placards for physically
handicapped individuals; and I.C., § 9-18-22- 1, et seq., addresses
handicapped persons license plates.



Sec. 8-165  Definitions.



   (a)   “Physically Handicapped Person” shall mean any person who
has:



      (1)   permanently lost the use of one (1) or more legs or arms,



      (2)   is permanently unable to move without the aid of
crutches or a wheelchair, or



      (3)   is unable to walk long distances as verified by a
doctor's certificate.



   (b)   “Handicapped Parking Permit” shall mean any tag, sticker,
or card issued by the Town of Dyer or any other municipality, license plate
issued by any state, or any other regularly issued handicapped parking
permit, indicating that the driver or a passenger in that vehicle is a
physically handicapped person. (Ord. No. 83-10, 3-8-83)



Sec. 8-166  Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces.



Certain public parking spaces within the Town of Dyer shall be designated as
“reserved” by posting immediately adjacent to and visible from such space
or spaces, a sign bearing the official international wheel chair symbol, or
facsimile thereof. Parking in these designated spaces shall be reserved
solely for the use of those vehicles prominently displaying a handicapped
parking permit. (Ord. No. 83-10, 3-8-83)



Sec. 8-167  Penalties.



Any person who shall take advantage of the handicapped parking permit granted
under this section when the vehicle is not being used to transport a
physically handicapped person shall be subject to a fine and penalty of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) as imposed by the Dyer Metropolitan Police
Department. Each individual occurrence shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 83-10, 3-8-83)



Sec. 8-168  Business Establishments to Provide Handicap Parking-Penalties.



Each business establishment required to provide parking spaces for the
handicapped shall not permit parking in such designated spaces by vehicles
not displaying a handicapped parking permit. Any person or business
violation, this section shall he subject to a fine and penalty of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) as imposed by the Dyer Metropolitan Police Department.
(Ord. No. 83-10, 3-8-83)



Sec. 8-169  through Sec. 8-173  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Weight Limits.19



                         



19   I.C., § 9-20-1-3, authorizes local authorities to impose weight
restrictions by proper ordinance.



Sec. 8-174  Weight Limit on Sheffield Avenue.



It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle with a gross weight in excess
of seven (7) tons (14,000 pounds) on Sheffield Avenue between Main Street and
Matteson Avenue, with the exception of local deliveries to local businesses
located on Sheffield Avenue between Main Street and Matteson Avenue. (Ord.
No. 89-28, 7-11-89)



Sec. 8-175  Penalty.



Any person violating the terms and provisions of Section 8-174 shall be
subject to a fine in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) payable to the
Clerk of the Town of Dyer; and if not paid, then subject to filing of action.



(Ord. No. 89-28, 7-11-89)



Sec. 8-176  Ten (10) Ton Gross Weight Limit Streets.



No person, firm or corporation shall operate over the within designated
streets situated within the Town of Dyer, Indiana, any vehicle when the
combined weight of the vehicle together with its driver and load exceeds ten
(10) tons gross weight, except as hereinafter provided. Said gross weight
shall be the maximum permissible weight allowed on the following streets
within the Town of Dyer: Magnolia, Greenwood, East End, Meadow Lane,
Sunnybrook, 214th, 213th Place, 212th Place, Berkley Drive, Edmond Drive,
Devon Drive, Coral Drive, Beldon Drive, Avalon, 215th, Harrison, Sunnyside,
Church, Illinois, Keilman (except as provided in Section 8-183 hereafter)
Greiving, Henry, Stech, Nondorf, Moeller, Elm, Oak, Gettler, Schulte, Plum
Creek, Andrew Drive, Mary, Forest Park Drive, South, Lakewood Drive, Monaldi
Parkway, Schmidt, Enslen Drive, Frances Place, Janet Place, Edgewood Drive,
Fagen Street and Lake Street.



(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 11-12-57; Am Ord. No. 2002-06, 2-19-02)



Sec. 8-177  Exceptions Require Permit.



Any person, firm or corporation desiring to operate a vehicle in excess of
said gross weight, having first shown a necessity for so doing to the Town
Council whose decision shall be final and conclusive, shall if the said
Council decides a necessity exists for so doing, secure a temporary permit
from the Town Clerk permitting operation of a vehicle with a greater weight
than the ten (10) ton gross weight maximum limitation herein imposed.



(Ord. No. 367, § 2, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-178  Bond Requirements.



When the Town Council has decided that a necessity exists for the operation
of vehicles in excess of gross weight it shall order the Town Clerk to issue
a temporary permit to said person, firm or corporation, provided that said
person, firm or corporation has first posted with said Town Clerk a Five
Hundred Dollar ($500.00) cash bond to insure that the streets, including
curbs and gutters, operated upon, have not been damaged in any way as a
result of said operation, and further provided that said person, firm or
corporation had paid to said Town Clerk a permit fee of Fifty Cents ($0.50)
for each permit, which fee shall revert to the General Fund.



(Ord. No. 367, § 3, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-179  Damage to Streets.



The cash bond so posted shall be returned to the person, firm or corporation
having deposited same upon surrender to the Town Clerk of the temporary
permit so issued provided that it has been certified upon the face of said
temporary permit by the Dyer Town Public Works Director that said street or
streets so used have been inspected and that no damage has resulted as a
consequence of operation pursuant to issuance of said temporary permit. If
the Public Works Director finds upon inspection that any street damage has
been caused by operation of any vehicle for which a temporary excess weight
permit has been issued, he shall report same to the Town Council of the Town
of Dyer, who shall estimate the cost of repair of said damage and shall
declare forfeited any or all of said cash bond including any part or all of
said cash bond including any part or all thereof as is necessary to offset
the cost of said repairs.



(Ord. No. 367, § 4, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-180  Form of Temporary Permit.



The temporary permit so issued in accordance herewith shall constitute a
receipt for the cash bond and shall upon its face designate the name of the
person, firm or corporation to whom issued, date of issue, the maximum excess
weight permitted, the day and time when said permit shall be valid, the type
and description of vehicle to be used, the street or streets upon which said
vehicle shall be operated, signature of the Dyer Town Clerk, a place for the
Dyer Town Public Works Director to certify that he has inspected the streets
and found them undamaged, if such be the case, and a place for the person,
firm or corporation to sign acknowledging receipt or return or the cash bond
so posted.



(Ord. No. 367, § 5, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-181  Display of Permit.



All temporary excess weight at permits issued in accordance with this
ordinance shall be displayed openly and in clear view in each vehicle being
operated pursuant to the permit so issued.



(Ord. No. 367, § 6, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-182  Penalty.



Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall upon conviction be
fined not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each offense.



(Ord. No. 367, § 7, 11-12-57)



Sec. 8-183  Weight Limit on Keilman Street.



It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle with a gross weight in excess
of three tons (6,000 pounds) on Keilman Street over the Keilman Street
Bridge.  The gross weight limit for all other portions of Keilman Street
shall be as contained within Section 8-176 herein.



(Ord. No. 2002-06, 2-19-02)



Sec. 8-184 through Sec. 8-187  Reserved for Future Use.



Division V. Miscellaneous Regulations.



Sec. 8-188  Driving on Sidewalks Prohibited.



It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to go upon any sidewalk with
any vehicle or animal expect in the necessary act of crossing any such
sidewalk and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride upon any
sidewalk in the Town of Dyer, Indiana, upon any bicycle, motorcycle, horse,
mule, pony, ox, cow, wagon or buggy or other vehicle propelled by man or
beast or by mechanical power.



(Ord. No. 15, § 1, 5-2-11)



Sec. 8-189  Parking Limitation for Parking Vehicles With Live Animals.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park, and/or to permit to be parked, and/or to remain parked, any motor
vehicle loaded with cattle, hogs, sheep, horses and/or other livestock or
poultry on any of the public streets, alleys or other public places within
the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, for more than thirty (30) minutes
at any one time.



(Ord. No. 167, § 1, 1-4-38)



   (b)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall be fined in any sum not less than one
dollar ($1.00) or more than ten dollars ($10.00).



(Ord. No. 167, § 2, 1-4-38)



Sec. 8-190  Obedience and Stopping at Railroad Crossings. 20



   (a)   Protected Railroad Crossings. All vehicles and the operator of
all vehicles shall stop wherever any protected railroad grade crossing
indicates the presence of a train by flashing lights, lowering or raising of
gates, or the extinguishment of a green light, or by means of any other
automatic crossing protection which indicates the fact that a train is
approaching the crossing and such automatic crossing protection begins to
function.



   (b)   Unguarded Crossings. It shall be the duty of the operator of
every motor vehicle approaching any railroad grade crossing which is not
protected by an automatic crossing protection consisting of either gates or
red flashing lights, to bring his automobile or vehicle to a stop within
fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail, and he shall then look to the right and
to the left and ascertain that it is safe to proceed before proceeding across
the crossing.



(Ord. No. 687, § 1, § 2, - - 68)



                 



20   I.C., § 9-21-8-39, addresses railroad crossings.



Sec. 8-191  Non-moving Trains Prohibited from Blocking Streets at Railway
Crossings.



   (a)   Any railroad company or any person, firm, or corporation
operating or employed by any railroad within the Town is prohibited from
permitting a non-moving railroad train, car, or engine to block any public
street or roadway in the town for more than ten (10) minutes at any one (1)
time, except when necessary to comply with governmental safety regulations,
or where the railroad train, car, or engine cannot be moved due to
circumstances beyond the control of the railroad company.



   (b)   This ordinance is enacted to promote the public interest and
welfare of the residents of the town and those using its public streets and
roadways by facilitating the orderly flow of traffic and ensuring the
continued and unimpeded response of essential public safety services, not to
control, regulate, or improve railroad safety, thus it shall not apply to
moving railroad trains, cars, or engines, and shall not supplant current
federal or Indiana law governing negligence or lack thereof by railroads or
their agents and employees.



(Ord. No. 2000-15, 6-20-00; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-192  Penalty.



   Each violation of Section 8-191, defined as each separate blockage or
obstruction of a public street or roadway by a standing railroad train, car,
or engine for more than ten (10) minutes, is punishable by a fine of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) assessed against the railroad
company, or person, firm, or corporation responsible for the violation.
However, no railroad agent or employee acting under the rules or orders of
the railroad company, firm, or corporation shall be fined for a violation of
this ordinance, as the same may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2000-15, 6-20-00; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-193 through Sec. 8-200  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VI. Renaming Streets.



Sec. 8-201  Renaming Streets Within Pinewood Estates.



The following recorded streets shall be corrected as follows:



   RECORDED      NEW NAME      RECORDED      NEW NAME



Cypress Drive         Old Beach Road      Dogwood
Drive      Tomahawk Road



Holly Court            Flint Court         Birch
Drive         Glacier Drive



Cottonwood Drive      Boulder Road      Pinewood
Drive      Sandy Ridge Road



Elmwood Drive         Flat Rock Road      Walnut
Court      Ridge Court



Willow Drive         Rolling Hill Dr.      Elmwood
South      Fossil Stone Road



Aspen Court            Dune Sand Court      Schilling
Drive      Granite Drive



Laurel Drive            Arrowhead Drive      Calumet
Avenue      NO CHANGE



(Ord. No. 79-16, 6-12-79)



Sec. 8-202 through Sec. 8-207  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Local Road and Streets Inventory.21



                                                 



21   Editor's Note: The Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) is
required to have a complete inventory of roads and streets for dollar
allocation purposes.



Sec. 8-208  Acceptance of Local Roads and Streets.



All roads and streets dedicated to the Town of Dyer are hereby accepted into
the local road and street inventory of the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-209 through Sec. 8-214  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VIII. Vehicle Identification.



Sec. 8-215  Motor Vehicle Inspections - Fees.



   (a)   Motor vehicle identification inspections. Any person or firm
requesting a motor vehicle identification inspection by the Police Department
of the Town of Dyer shall be assessed the sum of $5.00 (Five Dollars) which
shall be paid in advance for such inspection.



   (b)   The fees collected under subsection (a) and (b) shall be
deposited in the Town Law Enforcement Continuing Legal Education Fund (LECEF)
for the purposes as set forth and permitted by the Town Code Section 2-187,
as amended from time to time.



(Am. Ord. No. 2003-29, 11-18-03; Am. Ord. No. 2015-01, 3-12-15)



Sec. 8-216 and Sec. 8-217  Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 9
UTILITIES



ARTICLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.



Sec. 9-1   Authority to Establish Utility Service.



Sec. 9-2   Authority to Establish Waterworks.



Sec. 9-3   Authority to Regulate the Disposal of Sanitary Sewage.



Sec. 9-4 Through Sec. 9-10 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2. WATERWORKS



   Division I. Background Regulations.



Sec. 9-11   Payment in Lieu of Property Taxes.



Sec. 9-12   State Law Incorporated by Reference.



Sec. 9-13   Board of Directors.



Sec. 9-14   Waterworks District.



Sec. 9-15   Compliance.



Sec. 9-16   Revenue Bonds.



Sec. 9-17   Conflicting Ordinances.



Sec. 9-18   Water Quality Management Planning Responsibilities.



Sec. 9-19 Through Sec. 9-24 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Establishment of Customer Deposits, Connection Charges,
and Rules and Regulations for the Waterworks System.



Sec. 9-25   Customer Deposits.



Sec. 9-26   Disconnection and Reconnection of Service.



Sec. 9-27   Water Hydrant Connection.



Sec. 9-28   Deposit Fees.



Sec. 9-29   Accuracy Tests.



Sec. 9-30   Installation of Meters.



Sec. 9-31   Contract for Service.



Sec. 9-32   Delinquent Accounts.



Sec. 9-33   Violation.



Sec. 9-34   Interest Penalty Waived If On Social Security.



Sec. 9-35   Discontinuance of Water Service/Administrative Appeal.



Sec. 9-36 Through Sec. 9-39 Reserved For Future Use.



   Division III. Regulations To Protect the Public Water System from
Contamination.



Sec. 9-40   Cross-Connections Defined.



Sec. 9-41   Cross-Connections Prohibited.



Sec. 9-42   Inspections and Fees.



Sec. 9-43   Right of Entry.



Sec. 9-44   Discontinuance of Water Service.



Sec. 9-45   Emergency Situations.



Sec. 9-46   Backflow Preventors.



Sec. 9-47   Licensed Plumber Required.



Sec. 9-48   Regulations Supplemental to State Uniform Plumbing Code.



Sec. 9-49 Through Sec. 9-54 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Rates and Charges for Use and Service Rendered by
Waterworks System.



Sec. 9-55   Metered Monthly Rates.



Sec. 9-56   Minimum Charge.



Sec. 9-57   Fire Protection Charges - Hydrant Rental.



Sec. 9-58   Sprinkler Connection.



Sec. 9-59   Temporary Users.



Sec. 9-60   Late Payment Charge.



Sec. 9-61   Water Non-Recurring Charges.



Sec. 9-62   Customer Deposits.



Sec. 9-63   Reasonable Return.



Sec. 9-64   Payment in Lieu of Taxes.



Sec. 9-65   Effective Date.



Sec. 9-66   Penalties.



Sec. 9-67   System Development Charges.



Sec. 9-68 Through Sec. 9-69 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division V. Other Regulations.



Sec. 9-70   Swimming Pool-When Assessment Waived.



Sec. 9-71   Information to be Filed With Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 9-72   Sprinkling Regulations.



Sec. 9-73 Through Sec. 9-79 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   Division I. General Provisions



Sec. 9-80   State Law Incorporated by Reference.



Sec. 9-81   Department of Storm Water Management Control.



Sec. 9-82   Territory Included Within District.



Sec. 9-83   Board of Storm Water Management.



Sec. 9-84   Special Taxing District.



   Division II. Storm Water User Fee Rates and Policies



Sec. 9-85   Definitions.



Sec. 9-85.1   Storm Water Utility User Fee.



Sec. 9-85.2   Storm Water Utility User Fee Establishment Procedures.



Sec. 9-85.3   User Fee Structure.



Sec. 9-85.4   Billings and Terms of Payment.



Sec. 9-85.5   Credit Policy and Procedure.



Sec. 9-85.6   Appeals of ERU Determinations.



Sec. 9-85.7   Storm Water Fund.



Sec. 9-85.8   Lien on Premises.



Sec. 9-86   Prohibiting Discharges in the Storm Water Collection System.



Sec. 9-87 Through Sec. 9-89 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SANITATION.



Sec. 9-90   Governing State Law.



Sec. 9-91   Department of Public Sanitation Created.



Sec. 9-92   Territory Included in District.



Sec. 9-93   Board.



Sec. 9-94   Special Taxing District.



Sec. 9-95   Concurrent Power.



Sec. 9-96 Through Sec. 9-99 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. REGULATIONS ADDRESSING PUBLIC SEWERS AND DRAINS.



Sec. 9-100   Definitions.



Sec. 9-101   Private Sewage Disposal.



Sec. 9-102   Building Sewers and Connections.



Sec. 9-103   Discharges to Public Sewers.



Sec. 9-104   Pretreatment of Industrial Wastes.



Sec. 9-105   Plans and Specifications of Pretreatment Facilities.



Sec. 9-106   Spills Reporting.



Sec. 9-107   Protections from Damage; Arrest.



Sec. 9-108   Search Warrant.



Sec. 9-109   Recovery of Costs.



Sec. 9-110   Effective Date of Ordinance.



Sec. 9-111   Construction of Ordinance.



Sec. 9-112   Severability and Conflicts.



Sec. 9-113 Through Sec. 9-124 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 6. SEWAGE WORKS.



   Division I. Scheduling of Rates and Charges.



Sec. 9-125   Definitions.



Sec. 9-126   Rates and Charges.



Sec. 9-127   Special Metering.



Sec. 9-128   Billing.



Sec. 9-129   Laws and Regulations by the Town.



Sec. 9-130   Delinquent Bills.



Sec. 9-131   Connection, Tap-In and Permit Fees.



Sec. 9-132   Excessive Strength Surcharge.



Sec. 9-133   Authorization to Enforce Regulations.



Sec. 9-134   Fire Protection and Adjustments.



Sec. 9-135   Compliance with State and Federal Requirements.



Sec. 9-136   Authorization to Enter into Special Rate Contracts.



Sec. 9-137   Effective Date of Ordinance Rates and Charges.



Sec. 9-138   Effective Date of Ordinance.



Sec. 9-139   Construction of Ordinance.



Sec. 9-140   Severability and Conflicts.



Sec. 9-141   System Development Charges.



Sec. 9-142 Through Sec. 9-144 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Funds Related to Sewage Works.



Sec. 9-145   Revenue Fund.



Sec. 9-146   Operation and Maintenance Fund.



Sec. 9-147   Sewage Works Sinking Fund.



Sec. 9-148   Improvement Fund.



Sec. 9-149   Priority of Payments.



Sec. 9-150   Maintenance of Accounts.



Sec. 9-151 Through Sec. 9-157 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Miscellaneous Regulations Related to the Sewage Works.



Sec. 9-158   Release of Sewer Taps.



Sec. 9-159   Assessment of a Surcharge for Disposal of Ground Water Into
the Dyer Sanitary Sewer System.



Sec. 9-160   Payment in Lieu of Taxes.



Sec. 9-161 Through Sec. 9-179 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES REGARDING “UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS”.



Sec. 9-180   Definitions.



Sec. 9-181   Public Hearing.



Sec. 9-182   Designation of Underground Utility District.



Sec. 9-183   Unlawful Acts.



Sec. 9-184   Exception, Emergency or Unusual Circumstances.



Sec. 9-185   Other Exceptions.



Sec. 9-186   Notice to Property Owners and Utility.



Sec. 9-187   Responsibility of Utility.



Sec. 9-188   Responsibility of Property Owner.



Sec. 9-189   Responsibility of Town.



Sec. 9-190   Extension of Time.



Sec. 9-191   Penalty.



Sec. 9-192 Through Sec. 9-199 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.



Sec. 9-200   Quad-Town Council and Intergovernmental Cooperation.



Sec. 9-201   Charges for Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste.



Sec. 9-202   Solid Waste Disposal Fund.



Sec. 9-203   Monthly Billing Procedure.



Sec. 9-204   Use of Funds.



Sec. 9-205   Yard Waste Stickers.



Sec. 9-206   Size and Weight Limitations.



Sec. 9-207   Role of Town Council President.



Sec. 9-208   Solid Waste/Recycling Commission.



Sec. 9-209 Through Sec. 9-239 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS. 1



                               



1I.C., §§36-9-23-1 through 36-9-23-36, address municipal sewage works.



Sec. 9-1  Authority to Establish Utility Service. 2



A Town may furnish or regulate the furnishing of utility service to the
public.



                               



2I.C., § 36-9-2-15, addresses utility service to the public.



Sec. 9-2  Authority to Establish Waterworks. 3



A Town may regulate the furnishing of water to the public, and may establish,
maintain, and operate waterworks.



                               



3I.C., § 36-9-2-14, addresses Waterworks.



Sec. 9-3  Authority to Regulate the Disposal of Sanitary Sewage. 4



   a.   A Town may regulate the furnishing of the service of
collecting, processing, and disposing of waste substances and domestic or
sanitary sewage, which includes the power to fix the price to be charged for
that service.



   b.   A Town may collect, process, and dispose of waste substances
and domestic or sanitary sewage, and may establish, maintain, and operate
sewers, sewage disposal systems, and systems to collect and dispose of waste
substances.



                               



4I.C., §§ 36-9-2-16 and 36-9-2-17, address the disposal of substances and
domestic or sanitary sewage.



Sec. 9-4 through 9-10 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 2.  WATERWORKS.



Division I.  Background Regulations.



Sec. 9-11  Payment in Lieu of Taxes.



   a.   The Town of Dyer is entitled to assess and collect a payment in
lieu of property tax from the Dyer Water Utility based on the assessed value
of the property and holdings of the Dyer Water Utility pursuant to Burns
Annotated Statutes, Code Edition § 8-1.5-3-8. (Ord. No. 89-46, 12-12-89)



   b.   An ordinance setting forth the computation of payment in lieu
of taxes is required of the Town Council.



Sec. 9-12  State Law Incorporated By Reference.



The Town owns and operates a waterworks and adopts the provisions of Indiana
Code, § 8-1-1.5-4 with the passage of this ordinance. (Ord. No. 91-17, § 1,
7-9-91)



Sec. 9-13  Board of Directors.



The Town Council of the Town of Dyer, pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-4-2,
creates a division of waterworks to be a part of the Department of Public
Works which is further addressed in § 2-55, et seq., of this Code.



Sec. 9-14  Waterworks District.



The Department has jurisdiction over a special taxing district to be known as
the Town of Dyer Department of Waterworks Special Taxing District (the
"District") whose boundaries are coterminous with and the same as the
corporate boundaries of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, which
consists of all the territory served by the Department. (Ord. No. 91-17, §
3, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 95-11, 4-11-95)



Sec. 9-15  Compliance.



The Division and the Board shall comply with all provisions of Indiana Code,
§ 8-1.5-4 as existing and as may be hereafter amended. (Ord. No. 91-17, §
5, 7-9-91)



Sec. 9-16  Revenue Bonds.



The Board shall take no actions which shall impair or impede the rights of
the holders of the 1987 Bonds so long as the 1987 Bonds are outstanding. The
Dyer Water Board shall have authority and right to issue waterworks revenue
bonds in accordance with Indiana Code, § 8-1.5. (Ord. No. 91-17, § 6,
7-9-91; Ord. No. 95-11, 4-11-95)



Sec. 9-17  Conflicting Ordinances.



All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed, provided, however, that this ordinance shall not be deemed in any
way to repeal, amend, alter or modify the ordinance authorizing the 1987
Bonds nor be construed, as adversely affecting the rights of the holders of
the 1987 Bonds. (Ord. No. 91-17, § 7, 7-9-91)



Sec. 9-18  Water Quality Management Planning Responsibilities. 5



The Town of Dyer, Indiana, desires to be the approved designated management
agency for the control of water pollution sources within its area of legal
jurisdiction. (Res. No. 91-17, 7-9-91)



                               



5 The Clean Air Act, §§ 208 and 303(e) require the development and
implementation of water quality management plans, and the EPA, Region V
requires appropriate designation for State Revolving Fund Financial
Assistance.



Sec. 9-19 Through Sec. 9-24 Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Establishment of Customer Deposits, Connection Charges, and
Rules and Regulations for the Waterworks System.



Sec. 9-25  Customer Deposits.



Each firm or person desiring to have water service provided to real estate
within the Town of Dyer, shall deposit with the Dyer Water Utility through
the Clerk-Treasurer a security deposit in the following amount:



   Residential Service   $ 40.00



   Retail-under 1,500 square feet of gross floor space   $ 40.00



   Retail-over 1,500 square fee of gross floor space   $100.00



   Beauty Salons, Barber Shops & Industrial Connection   $200.00



   Restaurants, Laundromats, & Nursing Homes   $400.00



The security deposit shall be collected by the Clerk-Treasurer and receipted
into the Water Utility and shall be returnable to the customer upon final
reading and full payment of all charges incurred for water utility service. 
In the event the customer is not delinquent in payment over (30) days for a
continuous period of thirty-six (36) months, the Clerk-Treasurer shall return
the security deposit to the customer upon submission of written request
therefor. (Ord. No. 84-21, § 1, 5-10-84)



Sec. 9-26  Disconnection and Reconnection of Service.



If at any time it becomes necessary to remove a water meter or disconnect
water service to a customer, for non-payment of charges or at the customer's
request, a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid by the
customer.  If at any time it becomes necessary to reconnect a water meter or
connect water service to a customer, a reconnection fee in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid by the customer prior to reconnection of
water service.  In the event that the request for removal or the
disconnection of water service or the reconnection of water service is done,
at the customer’s request, during non Town of Dyer business hours, each of
said fees shall increase by twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 



(Ord. No. 84-21, § 2, 5-10-84; Ord. No. 2008-12, 9-17-08)



Sec. 9-27  Water Hydrant Connection.



   a.   Any person or firm desiring to utilize a fire hydrant for the
purpose of purchasing water from the Dyer Water Utility, shall notify the
Director of Public Works or his designee.



   b.   Upon approval by the Director or his designee, the applicant
shall pay a deposit to the Clerk-Treasurer in the amount listed below under
deposit fee.



   c.   The person or firm applying for the hydrant permit shall be
responsible for any damage or problems that may occur to the fire hydrant or
hydrant meter in the course of obtaining water.



   d.   Upon receiving a paid receipt from the Clerk-Treasurer, the
applicant will be issued the proper size water meter and hydrant wrench. When
the meter and wrench are returned, the Department of Public Works will notify
the Clerk-Treasurer of the amount of water used and the applicant shall be
responsible for the amount of water used. A hydrant may only be opened by an
employee of the Town of Dyer after issuance of a valid permit. Except in
extraordinary cases, only the hydrant located at the Public Works facility
shall be available for use by the public under the provision of this
ordinance.



(Ord. No. 90-6, 3-13-90)



Sec. 9-28  Deposit Fees.



The following deposit and rental/usage fees are established:



   1.   Deposit for hydrant meter with backflow device:   $1,500.00



   2.   Deposit for hydrant wrench:   $26.00



   3.   The rental fee for the hydrant meter shall be $50.00 plus $1.00
per day for each day of usage payable in advance.  Any unpaid fees and/or
damage to the hydrant meter or wrench shall be deducted from the deposit. 
Any overpayment shall be refunded.



It shall be unlawful for any person to open a hydrant without a permit having
been issued to such person as herein above provided. (Ord. No. 90-6, 3-13-90;
Ord. No. 2008-12, 9-17-08)



Sec. 9-29  Accuracy Tests.



Each person or firm purchasing water from the Dyer Water Utility shall be
entitled to have the accuracy of the water meter on his property checked for
accuracy at any reasonable time upon five (5) days' notice to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town. Each such customer shall be entitled to one (1)
accuracy test each twelve (12) months, as requested, without charge.
Thereafter, additional meter accuracy tests shall be performed by the Dyer
Water Utility, except that the requesting customer shall be responsible for
the cost of the test in the event the test indicates the meter is accurate.
In such event, the Clerk-Treasurer shall assess the customer the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) which shall be added to the customer's next succeeding bill.
(Ord. No. 84-21, § 4, 5-10-84)



Sec. 9-30  Installation of Meters.



   (a)   Space shall be provided by the consumer for installation of
the water meter. The meter shall be accessible to the Dyer Water Utility, and
its duly authorized representative, at all times. The plumbing inspector of
the Town of Dyer shall have authority to require the consumer to locate or
relocate the meter if, in his opinion, the meter is inaccessible or is
rendered inaccessible as a result of reconstruction, remodeling, or
improvement of the real estate serviced.



   (b)   All water meters shall be equipped with an electronic
transmitting register that will allow the meter to be read locally and to
transmit readings via radio frequency to a remote reading device.



   (c)   An electric transmitting register shall be required for all
new construction and for all existing water service customers.



   (d)   Meters will be read electronically via radio frequency by the
utility each month. Effective February 1, 2014, a monthly meter reading
surcharge shall apply to any customer that has not converted to an electric
transmitting register in accordance with Section 9-30. Call-in readings shall
not be accepted.



   (e)   Any person or entity found in violation of the terms of this
section shall be subject to a fine of $250.00.  Each day this section is
violated shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 84-21, § 5, 5-10-84; Am. Ord. 2013-12, § 1, 11-14-13; Am. Ord.
No. 2014-17, 11-13-14; Am. Ord. No. 2016-19, § 1, 7-14-16)



Sec. 9-31  Contract for Service.



   a.   Any person or firm desiring to purchase water from the
Department of Public Utilities (Dyer Water Utility) of the Town of Dyer shall
execute a contract in favor of the Dyer Public Works Department in the form
of "Exhibit A" attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. In the
event the person or firm contracting for such service is not the registered
owner of the real estate to which the water service is provided, it shall be
necessary for the owner of the real estate serviced to executor a
“Guarantee” as provided on “Exhibit A” attached hereto and made a
part hereof by reference, which shall be executed by the owner of the
serviced real estate Within ten (10) days after water service is provided to
the subject real estate.



   b.   In the event the owner fails or refuses to executor and deliver
to the Clerk-Treasurer such a “Guarantee” within such ten (10) day
period, the water service shall be disconnected and shall not be reconnected
until the required “Guarantee” is so executed by the owner.



   c.   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to notify the owner of each
parcel of real estate to which water is presently supplied, who has not
heretofore executed a contract for water service and/or guarantee of
contract, of the requirements of this ordinance. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
further provide each such owner with a guarantee and contract in the form of
“Exhibit A”, which shall be executed by said owner and his tenant and
returned to the Clerk-Treasurer within fifteen (15) days of the date mailed.
If the executed contract and guarantee is not executed and filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer within said fifteen (15) days, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall send to the owner, and also to the person to whom
service is registered, a second and final notice which shall notify and
advise such persons or firms that water service will be disconnected seven
(7) days from the date of such notice. In the event the owner and person to
whom such water service is billed refuse or fail to execute and file such
contract with the Clerk- Treasurer within such seven (7) day period, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall direct the Director of Public Works to disconnect the
water service to such real estate. Service shall not thereafter be
reconnected until the “Contract” and “Guarantee” attached hereto and
“Exhibit A” and incorporated herein by reference are duly executed and
filed with the Clerk-Treasurer, and the reconnection fee in the amount of
twenty dollars ($20.00), as hereinabove provided, is paid.  (Ord. No. 84-21,
§ 6, 5-10-84)



Sec. 9-32  Delinquent Accounts.



Residential accounts with a delinquent balance of one hundred dollars
($100.00) or more for a continuous period in excess of thirty (30) days shall
be disconnected, and shall not be reconnected until the account, together
with the reconnection fee as hereinabove provided, is paid in full.
Commercial accounts with delinquent balance in excess of the average one (1)
month billing for a continuous period in excess of thirty (30) days shall be
disconnected, and shall not be reconnected until the account, together with
the recognition fee as herein provided, is paid in full. (Ord. No. 84-21, §
7, 5-10-84)



Sec. 9-33  Violation.



Any person found in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall be subject
to a fine in an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00). Each
day this ordinance is violated shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. No.
84-21, § 8, 5-10-84)



Sec. 9-34  Interest Penalty Waived If On Social Security.



Any citizen of the Town of Dyer who receives a bill for the rendering of
utility services by the Town, and who also receives social security payments,
shall not be liable for any interest penalty stated on said utility bill.
(Res. No. 91-9, 4-9-91)



Sec. 9-35  Discontinuance of Water Service/Administrative Appeal.



   (a)   This appeal process shall not apply to water disconnections
due to necessary repairs, any tampering, or knowingly permitting any
tampering with any service pipe, service stop, meter, or meter seal.



   (b)   In all other cases, the Town of Dyer Water Utility shall give
at least seven (7) days prior written notice, either mailed to such customer
at his address as shown upon the utility's records or personally delivered to
him where a person is on the premises, advising the customer of the reason
for the proposed discontinuance of service, and stating that service shall be
discontinued if the reason continues to be uncorrected at the conclusion of
seven (7) days; and further providing that the customer may request an
administrative hearing to held prior to discontinuance of service. The
administrative hearing shall be held before the Dyer Town Administrator. In
the event of the absence of the Town Administrator, the hearing may be held
before his designated representative. At the conclusion of the administrative
hearing, the Town Administrator or his designee shall have the authority,
based on good cause, to affirm, modify, or reverse the order to discontinue
service. The Town Administrator or his designee shall provide the decision of
the hearing in writing.



   (c)   The Town of Dyer Water Utility may discontinue service without
notice in cases arising due to necessary repairs, any tampering, or knowingly
permitting any tampering with any service pipe, service stop, meter, or meter
seal.  (Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 9-12-13)



Sec. 9-36 Through Sec. 9-39  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Regulations To Protect the Public Water System From
Contamination.



Sec. 9-40  Cross-Connection Defined.



A cross-connection shall be defined as any physical connection or arrangement
between two (2) otherwise separate systems, one (1) of which contains potable
water from the Town of Dyer, “Town”, water system, and the other, water
from a private source, water of unknown or questionable safety, or steam;
gases, or chemicals, whereby there may be a flow from one (1) system to the
other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between
the two (2) systems. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 1, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-41  Cross-Connection Prohibited.



No person, firm, or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross-connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private,
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the Town may enter the supply or distribution system of the Town,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Water
Utility Department of the Town, “Utility” and by the Environmental
Management Board in accordance with Rule 320 IAC 3-9. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 2,
12-12-89)



Sec. 9-42  Inspections and Fees.



It shall be the duty of the Utility to cause inspections to be made of all
properties served by the public water system where cross connections with the
public water system is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and
reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as
established by the Utility. However, inspection shall be mandatory upon
issuance of a permit for reconstruction or remodeling. Inspection shall also
be made at the time of sale of real estate if inspection is required for
proper sewer separation. Inspection fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord.
No. 89-48, § 3, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-43  Right of Entry.



Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Utility shall
have the right to request entry at any reasonable time to examine any
property served by a connection to the public water system of the Town for
cross-connections. On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property
so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of
access or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be deemed evidence
of the presence of cross-connections. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 4, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-44  Discontinuance of Water Service.



The Utility is authorized and directed to discontinue water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance exists, and to
take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the public water system. Water service shall be
discontinued only after reasonable notice is served on the owner, lessee, or
occupants of the property or premises where a violation is found or suspected
to exist. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 5, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-45  Emergency Situations.



It is deemed by the Utility that a cross-connection or any emergency
endangers public health, safety, or welfare and requires immediate action,
and a written finding to that effect is filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the
Town and delivered to the consumer's premises, service may be immediately
discontinued. The consumer shall have an opportunity for hearing within ten
(10) days of such emergency discontinuance. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 6, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-46  Backflow Preventers.



All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals, mortuaries,
wastewater treatment plants, laboratories, and all other hazardous users
shall install and maintain a reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing. (Ord. No. 89-48, § 7, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-47  Licensed Plumber Required.



Installation of a cross-connection control or backflow prevention device
shall only be performed by a duly licensed plumbing contractor. (Ord. No.
89-48, § 8, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-48  Regulations Supplemental to State Uniform Plumbing Code.



This Ordinance does not supersede the State Uniform Plumbing Code or the
Town's Plumbing Ordinances, but is supplementary to them. (Ord. No. 89-48, §
9, 12-12-89)



Sec. 9-49 through Sec. 9-54  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Rates and Charges for Use and Service Rendered by Waterworks
System.



Sec. 9-55  Metered Monthly Rates.



There shall be and there are established for use of and service rendered by
the waterworks system of the Town of Dyer, the following rates and charges,
based on the use of water supplied by said waterworks system:



   Metered Rates



   Water Consumed Per Month            Rate Per 1,000 Gallons



   First      2,000 Gallons               $5.325



   Next      8,000 Gallons               $4.77



   Next      20,000 Gallons            $4.43



   Next      70,000 Gallons            $4.10



   Over      100,000 Gallons            $3.75



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Am. Ord. No. 2009-11, 11-7-09; Am. Ord. No.
2016-27, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-56  Minimum Charge.



   Meter Size (Inches)               Rate Per 1,000 Gallons



   5/8 to 3/4                     $  10.65



   1 (Residential customer)               $  10.65



   1 (Non-residential customer)               $  25.00



   1¼                        $  39.25



   1½                        $  48.80



   2                        $  75.35



   3                        $137.35



   4                        $219.30



   6                        $424.15



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 96-30, § 2, 12-10-96; Ord. No.
97-17, 7-8-97; Ord. No 97-20, 9-9-97; Am. Ord. No. 2009-11, 10-7- 09; Am.
Ord. No. 2016-27, 12-8-16; Am. Ord. 2017-02, 2-1-17)



Sec. 9-57  Fire Protection Charges - Hydrant Rental.



Private Hydrants - per hydrant - per annum:      $500.00



   Municipal Hydrant:



   Size of Meter (Inches)                  Monthly Charge



   5/8 - 1                              $
6.60



    1 1/2                              $
33.10



     2                                 $
52.95



     3                                 $
99.25



    
4                                 $165.45



    
6                                 $331.20



    
8                                 $472.85



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 2008-24, 12-17-08; Am. Ord. No.
2009-11, 10-7-09; Am. Ord. No. 2016-27, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-58  Fire Sprinkler Connection.



   Connection (Inches)                     Per Annum



    
2                                 $   
55.45



    
3                                 $  124.80



     4
                                 $  221.90



     6
                                 $  499.25



     8
                                 $  887.50



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Am. Ord. No. 2009-11, 10-7-09; Am. Ord. No.
2016-27, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-59  Temporary Users.



Water furnished to temporary users such as contractors, circuses, etc., shall
be charged on the basis of the metered gallon rates hereinbefore set forth as
estimated and established by the Waterworks Superintendent. (Ord. No. 87-34,
§ 1[e], 6-14-89)



Sec. 9-60  Late Payment Charge.



All bills for water services not paid within fifteen (15) days from the due
date thereof, as stated in such bills, shall be subject to the collection or
deferred payment charge of ten percent (10%) on the first three dollars
($3.00) plus three percent (3%) on the excess over three dollars ($3.00).
(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94)



Sec. 9-61  Water-Non-Recurring Charges.



   Water Non-recurring
Charges                           Amount



   Tap Fee - 5/8 inch - ¾
inch                                 $375.00



   Tap Fee - 1
inch                                    $45
0.00



   Larger than 1
inch                                 Cost;
no less than $450.00



   Disconnection
Charge                                 $ 
50.00



   Reconnection
Charge                                 $ 
50.00



   Bad Check
Charge                                 $ 
20.00



      Credited to
Water                              $  10.00



      Credited to
Sewer                              $  10.00



   Manual Meter Reading Surcharge
Fee                     $  75.00 per month (effective
October 1, 2016)



                                       �
� (See Sec. 9-30)



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Am. Ord. No. 2003-28, 11-18-03; Am. Ord. No.
2009-11, 10-7-09; Am. Ord. 2013-12, § 2, 11-14-13; Am. Ord. No. 2016-19, §
2, 7-14-16)



Sec. 9-62  Customer Deposits.



   Customer
Deposits:                                 Amou
nt



   Residential                               
        $  40.00



   Retail under 1,500 sq.
ft                              $  40.00



   Retail over 1,500 sq.
ft                              $100.00



   Beauty shop, barber shop, and industrial
                     $200.00



   Restaurant, laundromat, nursing
home                        $400.00



   Water Hydrant Connection Permit
Fee                     $    7.00



   Meter Accuracy Test after one test per
year                  $  10.00



   Temporary water user



      First four
months                                 $ 
70.00



      Each month
thereafter                              $ 
28.00



   Late Payment
Charge                                 10%
of first $3.00, plus 3% of amount over $3.00



(Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, 10-17-94; Am. Ord. No. 2009-11, 10-7-09)



Sec. 9-63  Reasonable Return.



The Town elects to earn a reasonable return on the waterworks utility plant.
(Ord. No. 94-18, § 2, 10-17-94)



Sec. 9-64  Payments in Lieu of Taxes.



The Town elects to receive payments in lieu of taxes from the waterworks.
(Ord. No. 94-18, § 3, 10-17-94)



Sec. 9-65  Effective Date. 6



The rates and charges set out in this ordinance shall become effective only
after said rates and charges are approved by the Indiana Utility Regulatory
Commission. (Ord. No. 94-18, § 5, 10-17-94)



                         



6   Editor's Note: The Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission approved the
schedule of rates and charges on January 4, 1989.



Sec. 9-66  Penalties.



Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision, rule or
regulation of this ordinance, or any amendment thereof, or act supplementary
thereto, hereafter passed, wherein no penalty is fixed shall be subject to a
fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each such offense and where there is a continuing
violation of any rule or provision and notice is given such patron thereof,
each day that such patron shall continue to violate the same thereafter shall
be deemed and taken as a separate offense and punishable by a separate fine
in the amount above provided. All fines, penalties for delinquencies,
installments of water rentals, charges for shutting off and turning on the
water and all permit fees and other charges made water patrons under the
provisions of this ordinance or acts hereafter passed pertaining to the
waterworks system when collected, shall be paid over to the Town's
Clerk-Treasurer, and shall belong to, and be credited to the water works fund
of the Town. (Ord. No. 89-15, 5-9-89)



Sec. 9-67  System Development Charges.



A system development charge will be collected from new customers of the Town
municipal waterworks in accordance with the following schedule:



 

 
   Meter Size


 
5/8"
 
1"
 
1-1/2"
 
2"
 
3"
 
4"


Ratio
 
1.0
 
1.0
 
5.0
 
8.0
 
15.0
 
25.0


Year
 
   System Development Charges


2010 and thereafter
 
1,665
 
1,665
 
8,325
 
13,320
 
24,975
 
41,262



 



(Ord. No. 2006-10, 8-16-06)



Sec. 9-68 through Sec. 9-69  Reserved for Future Use.



Division V. Other Regulations.



Sec. 9-70  Swimming Pool-When Assessment Waived.



   a.   Any resident who applies for and obtains a building permit for
construction of a swimming pool shall be enacted to fill the pool one (1)
time within fifteen (15) days after completion of construction of said pool
without assessment of a sewer charge on the gallons used to fill the pool.



   b.   Any resident of the Town of Dyer with an existing swimming pool
shall be permitted to fill the pool one (1) time each year between May 15 and
June 15 without assessment of a sewer charge on the gallons used to fill the
pool. (Ord. No. 89-19, 5-9-89)



Sec. 9-71  Information to be Filed With Clerk-Treasurer.



Any resident desiring to fill a pool without assessment of a sewer charge on
the gallons used shall serve written notification to the Clerk-Treasurer's
office, which shall state the resident's name and address, and the present
reading on the water meter. The resident shall have seventy two (72) hours to
fill the pool at which time said resident shall present a statement to the
Clerk-Treasurer as to the present reading on the resident's water meter.
Provided the resident complies with these conditions, the resident shall not
be assessed a sewage charge for water used during the seventy two (72) hour
period granted to fill the pool.



(Ord. No. 89-19, 5-9-89)



Sec. 9-72  Sprinkling Regulations.



   a.   In order to insure adequate supplies of water for the Town of
Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, that the following regulations shall apply during
the summer months, or other emergencies as determined by the Town Council.



      1.   That all residences, businesses or owners of property
having an even numbered street address shall sprinkle yards, gardens, flowers
or other areas only on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.



      2.   That all residences, businesses or owners of property
having an odd numbered street address shall sprinkle yards, gardens, flowers
or other areas only on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays.



      3.   That due to the extra heavy water demand on Mondays as a
result of washing and hydrant flushing, there shall be no sprinkling on
Mondays.



      4.   That in the event of a severe water shortage, a
sprinkling ban will be put into effect. At that time all sprinkling or other
outside hose usage will cease until such time as determined by the Town
Council. (Ord. No. 81-30, § 1-4, 7-14-81)



   b.   Any person or firm who violates the terms and provisions of
this ordinance shall be fined in an amount not less than Twenty Dollars
($20.00) and not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00). Each day a
violation occurs is a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 84-25, § 5, 6-12-84)



Sec. 9-73 through Sec. 9-79  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 3. STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. 7



                           



7   This Article is also addressed in §§ 2-68 through 2-71 of this Code.



Division I. General Provisions



Sec. 9-80  State Law Incorporated By Reference.



The statute (Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5) of the State of Indiana entitled “An
Act to Amend the Indiana Code Concerning Storm Water Management” is adopted
by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, so as to make said Act and
any and all amendments thereto effective and operative as to the Town of
Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord.No. 91-5, § 1, 2-12-91)



Sec. 9-81  Department of Storm Water Management Created.



Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5, et seq., a Department of Storm Water
Management is created for the purpose of providing for the collection,
disposal and drainage of storm and surface water and the relieving of
sanitary sewers of such water in the district.



(Ord. No. 91-5, § 2, 2-12-91)



Sec. 9-82  Territory Included Within District.



The territory to be included initially in the District shall be all of that
territory included at any time within the corporate limits of the Town of
Dyer, and any territory, addition, or platted subdivision or unplatted lands
lying outside the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, which have
been taken into or which have been connected with the public sewer system of
the Town of Dyer, Indiana, in accordance with the provisions of any prior
act, and the drainage of which discharge is into or through the storm sewer
system of the Town of Dyer Indiana.



(Ord. No. 91-5, § 3, 2-12-91)



Sec. 9-83  Board of Storm Water Management.



   a.   The Board shall consist of three (3) Directors to be appointed
by the Town Council, not more than two (2) of whom may be of the same
political party. The term of the first Director shall end on December 31,
1991; the term of the second Director shall end on December 31, 1992; and the
term of the third Director shall end on December 31, 1993. Thereafter all
terms will be for a period of three (3) years.



   b.   The members of the Board shall be compensated for their
services as set forth annually in the salary ordinance for the Town of Dyer.



   c.   Should a vacancy occur on the Board, that vacancy shall be
filled by the Town Council within sixty (60) days from the date the vacancy
occurred. The Town Council shall appoint one of its own members to fill the
vacancy during any interim period of time. The Town Council may by simple
majority vote remove a Director at any time when, in the judgment of the Town
Council, it is for the best interest of the Department of Storm Water
Management.



(Ord. No. 91-5, § 4, 2-12-91)



Sec. 9-84  Special Taxing District.



Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 8-1.5-5, there is created a special taxing
district which shall include all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, as identified and set
out hereinabove in Sec. 2-65.



(Ord. No. 91-5, § 5, 2-12-91)



Division II. Storm Water Service User Fee Rates and Policies



Sec. 9-85  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   a.   “Abatement” - Any action taken to remedy, correct, or
eliminate a condition within, associated with, or impacting a storm water
drainage system.



   b.   “Agricultural Property” -  A parcel of land or lot having
an area in excess of five (5) acres and upon which crops have been grown for
harvest within the past twelve (12) months.



   c.   “Apartment/Condominium Property” - A lot or parcel of land
on which is situated a building containing five (5) or more single-family
dwelling units, or on which two (2) or more buildings each containing
multiple single-family dwelling units are situated.



   d.   “Approved Plans” - Plans approved by the Town of Dyer
Department of Storm Water Management according to a permits and plan review
which will govern all improvements made within the Town that require storm
water facilities or changes or alterations to existing storm water facilities.



   e.   “Best Management Practices (BMP)” - Structural and/or
non-structural controls that temporarily store storm water runoff to reduce
flooding and provide other benefits.



   f.   “Board” - Board of Directors of the Town of Dyer Department
of Storm Water Management established under Section 9-80, et seq., of the
Dyer Town Code.



   g.   “Code” - Dyer Town Code.



   h.   “County Regulated Drain” -  Part of the storm water
conveyance system under the jurisdiction of the Lake County Drainage Board,
including certain ditches, tiles, and sewers.



   i.   “Design Storm” - A rainfall event of specified size and
return frequency that is used to calculate the runoff volume and peak
discharge rate of a BMP.



   j.   “Detention” - The temporary storage of storm water runoff
in a basin, pond or other structure to control the peak discharge rates by
holding the storm water for a period of time and which provides some gravity
settling of particulates.



   k.   “Direct Discharge” - Storm water runoff from a lot or
parcel of real property contiguous to Plum Creek, Hart Ditch or Dyer Ditch,
or any laterals to either Plum Creek, Hart Ditch or Dyer Ditch that are
regulated by the Lake County Drainage Board and enters either such ditch or
lateral without crossing other properties or entering the Public Storm Water
Facilities or Storm Water System.



   l.   “Director” - A person appointed by the Dyer Town Council to
undertake the tasks and responsibilities set forth by this Division, who
shall serve at the discretion of the Dyer Town Council.



   m.   “Drain” - Any sewer, tile, ditch, stream or other storm
water conveyance channel or conduit.



   n.   “DSM” - Dyer Department of Storm Water Management.



   o.   “Equivalent Impervious Area” - The square foot sum of all
land cover types multiplied by the corresponding runoff coefficient for each
land cover type, as identified as follows:



      Land Cover               Runoff Coefficient



      Asphalt and concrete drives,



      walks, and parking                0.90



      Rooftops                      0.90



      Grass, lawns, parks, golf



      courses, cemeteries                0.15



      Unimproved land, woods,



      agricultural                      0.20



      Gravel drives and parking             0.55



      Ponds and lakes                   0.90



   p.   “Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)” - A unit value equal to
the average amount of equivalent impervious area of a residential property
within the Town of Dyer and established at 4,343 square feet.  It is also
the basis for calculating the proper assessment of storm water charges to all
users of the Dyer Storm Water System.



   q.   “Exempt Drain” - Plum Creek, Hart Ditch or Dyer Ditch, or
any laterals to either Plum Creek, Hart Ditch or Dyer Ditch that are
regulated by the Lake County Drainage Board.



   r.   “Impervious Area” - Real property that has been paved
and/or covered with buildings and materials which include, but are not
limited to, concrete, asphalt, rooftop, blacktop, and compacted gravel, such
that the natural infiltration of water into the soil is prevented.



   s.   “Infiltration” - A complex process of allowing storm water
runoff to penetrate the ground surface and flow through the upper soil
surface.



   t.   “Lot/Parcel” - A part or portion of land having a legal
description that is formally set forth in a conveyance instrument.



   u.   “Non-Residential Property” - All properties not encompassed
within the definition of Residential Property shall be defined as
non-residential property.  Non-residential property shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to:



      1.   Agricultural property;



      2.   Apartment and condominium property;



      3.   Mobile home parks;



      4.   Commercial property;



      5.   Industrial property;



      6.   Institutional property;



      7.   Governmental property;



      8.   Churches;



      9.   Schools;



      10.   Federal, State and local government owned property; and



      11.   Any other property not mentioned herein and not
specifically defined as either residential property or vacant residential
property.



   v.   “NPDES” - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System.  Regulations for storm water discharges as described in The Federal
Register, 40 CFR Parts 122,123 and 124, as amended.



   w.   “NPDES Permit” - Permit required to be obtained by the Town
of Dyer pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act, as amended.



   x.   “Peak Discharge” - The maximum rate of flow of water
passing a given point during or after a rainfall event.



   y.   “Pervious Area” - Real property that has a runoff
coefficient of less than 0.90.



   z.   “Private Storm Water Facilities” - Various storm water and
drainage works not under the control or ownership of the Town, County, State
and/or Federal Government which may include inlets, conduits, pipes, pumping
stations, manholes, structures, channels, outlets, retention or detention
basins, other structural components and equipment designed to transport,
move, hold or regulate storm water.



   aa.   “Public Storm Water Facilities” - The various storm water
and drainage works under the control and/or ownership of the Town, County,
State or Federal Government which may include inlets, conduits, pipes,
pumping stations, manholes, structures, channels, outlets, retention or
detention basins, other structural components and equipment designed to
transport, move, hold or regulate storm water.



   bb.   “Residential Property” - For the purpose of this division,
Residential Property refers to a lot or parcel or contiguous lots or parcels
of single ownership of real property on which a building or mobile home is
situated, which building contains a group of rooms forming a single
inhabitable dwelling unit with facilities that are used or are intended to be
used primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.  This definition
also includes a lot containing one (1) individual building containing four
(4) or fewer separate or contiguous single-family dwelling units. Each and
every residential property shall be assigned one (1) ERU. A Residential
Property having a land area in excess of five (5) acres shall be assigned one
(1) ERU for the first five (5) acres, and the remaining acres in excess of
five (5) acres shall be calculated according to its land cover type and size
and additional ERUs shall be billed accordingly.



   cc.   “Retention” - The holding of storm water runoff in a
constructed basin or pond or in a natural body of water without release
except by means of evaporation, infiltration or emergency bypass.



   dd.   “Retrofit” - To install or improve a Private Storm Water
Facility using BMP.



   ee.   “Runoff Coefficient” - Ratio of peak flow from a drainage
area (in cubic feet per second) and the product of rainfall intensity (in
inches per hour) over a given land area (in acres). A measure of how much
storm water runoff is produced in response to the rainfall.



   ff.   “Storm Sewer” - A sewer designed or intended to convey
only storm water, surface runoff, street wash waters, and drainage, and not
intended for sanitary sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.  The portion of a sewer intended to carry storm water only,
which begins at the grating or opening where water enters said sewer, through
the sewer and any other conduits to the outlet structure where water enters a
channel, natural watercourse or combined sewer.



   gg.   “Storm Water” - The chemical compound of hydrogen and
oxygen which is produced from atmospheric clouds as rain, snow, sleet, and
hail.



   hh.   “Storm Water Utility User Fee” - A charge imposed on users
of the Town's Public Storm Water Facilities and Storm Water System.



   ii.   “Storm Water System.” - All constructed facilities,
structures and natural watercourses under the ownership, and/or control of
the Town and/or the DSM, used for collecting and conducting storm water to,
through and from drainage areas to the point of final outlet, including, but
not limited to, any and all of the following: inlets, conduits and
appurtenant features, creeks, channels, catch basins, ditches, streams,
culverts, retention or detention basins and pumping stations; and excluding
therefrom any part of the system of drains and watercourses under the
jurisdiction of the Lake County Drainage Board.



   jj.   “Storm Water Utility Customer/User” - The owner of a lot
or parcel of residential,  nonresidential property, or vacant residential
property.   



   kk.   “Subdivision Group” - All of the parcels of land within a
platted residential development.



   ll.   “Vacant Residential Property” - A lot or parcel of real
property on which there does not exist a building or mobile home and which
has a residential zoning classification A vacant residential property in
excess of five (5) acres in size shall be assigned a one-third (1/3) ERU for
the first five (5) acres, thereafter the remaining acreage shall be
calculated according to its land cover type and additional ERUs shall be
billed accordingly.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.1  Storm Water Utility User Fee.



A Storm Water Utility user fee shall be imposed on each and every lot and
parcel of real property within the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, which
charge shall be assessed against the owner thereof, who shall be considered
the Storm Water Utility customer/user for the purposes of this Division. 
This user fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay for the repair,
replacement, planning, improvement, operation, regulation and maintenance of
the existing and future storm water system for the Town of Dyer.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.2  Storm Water Utility User Fee Establishment Procedures.



The Storm Water Utility user fee shall be Eighteen dollars and seventy-six
cents ($18.76) per ERU per month, effective February 1, 2017.  Any billings
for storm water service outside this time shall be on a per diem basis. 
This Storm Water Utility user fee rate is designed to recover and be able to
pay the cost of rendering storm water service to the users of the Storm Water
System, and shall be the basis for assessment of the Town’s Storm Water
Utility user fee.  This rate is established so as to maintain adequate fund
reserves to provide for reasonably expected variations in the cost of
providing services, as well as variations in the demand for services. This
rate shall be evaluated annually as to its sufficiency to satisfy the needs
of the DSM.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02; Am. Ord. No.
2009-10, 1-28-09; Am. Ord. No. 2016-29, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-85.3  User Fee Structure.



For the purposes stated herein, there is hereby assessed a Storm Water
Utility user fee to each Storm Water Utility customer/user within the
corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, in an amount as
determined below.  For any such property, lot, parcel of land, building or
premises which contributes directly or indirectly to the Storm Water System
of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, such charge shall be based upon
the quantity of impervious area situated thereon. All properties having
pervious or impervious area within the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana,
will be assigned an equivalent residential unit (ERU), or a multiple thereof



   a.   Residential Properties.  A monthly flat user fee for storm
water service rendered to residential property located within the Town of
Dyer shall be charged to each account, according to the service address. All
residential properties are hereby assigned one (1) ERU. This flat rate shall
apply to all residential properties as defined herein, except that any
residential property having land area in excess of five (5) acres shall be
assigned one (1) ERU for the first five (5) acres, and the remaining acres in
excess of five (5) acres shall be calculated according to its land cover type
and size and additional ERUs shall be billed accordingly.



   b.   Nonresidential Properties.  Nonresidential properties located
within the Town of Dyer will be assigned an ERU based upon said properties'
individually measured pervious and impervious area (in square feet) divided
by 4,343 square feet (one ERU). This division will be calculated to the first
decimal place (nearest tenth of one ERU).



   c.   Vacant Residential Property.  Vacant residential property
located within the Town of Dyer shall be assigned one-third (1/3) of one (1)
ERU (.33 ERU) except that any vacant residential property in excess of five
(5) acres shall be assigned one-third (1/3) of one (1) ERU (.33 ERU) for the
first five (5) acres, thereafter the remaining acres will be calculated based
on the land cover type and additional ERUs will be billed accordingly.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20,  10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.4  Billings and Terms of Payment.



   a.   Billings.  All storm water service bills shall be rendered on
a monthly basis, along with the Storm Water Utility user’s charges for
other Town utility services.



   b.   Terms of Payment.  The Storm Water Utility user fee shall be
due on the payment date set out for the Town utility bill.  It shall be a
violation of this Division to fail to pay a storm water service bill when
due. All bills for storm water services not paid on or before the due date,
which due date shall be approximately fifteen (15) days after the bill is
rendered, shall be subject to a collection or deferred payment charge equal
to ten percent (10%) of the outstanding balance.



   c.   Collection.  Delinquent Storm Water Utility user fees may be
collected in a civil action along with other delinquent city utility charges
by the Town, and the Town shall be permitted to collect its reasonable
attorney's fees and court costs.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.5  Credit Policy and Procedure.



   a.   Credit Availability.  Credit will be available to all
properties except individual residential properties for various forms and
levels of abatement, as approved by the DSM in accordance with the Town of
Dyer Storm Water Service Credit Application and Appeal of ERU Calculations
Instruction Manual.



      1.   Maintenance Requirements.  Credit may only be allowed
for lots and parcels of real property where structural controls are
maintained in fully functional condition and according to maintenance
criteria and design standards required by the DSM.



      2.   Existing Structure Credits.  Credit may be allowed for
previously constructed abatement features or storm water controls.  The
amount of credit granted will be determined by the methods of design of the
structure and as approved by the DSM.



      3.   Direct Discharge Credit.  Credit may be granted on the
basis of location of a given property in relation to the Dyer Ditch, Hart
Ditch, or Plum Creek and other legal public drains under the control and
jurisdiction of the Lake County Drainage Board, if such property directly
discharges its storm water to such drain in conformance with all maintenance
criteria and design standards as applicable.



      4.   Voluntary Controls.  Voluntary controls and/or upgrades
of existing private storm water facilities through retrofitting that exceed
the Town’s standard storm water abatement design criteria may be considered
for credit on a case-by-case basis considering the impact of the controls on
the Town's Storm Water System, as determined by the DSM.



      5.   Industrial NPDES Permit Credits.  No credit shall be
allowed for industries in compliance with federal laws and regulations
regarding industrial storm water discharge permits.



      6.   Pollution Reduction.  No credit shall be allowed for
voluntary efforts to reduce the amount of pollutants in a user's storm water
runoff or for improvements to the quality of a user's storm water discharge.



      7.   Regional Basins.  Credit will not be granted to
properties draining into ponds or basins maintained or owned by the Town. 
Credit may only be considered for privately owned and maintained regional
controls.



      8.   Percent Discounted Credits for Private Storm Water
Facilities.



         (a)   Discounts and credits shall be computed on an ERU
basis.  A maximum credit equal to eighty percent (80%) of the gross ERUs
originally assigned may be granted for the construction and maintenance of
private storm water facilities considering the potential of each such
facility to reduce peak and/or volume storm water flow and direct discharge
capabilities.



         (b)   The administrative costs involved with operation
of the DSM shall be shared by all Storm Water Utility customers/users,
including future costs incurred to meet quality-based NPDES Permit
requirements which provide community-wide benefits, and thus cannot be
credited. The administrative cost component of the Storm Water Utility user
fee charges is approximately twenty percent (20%) of the overall DSM
operation costs.  Discounts and credits shall be cumulative; however, in no
case shall the total amount of discounts and credits exceed eighty percent
(80%) of the Storm Water Utility customer/user’s gross Storm Water Utility
user fee.  The formula for determining the applicable credit percentage for
individual parcels shall be specifically set out by the DSM.



      9.   Federal, State, Town, County and Private Roadways. 
Streets, roads and highways shall be given 100% credit as they form an
integral part of the Storm Water System. The surface water control system
incorporated in design of roadways are areas engineered to convey all design
runoff without street flooding. Primary elements of the drainage system yield
community-wide benefits and are installed to service the general public's
interests.



   b.   Credit Procedures.



      1.   Timing of Applications/Determinations.  An application
for credit shall be made on forms provided by the DSM and the Town
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be accompanied by the appropriate application fee
in the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).  It is the intent of the Town
that all applications will be reviewed and credits and discounts determined
within forty-five (45) days after submittal of a complete and correct
application package. Any credit issued or approved will be effective on the
1st billing cycle for that property following completion of construction, or
the date of the application.  However, in the discretion of the DSM, a
credit issued or approved may be applied retroactively to the first billing
of service charges under this Division.



      2.   Appeals.  Appeals of credit or discount determinations
shall be considered and reviewed consistent with the procedures set out below
for reconsideration of ERU determinations.



      3.   Payment Required Pending Appeal Determination.  An
application for credit, or an appeal of a determination thereon, shall not
constitute a valid reason for non-payment of the originally assessed storm
water service charge by the Storm Water Utility customer/user.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.6  Appeals of ERU Determinations.



If a Storm Water Utility customer/user determines that the ERU multiple
assigned to said user's real property is incorrect for any reason, said Storm
Water Utility customer/user shall have the right to appeal the ERU
determination and thus the rate assessed in the following manner:



   a.   The Storm Water Utility customer/user shall obtain and complete
a petition to appeal storm water rate form (“petition”), which shall be
returned to the Town of Dyer Clerk-Treasurer with verifiable documentation
supporting the appeal.



   b.   The Director shall investigate the appeal and, upon review
thereof, shall render a written determination to the Board and the Storm
Water Utility customer/user that either the original ERU determination and
assessed rate should be affirmed or the Storm Water Utility user fee should
be adjusted in accordance with the petition.



   c.   If a petition to appeal is denied, said determination shall be
forwarded to the Storm Water Utility customer/user by certified mail, return
receipt requested.  The Storm Water Utility customer/user shall then have
thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of said determination to request a
reconsideration by the Board.  Any additional facts concerning the appeal
shall be submitted in writing to the DSM, along with a copy of the original
petition and supporting documents, to the Board.  The Director shall submit
a written report of the determination in the case, along with any documents
used in denying the appeal.



   d.   Thereafter, the Board shall review all documentation and, if
requested in writing by the Storm Water Utility customer/user, conduct a
hearing to determine and resolve the appeal.  Such hearing will be scheduled
by the DSM, and the Storm Water Utility customer/user will be notified by
certified mail of the date of such hearing, which notice shall be received by
the Storm Water Utility customer/user at least seven (7) days prior to the
date of such hearing.  A written opinion shall be rendered within 
forty-five (45) days after the hearing or submission of documentation if no
hearing is conducted. The written opinion of the Board shall constitute the
final DSM determination. The hearing shall be electronically recorded and if
requested by the Storm Water Utility customer/ user, a transcript of the
hearing shall be provided to the Storm Water Utility customer/user. The Storm
Water Utility customer/user will be charged at a cost per page as determined
by the Board, in accordance with applicable law, as amended from time to time.



   e.   A Storm Water Utility customer/user aggrieved by the final
Board determination shall have the right to judicial review of such
determination in accordance with applicable Indiana law.



   f.   If the Director recommends the Storm Water Utility user fee be
reduced, or reduction is ordered by the Director, the Board or any Court of
competent jurisdiction, the Storm Water Utility customer/user shall be
credited accordingly for any overpayment made from the date of the petition.



   g.   Dispute or appeal of an ERU determination or storm water
service rate shall not be a valid reason for non-payment of the originally
assessed Storm Water Utility user fee by the Storm Water Utility
customer/user.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.7  Storm Water Fund.



   a.   There is hereby established for the Town of Dyer, Lake County,
Indiana, a Dyer Storm Water Operation and Maintenance Fund, which shall be a
non-reverting fund. All revenues and fees collected for storm water service,
including but not limited to, Storm Water Utility user fees, credit
application fees, and interest earnings on any unused funds, shall be
deposited in the Dyer Storm Water Operation and Maintenance Fund. 
Disbursements from this fund will be authorized by the Board. Such
disbursements will be used for the operation, maintenance and improvement of
the Town of Dyer's Storm Water System in accordance with applicable Indiana
law. Monies from this fund shall not revert to any other Town utilities or
Town fund and may not be transferred for any other purpose, except as
permitted by applicable Indiana law. The fund shall exist in perpetuity or 
until such time as this Division has been repealed, at which time any monies
held in said fund shall be transferred to the Town of Dyer's general fund
after payment of any and all fees, expenses or charges that may then be owing
for the operation, maintenance and improvement of the Town of Dyer's Storm
Water System.



   b.   Commencing in the first quarter of 2007, the Board, in
cooperation with the Town of Dyer Clerk-Treasurer, shall on a biennial basis
retain the services of a Certified Public Accountant to perform an
independent financial management report regarding the DSM and the Storm Water
Utility. Such report shall include an evaluation of the rates and charges
collected by the DSM, including the Storm Water Utility user fee,
expenditures by the Board, anticipated future revenues, and the overall
financial condition of the DSM and the Storm Water Utility. The report is
intended to provide information to the Board and the Town of Dyer officials
in their role as managers of the Storm Water Utility. The cost of such report
shall be paid by the DSM from the Dyer Storm Water Operation and Maintenance
Fund.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-85.8  Lien on Premises.



Each Storm Water Utility user fee charged pursuant to this Division is hereby
made a lien upon the residential, nonresidential and vacant residential
property to which the same is charged, and, if the same is not paid within
ninety (90) days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be certified to
the Auditor of Lake County, who shall place the same on the tax duplicate of
said County with the interest and penalties allowed by law to be collected as
other taxes are collected.



(Ord. No. 2002-17, 7-16-02; Am. Ord. No. 2002-20, 10-15-02)



Sec. 9-86 Prohibiting Discharges in the Storm Water Collection System.



   a.   For the purpose of this Division, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      1.   “Discharge” - To send forth or emit.



      2.   “Public Natural Outlet” - An area upon which occurs
the conveyance of storm water, including a street, gutter, catch basin, pipe,
channel, ditch, conduit, creek, stream and river.



      3.   “Storm Water” - Water resulting from rain, melting or
melted snow, hail or sleet.



   b.   It shall be unlawful for any person to drain, deposit, place or
otherwise discharge into any public natural outlet or storm water system
within the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, or to cause or permit to be
drained, deposited, placed or otherwise discharged into such waters any
substance or material other than storm water.  Those categories of non-storm
water discharges or flows set forth in 327 IAC 15-13-14(d), as amended, are
excepted and exempt from regulation under this ordinance.



   c.   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
ordinance shall be served by the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease or correct
all violations.  Failure to comply with such written notice shall constitute
a separate violation of this ordinance.  Any person who violated any
provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to two
thousand, five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day for each day that such
person is in violation of this ordinance.  The remedies and penalties
provided in this ordinance are not exclusive, and the Town of Dyer may seek
whatever other remedies are authorized by statute, at law or in equity,
against any person who violated the provisions of this ordinance.



   d.   Any person determined to be responsible, in whole or in part,
for a discharge in violation of this ordinance shall be liable to the Town of
Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, for payment of any and all necessary expenses
incurred in performing pollution abatement, including but not limited to
costs for testing, measuring, sampling, collecting, removing, containing,
treating, and disposing of any material.



   e.   The Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, may, immediately upon
discovering an ongoing or potential discharge of material prohibited by this
ordinance, petition the Circuit or Superior Court of Lake County, Indiana, or
the U.S. District Court, for a restraining order and temporary or permanent
injunction to halt or prohibit such discharge.



   f.   A Superintendent of Public Works, Town Manager, or other duly
authorized town employee having proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with provisions
of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2005-15, §§ 1 - 6, 9-21-05)



Sec. 9-87 through 9-89  Reserved For Future Use.



ARTICLE 4. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SANITATION.



Sec. 9-90  Governing State Law.



The Statute, Indiana Code, §§ 36-9-25-1 through 36-9-25-40, concerning the
establishment and maintenance of a department of public sanitation, defining
its powers and duties, and creating a sanitary district, be and hereby is
adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, so as to make said
Statute and any and all amendments thereto effective and operative as to the
Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 91-7, § 1, 3-12-91)



Sec. 9-91  Department of Public Sanitation Created.



Pursuant to said Statute a Department of Public Sanitation shall be and is
created for the purpose of providing for the collection, disposal, and
drainage of wastewater in the Town of Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 91-7, § 2,
3-12-91)



Sec. 9-92  Territory Included in District.



The territory to be included initially in the district shall be all of that
territory included at any time within the corporate limits of the Town of
Dyer, and any territory, addition, or platted subdivision or unplatted lands
lying outside the corporate limits of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, which have
been taken into or which have been connected with the wastewater treatment
system of the Town of Dyer. Indiana, in accordance with the provisions of any
prior act, and the drainage of which discharges into or through the sewer
system of the Town of Dyer, Indiana. (Ord. No. 91-7, § 3, 3-12-91)



Sec. 9-93  Board.



The Board shall consist of three (3) commissioners to be appointed by the
Town Council, not more than two (2) of whom may be of the same political
party. The term of the first commissioner shall end on December 31, 1991; the
term of the second commissioner shall end on December 31, 1992; and the term
of the third commissioner shall end on December 31, 1993. Thereafter all
terms will be for a period of four (4) years. The members of the Board shall
be compensated for their services set forth annually in the salary ordinance
for the Town of Dyer. Should a vacancy occur on the Board, that vacancy shall
be filled by the Town Council within sixty (60) days from the date the
vacancy occurred. (Ord. No. 91-7, § 4, 3-12-91)



Sec. 9-94  Special Taxing District.



Pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-9-25, there is created a special taxing
district which shall include all of the territory as identified and set out
hereinabove in Sec. 9-92. (Ord. No. 91-7, § 5, 3-12-91)



Sec. 9-95  Concurrent Powers.



This ordinance shall not be construed as adversely affecting any outstanding
sewage works revenue bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to Indiana Code,
§ 36-9-23. The Town shall retain its municipal works board and the town's
ability to issue revenue bonds pursuant to Indiana Code, § 36-9-23. The
municipal works board and the Board of Sanitary Commissioners shall have
concurrent power with respect to the sewer system of the Town of Dyer,
Indiana.  (Ord. No. 91-7, § 6, 3-12-91)



Sec. 9-96 through Sec. 9-99  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 5. REGULATIONS ADDRESSING PUBLIC SEWERS AND DRAINS.



Sec. 9-100  Definitions.



Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in the Ordinance shall be as follows:



   a.   “Ammonia (or NH3-N)” shall mean the same as Ammonia
Nitrogen measured as Nitrogen. The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” as defined in
this article.



   b.   “Building (or House) Drain” means the lowest horizontal
piping of building drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and
conveys it to a point approximately five (5) feet outside the foundation wall
of the building or house.



      1.   “Building Drain (Sanitary)” - A building drain which
conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only.



      2.   “Building Drain (Storm)” - A building drain which
conveys storm water or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.



   c.   “Building (Or House) Lateral sewer” means the extension
from the building drain to the sewage system or other place of disposal.
(Also called house connections.)



      1.   “Building Sewer (Sanitary)” - A building sewer which
conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only.



      2.   “Building Sewer (Storm)” - A building sewer which
conveys storm water or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.



   d.   “Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (or CBOD)” of
sewage, sewage effluent, polluted waters or industrial wastes shall mean the
rate at which microorganisms use the oxygen in water or wastewater while
stabilizing decomposable carbonaceous organic matter under aerobic
conditions.  The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” as defined in this section.



   e.   “CFR” means Code of Federal Regulations.



   f.   “Chemical Oxygen Demand (or COD)” of sewage, sewage
effluent, polluted waters or industrial wastes is a measure of the oxygen
consuming capacity or inorganic and organic matter present in wastewater. All
laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in “Standard Methods.”



   g.   “Collector Sewer” shall mean a sewer whose primary purpose
is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges.



   h.   “Combined Sewer” shall mean a sewer intended to receive
both wastewater and storm or surface water.



   i.   “Commercial User” shall mean any establishment involved in
a commercial enterprise, (for profit or not for profit) business or service
which, based on a determination by tile Town, discharges primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.



   j.   “Compatible Pollutant” shall mean carbonaceous biochemical
oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and E. Coli bacteria, plus additional
pollutants identified in the Dyer Sanitary District NPDES Permit if the Dyer
Sanitary District Treatment Works was designed to treat such pollutants and
in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term
substantial degree is not subject to precise definition, but generally
contemplates removals in the order of eighty (80%) percent or greater. Minor
incidental removals in the order of ten (10%) to thirty (30%) percent are not
considered substantial. Examples of the additional pollutants which may be
considered compatible include:



      1.   Chemical oxygen demand,



      2.   Total organic carbon,



      3.   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds,



      4.   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds,



      5.   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin
(except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with operation of
the treatment works and the collection and transmission system).



   k.   “E. Coli” shall mean any or a number of organisms common to
tile intestinal tract or man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage
is an indicator of pollution.



   l.   “Easement” shall mean an acquired legal right for the
specific use of land owned by others.



   m.   “Effluent Data” means information necessary to determine
the identity, amount, frequency, concentration, temperature or other
characteristics of any pollutant discharged.



   n.   “EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or a
duly authorized official of that agency.



   o.   “Excessive Strength Surcharge” shall mean an additional
charge which is billed to users for treating compatible sewage wastes with an
average strength in excess of “normal domestic sewage."



   p.   “Floatable Oil” shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical
state, such that will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a
pretreatment facility approved by the Town.



   q.   “Force Main” shall mean a pipe in which wastewater is
carried under pressure.



   r.   “Garbage” shall mean any solid wastes from the preparation,
cooking or dispensing of food and from handling, storage or sale of produce.



   s.   “Garbage, Properly Shredded” shall mean the wastes from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow condition
normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half
(½) inch in any dimension.



   t.   “Governmental User” shall mean any Federal, State or local
governmental user of the wastewater treatment works.



   u.   “GPD” shall mean gallons per day.



   v.   “Heavy Demand Substances” are concentrations of phosphorus,
ammonia, suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand in sewage which exceed
the levers established in this code.



   w.   “IDEM” shall mean Indiana Department of Environmental
Management.



   x.   “Incompatible Pollutant” shall mean any pollutant that is
not defined as a compatible pollutant, including nonbiodegradable dissolved
solids, and further defined in Regulation 40 CFR Part 403.



   y.   “Industrial User” shall mean any manufacturing or
processing facility that discharges industrial waste.



   z.   “Industrial Wastes” shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous
substances or form of energy discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an
industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing or any natural resource carried on by a
person and shall further mean any waste from an industrial sewer.



   aa.   “Infiltration” shall mean the water entering a sewer
system, including building drains and sewers, from the ground, through such
means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls. (Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from
inflow.)



   bb.   “Infiltration/Inflow” shall mean the total quantity of
water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.



   cc.   “Inflow” shall mean the water discharged into a sewer
system, including building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not
limited to, roof leader, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains,
unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers,
catch basins, storm waters, surface runoffs street wash waters or drainage.
(inflow does not include, and is distinguishable from infiltration.)



   dd.   “Inspector” shall mean the person or persons duty
authorized by the Town through its Board of Sanitary Commissioners to inspect
and approve the installation or building sewers and their connection to the
public sewer system.



   ee.   “Interceptor Sewer” shall mean a sewer whose primary
purpose is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment
facility.



   ff.   “Institutional User” shall mean any establishment involved
in a social, charitable, religious, and/or educational function which, based
on a determination by the Town discharges primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.



   gg.   “Interference” shall mean a discharge, which alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal and/or causes a violation of a NPDES Permit or
causes the Town to be in violation of any local, state or federal laws, or
prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or
any more stringent State or local regulations; Section 405 of the Clean Water
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Tide II commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations
contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.



   hh.   “May” shall mean the indication of a discretionary
condition.



   ii.   “mgl” means milligrams per liter.



   jj.   “National Categorical Pretreatment Standard” means any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and © of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a
specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR, Chapter L
Subchapter N. Parts 405-471.



   kk.   “Nonresidential Discharger” means any user of the sewer
system who discharges a nondomestic effluent into the system by means of
pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches,
surface water intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and
appliances appurtenant thereto. (Specified in 40 CFR Part 403 as
“industrial user”)



   ll.   “Normal Domestic Sewage” (for the purpose of determining
surcharges) shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily
concentration as follows:



   T.S.S                  not more than 200 mg/l



   CBOD                  not more than 175 mg/l



   Ammonia-Nitrogen         not more than 25 mg/l



   Phosphorus               not more than 10 mg/l



As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or sanitary
conveniences as distinct from industrial processes.



   mm. “NPDES Permit” National Pollutant Discharge Elimination system
Permit setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States
pursuant to section 402 of Public Law 95-217.



   nn.   “Operation and Maintenance” shall mean the proper care,
maintenance and repairs necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection,
transport and treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to
receiving waters that conform with all related Federal, State and local
requirements.



   oo.   “Other Service Charges” shall mean tap charges, connection
charges, area charges and other identifiable charges other than excessive
strength surcharges.



   pp.   “Outlet” shall mean any outlet, natural or constructed,
including storm sewers, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or around water.



   qq.   “pH” shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the
hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen-ions,
in grams per liter of solution.



   rr.   “Pass Through” shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW
into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, along
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of a NPDES Permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   ss.   “Person” shall mean any and all persons, natural or
artificial, including, but not limited to any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, partnership, copartnership, joint stock
company, trust, estate, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, the State of Indiana, the United States of America, or
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include
the plural where indicated by the context.



   tt.   “Phosphorus (or P)” shall mean the chemical element
phosphorus, total. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance
with procedures set for “Standard Methods” as defined in this article.



   uu.   “Pretreatment” shall mean the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in
lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR
Section 403.6(d); and shall include applicable rules and regulations
contained in the Code of Federal Regulations as published in the Federal
Register, under Section 307 or PL 95-217, under regulation 40 CFR Part 403
pursuant to the Act, and amendments.



   vv.   “Pretreatment Requirement” shall mean any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user,
other than a pretreatment standard.



   ww. “Pretreatment Standard (or Standards)” shall mean prohibitive
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards or local limits.



   xx.   “Private Sewer” shall mean a sewer which is not owned by
public authority.



   yy.   “Publicly Owned Treatment Works (or POTW)” shall mean a
“treatment works,” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292)
which is owned by the Town. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in collection, storage, pumping, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



   zz.   “Public Sewer” shall mean a Sewer which is owned and
controlled by the public authority and will consist of the following
increments: Collector Sewer, Interceptor Sewer, Force Main, Pumping Station.



   aaa.   “Pumping Station” shall mean a station positioned in the
public sewer system at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.



   bbb.   “Residential User” shall mean a user of the POTW whose
premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more
persons, including all dwelling units, etc.



   ccc.   “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries
sanitary and industrial wastes, and to which storm, surface and ground water
are not intentionally admitted.



   ddd.   “Sewage” shall mean the combination of the liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions (including



polluted cooling water). The three most common types of sewage are:



      1.   “Sanitary sewage” shall mean the combination of
liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary
plumbing facilities.



      2.   “Industrial Sewage” shall mean a combination of
liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment
and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment
(this shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted
cooling water).



      3.   “Combined Sewage” shall mean wastes including
sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow
carried to the wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



   eee.   “Sewage Treatment Plant” means any arrangement of devices
and structures used for treating sewage.



   fff.   “Sewage Works” shall mean the structures, equipment and
processes to correct, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.



   ggg.   “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage,
including manholes and other appurtenances.



   hhh.   “Shall” shall mean mandatory.



   iii.   “Significant Industrial User” shall mean:



      1.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      2.   A user that:



         a.   Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand
(25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);



         b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or



         c.   Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that
it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      3.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
Subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town
may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received
from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6),
determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial
user.



   jjj.   “Significant Noncompliance (or SNC)” shall mean violation
of one or more of the following criteria:



      1.   “Chronic Violations of Wastewater Discharge Limits,”
defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken during a 3-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or
average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount:



      2.   “Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,” defined
here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater
measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a 3-month period
equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for CBOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);



      3.   Any other discharge violation that the Town believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of Town personnel or the general
public);



      4.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the Towns
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



      5.   Failure to meet, within sixty (60) days of the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;



      6.   Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due
date, any required reports including baseline monitoring reports, sixty (60)
day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;



      7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;



      8.   Any other violation(s) which the Town determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program or operation of the POTW.



   kkk.   “Plug (or Plug Load)” shall mean any discharge at a flow
rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards set forth in herein, or any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or
noncustomary batch discharge.



   lll.   “Standard Methods” shall mean the laboratory procedures
approved by the EPA and set forth in 40 C.F.R., Part 136.



   mmm.   “Storm Sewer” shall mean a sewer for conveying water,
ground water or unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.



   nnn.   “Total Suspended Solids (or T.S.S.)” shall mean solids
which either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or
other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtration and the
dissolved solids. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per
liter. Quantitative determination shall be made in accordance with procedures
set forth in “Standard Methods.”



   ooo.   “Town” shall mean the Town of Dyer acting through its
Town Council or duly authorized officials or Boards acting in its behalf.



   ppp.   “Toxic Amount” shall mean concentrations of any pollutant
or combination of pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any
organism will cause adverse effects, such as cancer, generic mutations and
physiological manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to the
Clean Water Act (PL 95-217).



   qqq.   “Unpolluted Water” is water of quality equal to or better
than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation
of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   rrr.   “Volatile Organic Matter” shall mean the material in the
sewage solids transformed to gases or vapors when heated to 550 degrees C for
15 to 20 minutes.



   sss.   “Wastewater” shall mean water in which sewage has been
discharged.



   ttt.   “Watercourse” shall mean a natural or official channel
for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.  (Ord. 97-5,
3-11-97)



Sec. 9-101  Private Sewage Disposal.



   a.   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with
the provisions of this Ordinance and any other applicable local, state of
federal law.  Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain any privy, privy vault, outhouse, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   b.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management and the Indiana Department of Public
Health. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.



   c.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available within 300
feet of the property line of a  property served by  a private sewage 
disposal system, the Town  will apprize the affected property owner of this
availability by certified mail. A direct connection shall then be made to the
public sewer in compliance with this Article, at the owner's expense, within
ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice.



   d.   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall be approved by the Lake County Department of Public,
Health and comply with all recommendations of the Indiana Department of
Public Health as set forth in Bulletins SE 8 and SE 13.



   e.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
Town.



   f.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall
be connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be deactivated in accordance with all applicable laws.



   g.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Lake
County Department of Public Health.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-102  Building Sewers and Connections.



   a.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Town.



   b.   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1)
for residential and (2) for commercial and industrial users. In either case,
the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by
the Town. The Permit Application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of
the Inspector.



   c.   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the landowner. The
landowner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.  The
person or company performing the construction shall provide liability
insurance protecting the Town from liability and shall provide a performance
bond acceptable to the Town in the amount of $10,000.



   d.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pumps,
exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff
or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   e.   The connection of a building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Town of Dyer Standard Specifications,
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Town.



   f.   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Town when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Inspector.  Prior to all excavation on public property, Town must be
notified at least 48 hours in advance and provided with a listing of the
hours of closure, if any.



   g.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with signs, barricades and lights and flag person as
needed so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Town. All signs, barricades and
lights shall be in good condition and conform to the Indiana Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



   h.   Before the Town accepts any sewers, new or otherwise, into the
POTW, certified videotape (VHS) must be provided to and accepted by the Town.
This requirement may be waived by the Inspector upon adequate visual
inspection of the work.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-103  Discharges to Public Sewers.



   a.   General Prohibitions.  No person shall discharge, introduce or
cause to be discharged or introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject
to categorical pretreatment standards or any other National, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



      1.   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
jurisdiction of the Town, any wastewater or other polluted water except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
Ordinance or a NPDES Permit.



      2.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
any natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted water except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this
Ordinance or a NPDES Permit.



      3.   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any human excrement, garbage or
other objectionable waste.



   b.   Specific Prohibitions.  No person shall discharge, introduce
or cause to be discharged or introduced any of the following described
pollutants, substances of wastewater into any public sewers or directly or
indirectly into a POTW.



      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard to the POTW, including,
but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than
140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.



      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher
than 9.0 or having any other corrosive  property capable  of causing 
damage or  hazard to  structures, equipment, collection systems or
personnel of the sewage works, or that interferes with any treatment process.



      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper, pulp, fiber, paper products, dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



      5.   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
wastewater works, or to exceed the limitations set forth in the applicable
Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards or other pretreatment standards of
regulations issued by EPA or the IDEM.  Toxic pollutant(s) are identified
pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended.



      6.   Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly, or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW.



      7.   Wastewater or any liquid having a temperature greater
that 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater or
liquid which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment
plant to exceed 104°F (40°C).



      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Town. Trucked pollutants that may, in the opinion of the
Inspector, interfere with operation of the POTW are prohibited.



      9.   Any wastewater, liquid or other waste containing
concentrations of the following substances in amounts exceeding the stated
values:



   Parameter               Limit, mg/l



   Chromium, total            2.0



   Copper, total               2.0



   Cyanide, total            1.0



   Fats, Oils and Grease         100.0



   Iron, Dissolved            1.0



   Lead, total               1.6



   Mercury, total            0.0005



   Nickel, total               2.0



   Phenol                  1.3



   PCB's                  No Discharge Allowed



   Zinc, total               2.0



      10.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.



      11.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to
any sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly, storm water, surface
water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water,
unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial water.



      12.   No new connection shall be made unless there is capacity
available to all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the sewage
treatment plant, including capacity for CBOD and TSS.



   c.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in this Ordinance, and which in the
judgement of the Town may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a nuisance, the Town may:



      1.   Require new industries or industries with significant
increase in discharges to submit information on wastewater characteristics
and obtain prior approval for discharges.



      2.   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any reason
deemed appropriate by the Town.



      3.   Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the limits
of normal domestic sewage as defined.



      4.   Require control of flow equalization of such wastes so as
to avoid any “slug” loads or excessive loads that may be harmful to the
treatment works.



      5.   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive flows or
loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional costs of
having capacity for and treating such wastes. If the Town permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Town and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and
laws.



   d.   Interceptors shall be provided by the discharger as necessary
for the removal of grease, flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
substances. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Town or its designee, and shall be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.  The owner and/or operator of interceptor equipment shall be
required to maintain certified records as to time and date of cleaning and
inspection.



   e.   When a discharger is required to provide preliminary treatment,
including interceptors or flow equalization facilities, such equipment shall
be maintained by the discharger in satisfactory operating condition as
determined by the Town.



   f.   When required by the Town, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole, together with such necessary meters, samplers and other
appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Town. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.  The Town, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management and
the USEPA shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.



   g.   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be
conducted using the methods and procedures in 40 CFR Part 136, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at
said control manhole, except for application for NPDES Permits and report
thereof such shall be conducted in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the USEPA, 40 CFR Part 136 and any subsequent revisions subject to
approval by the Town. In the event that no special manhole has been required,
the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect to constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analysis involved will
determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and 5.5. analyses are obtained from twenty-four
(24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from
periodic grab samples.)



   h.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any
industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by
the industrial concern, at such rates as are compatible with the rate
ordinance, provided, however, that no special agreement or arrangement may be
made with the Town which results in the violation of National Pretreatment
Standards or local limits.



   i.   Storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial
process water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity
for their accommodation. No person shall use such sewers, however, without
the specific written permission of the Town. Unpolluted water from air
conditioners, cooling, condensing systems or swimming pools shall be
discharged to a storm sewer. Where a storm sewer is not available, such
unpolluted water may be discharged to a sanitary sewer pending written
approval by the Town.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-104  Pretreatment of Industrial Wastes.



   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from Significant Industrial Users
prior to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the
Rules and Regulations adopted by the EPA (40 C.F.R. Part 403), and
“Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants” (40
C.F.R. Part 136), in addition to any more stringent requirements established
by the Town and subsequent State or Federal Guidelines and Rules and
Regulations.



   a.   Limitations of Wastewater Strength:



      1.   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, located
in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference into this code and include amendments to those
standards that occur hereafter as the same are published in the CFR with
effective dates as fixed therein.  An application for modification of the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards may be considered by the Town
when the wastewater treatment plant achieves consistent removal of the
pollutants described herein.



      2.   State and local requirements and limitations on
discharges shall be met by all dischargers when such requirements and
limitations are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations.



      3.   No discharger shall use unpolluted water to dilute a
discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment of prohibited substances to
achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this division.



      4.   Discharges to Public Sewers shall comply with Section
9-104 of this Ordinance.



   b.   Accidental Discharges/Slugs:



      1.   Each Significant Industrial User shall provide an
accidental discharge/slug control plan, which plan is subject to approval by
the Town and other applicable agencies and shall, thereafter, be implemented
by the Significant Industrial User. Such plans shall address, at an minimum,
the following:



         a.   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



         b.   Description of stored chemicals;



         c.   Procedures for immediately notifying the Town of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required hereafter;



         d.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any
accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
material loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



      2.   Dischargers shall notify the Town immediately upon the
occurrence of a “slug” or accidental discharge of substances prohibited
by this division. The notification shall include location of discharge, date
and time of occurrence, type of waste, concentration and volume, and
corrective actions.  Immediate notification may be verbal, followed by a
written verification within five (5) days of the incident.



   c.   Wastewater Discharge Permits:



      1.   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, nondomestic
wastes, or other wastes to any sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the
Town without having been issued a wastewater discharge permit if the
discharger:



         a.   Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards as promulgated by the EPA; or,



         b.   Discharges nondomestic wastewater in the amount
equal to or exceeding five thousand (5,000) gallons per day; or,



         c.   Contributes a nondomestic stream exceeding five (5)
percent of the dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant; or,



         d.   Has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the
treatment plan processes by inhibition, pass-through of pollutants, sludge
contamination, or endangerment of treatment plant personnel.



      2.   Prospective nondomestic users of any sewer which are
subject to the provisions of paragraph (c) (1) of this section shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit prior to connecting to or discharging into the
wastewater system and shall apply for said permit at least ninety (90) days
prior to anticipated connection.



      3.   The Town, at its discretion, may issue a Wastewater
Discharge Permit.



   d.   Permit Application.



      1.   Applications for wastewater discharge permits may be
procured from the Town.



      2.   Dischargers subject to the provisions of paragraph (c)
(1) of this section shall obtain from, complete and file with the Town a
permit application on a form prescribed by the Town. Said form shall require
the following information:



         a.   Disclosure of name, address and location of the
discharger.



         b.   Disclosure of Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.



         c.   Disclosure of wastewater constituents and
characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this
division, as determined by bona fide chemical and biological analysis.



         d.   Disclosure of time and duration of discharges.



         e.   Disclosure of average daily wastewater flow rates
in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
All flows must be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by
the Town due to cost or nonfeasibility.



         f.   Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical
and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections,
inspection manholes, sampling chambers, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation.



         g.   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including all materials which are or may be
discharged to the sewer.



         h.   Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any
pollutants or materials prohibited by this division in the discharge,
including a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved
on a consistent basis and if not, what additional operation and maintenance
activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to
comply.



         i.   Where additional pretreatment and/or operation
maintenance activities are required to comply with the applicable
pretreatment standard, the discharger must provide a compliance schedule by
which he will provide the additional pretreatment and/or implementation of
additional operational and maintenance activities. All pretreatment plans
shall be submitted to the Town for review and approval prior to
implementation.



         j.   Disclosure of each product produced by type,
amount, process or processes and rate of production.



         k.   Disclosure of the type and amount of the raw
materials utilized.



         l.   All permit applications for new or modified permits
must be signed by a principal executive officer of the discharger.



      3.   Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the application
for discharge permit, the Town shall review said application for compliance
with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and shall approve or reject
the application.



      4.   If the Town finds the applicant to be in compliance, the
application shall be approved and a permit to discharge shall be issued
subject to the following terms and conditions:



         a.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a municipal sewer.



         b.   Numerical limits on the average and maximum
wastewater constituents and characteristics.



         c.   Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.



         d.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities.



         e.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number and types of
samples, and standards for analyses and reporting schedules.



         f.   Compliance schedules.



         g.   Requirements for submittal of technical reports or
discharge reports.



         h.   Requirements for maintaining and retention of plant
records pertaining to wastewater discharge as specified and affording the
Town, USEPA and IDEM access thereto.



         i.   Requirements for reporting the nature of
significant changes in wastewater flow or in type and concentration of
wastewater constituents. For purposes of this requirement, significant
changes include, but are not limited to, flow and/or concentration increases
of twenty percent (20%) or greater or the discharge of any previously
unreported pollutants.



         j.   Requirements for notification of slug discharges.



         k.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town
to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.



         l.   The permit is for a period of five (5) years, but
may be revoked or rescinded if the applicant is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance.



      5.   If the Town rejects the application for noncompliance,
they shall establish a compliance schedule and require compliance schedule
reports and compliance date reports on forms as supplied.



   e.   Confidentiality:



      1.   In accordance with 40 C.F.R., Part 2, any information
submitted to the Town pursuant to these regulations may be claimed as
confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of
submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or instructions,
or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words “confidential
business information” on each page containing such information. If no claim
is made at the time of submission, the Town may make the information
available to the public without further notice.  If claim is asserted, the
information will be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R.
Part 2 (Public Information).



      2.   Information and data provided to the Town pursuant to
this part which is effluent data shall be made available to the public
without restriction.



      3.   All other information which is submitted to the U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management or the Town shall be available to the public at least to the
extent provided by 40 C.F.R., Paragraph 2.302.



   f.   Permit Modifications:



      1.   The Town reserves the right to amend any wastewater
discharge permit issued hereunder in order to ensure compliance by the Town
with applicable laws and regulations.  Within nine (9) months of the
promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater
discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards shall be
revised to require compliance with such standards within the time frame
prescribed by such standards.  All National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards adopted after the promulgation of this Ordinance shall be a part
hereof.



      2.   Any discharger required to obtain a discharge permit
under the newly promulgated standards shall apply for same immediately upon
notification by the Town.



      3.   Any current permittee whose wastewater discharge permit
is affected by newly promulgated National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
shall, upon notification by the Town, submit all documentation, information
and proposed changes necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with
the new standards.  Upon receipt of said information, the Town shall
establish a compliance schedule whereby the permittee shall attain compliance
with the applicable standards. The permittee shall be advised of any proposed
changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date
of change. Any changes in new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed the duration specified
in the applicable National Categorical Standards.



   g.   Permit Duration.  All Wastewater discharge permits shall be
issued for a five year duration and shall be valid subject to amendment or
revocation as provided in this division. Under special circumstances, as
determined by the Town, a permit may be issued for a period of less than five
(5) years.



   h.   Limitations on Permit Transfer.  Wastewater discharge permits
are issued to a specific discharger for a specific operation and are not
assignable to another discharger or transferable to any other location
without the prior written approval of the Town.



   i.   Reporting Requirements:



      1.   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a) (4), whichever is later,
existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical
pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the Town a report which
contains the information listed in paragraph 2 below. At least ninety (90)
days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that
become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the Town a report which
contains the information listed in paragraph 2 below. A new source shall also
be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.



      2.   The industrial user shall submit the information required
by this section including:



         a.   Identifying Information. The name and address of
the facility including the name of the operation and owners.



         b.   Wastewater Discharge Permits.  A list of any
environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the
facility.



         c.   Description of Operations. A brief description of
the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial
classifications of the operations carried out by such industrial user.  This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.



         d.   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured
average, or estimated, if approved by the Town, daily and maximum flow, in
gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other stream,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40
CFR 403.6(e).



         e.   Measurement of Pollutants.



            1.   Identify the categorical pretreatment
standards applicable to each regulated process.



            2.   Submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass), where required by the
Town of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out
herein.



            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out herein.



         f.   Certification.  A statement reviewed by the
industrial users authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis -- and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.



         g.   Compliance Schedule.  If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standard; the shortest
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. the completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out herein.



      3.   Any permittee subject to a pretreatment standard set
forth in this division shall submit to the Town during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently by the discharge permit, a periodic
compliance report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or
regulated substances in the effluent.  Included in the report shall be a
record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during
the reporting period, computed by verifiable techniques as required by the
applicable discharge permit.



      4.   Each permittee shall monitor the discharge with the
frequency prescribed in its wastewater discharge permit. All sampling and
analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R., Part 136.



      5.   Reports of monitoring events shall be filed with the Town
as required by the wastewater discharge permit. The reports shall include all
results of analyses required by the permit including flow conditions and the
nature and concentration of those prohibited substances specified in the
applicable categorical standards. The reports shall also specify sampling
location, date, time and techniques, analysis date, analyst and analysis
methods, and results of all analyses.



      6.   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the industrial user must notify the Town within twenty-four (24)
hours of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling
and analysis and submit the results of the report to the Town within fifteen
(15) days after the violation. The Industrial User shall continue to sample
until the Town informs them in writing that additional sampling is not
required.



      7.   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the Town, the EPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director and the State hazardous waste authorities in writing of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include
the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other).  If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms, of such
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the industrial user; an identification of the hazardous
constituents in the wastestream discharged during the calendar year, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must be
in writing and take place no later than fifteen (15) days after the discharge
commences.  Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only
once or each  hazardous waste  discharged.  However, notification of
changed  discharges must be submitted as required by law. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported
under the self-monitoring requirements set out above.



         a.   In the case of any new regulations under Section
3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the Town, the U.S. EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.



         b.   In the case of any notification made under this
section, the industrial user shall certify, within thirty (30) days, that it
has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated.



      8.   All permittees shall retain and preserve for no less than
five (5) years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring,
sampling and analyses made in connection with its discharge. All records
which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment
or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the Town
pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all
enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with
respect to any and all appeals have expired.



      9.   Any person who makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this section, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or
method required under this section may be assessed a civil penalty of not
more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).



      10.   All permittees subject to Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards will be required to file all reports as described in
40 C.F.R., 403, which is incorporated herein by reference, including
amendments that may hereafter be made as the same are published in the Code
of Federal Regulations. These reports shall include, but not be limited' to,
baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule reports, compliance date
reports and periodic compliance reports.



      11.   Compliance schedule reports must be submitted by any
nonresidential discharger not subject to categorical standards who is not in
compliance with the terms and conditions of this division.



   j.   Emergency suspension of service and permit. The Town may, for
good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment service and the discharge
permit of a nonresidential discharger when an actual or threatened discharge
presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or
welfare of persons, substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the
operations of the wastewater treatment plan, or violate any pretreatment
limits imposed by this Ordinance. Any nonresidential discharger notified of
the suspension of treatment service and/or permit shall cease all discharges
to the sewer system. In the event of failure of the nonresidential discharger
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time,
the Town shall commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel
the nonresidential user's compliance with such order. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension
under this section.



   k.   Revocation of Permit. The Town may revoke the permit of any
user that violates the following conditions of this ordinance, wastewater
discharge permit or orders issued hereunder.



      1.   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.



      2.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge.



      3.   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.



      4.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for
the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling.



      5.   Violation of the discharge standards in this Ordinance or
of the pretreatment standards in this section.



   l.   Notification of Violation; Administrative Adjustment. Whenever
the Town finds that a permittee has engaged in conduct which justifies
revocation of its permit, pursuant to this code, the Town shall serve or
cause to be served upon such permittee a written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. Within
fifteen (15) days of the date of receipt of the notice, the permittee shall
respond in writing to the Town advising of its position with respect to the
allegations. Thereafter the parties shall meet within fifteen (15) days to
establish a plan acceptable to tide Town for the correction of all confirmed
violations.



   m.   Show Cause Hearing. Where the violation of this code is not
corrected by timely compliance by means of administrative adjustment, the
Town may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct herein
prohibited, to show cause before the Town, why the proposed permit revocation
should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by
personal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested,
specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Town or its
designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is
to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the discharger to
show cause before the Town or its designee why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served not
less than ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent,
officer, or authorized representative of a discharger. The proceedings at the
hearing shall be considered by the Town which shall then enter appropriate
orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger.



   n.   Judicial Proceedings. Following a finding by the Town that a
permittee is not in compliance with the provisions of this code, the Town may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
appropriate local court.



   o.   Annual Publication of Significant Violators. The Town shall
annually publish in the local daily newspaper a list of the nonresidential
dischargers which were not in compliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the previous twelve (12)
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the dischargers during the same twelve (12) months.



   p.   The Town shall have the right to enter the facilities of any
industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this ordinance, and any
permit or other issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial
user is complying with all requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow
the Town immediate access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of
any additional duties.



      1.   Where an industrial user has security measures in force
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the Town will be permitted to enter without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.



      2.   The Town shall have the right to set up on the industrial
user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.



      3.   The Town may require the industrial user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary.  The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the industrial user and in addition all devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quantity shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their
accuracy, all of which shall be at the industrial user's expense.



      4.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or samples shall be
promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of
the Town and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be borne by the industrial user.



      5.   Unreasonable delays in allowing Town personnel access to
the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-105  Plans and Specifications of Pretreatment Facilities.



   Pretreatment information, including plans and specifications of control
facilities shall be submitted for approval of the Town and no construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until approval in writing is granted.
Where such facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operating order by the owner at his expense and
shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Town to determine that such
facilities are being operated in conformance with the applicable Federal,
State and local laws and permits. The owner shall maintain operating records
of the influent and effluent to show the performance of the treatment
facilities and for comparison against Town's monitoring records.  (Ord.
97-5, 3- 11-97)



Sec. 9-106  Spills Reporting.



   Users of the sewage works shall immediately notify the Town of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidentally or otherwise to the
sewer system.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-107  Protection from Damage; Arrest.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, recklessly or
negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the POTW.  (Ord. 97-5, 3- 11-97)



Sec. 9-108  Search Warrant.



   If the Town has been refused access to a building, structure or
property of any part thereof, and if the Town has demonstrated probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance or that there is a
need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the Town designed
to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then upon application to an appropriate judicial officer, the Town
may obtain and utilize a search warrant. In the event of an emergency
affecting public health and safety, inspections may be made without the
issuance of a search warrant.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-109  Recovery of Costs.



In addition to other penalties imposed for violations of the provisions of
this ordinance, any discharger who discharges or causes a discharge producing
a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the POTW shall be
liable to the Town for any one or more of the following which may be billed
to the discharger by the Town in its ordinary course of business and which
shall be paid to the Town within 30 days of the billing:



   a.   Any and all costs incurred by the Town for any cleaning, repair
or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge;



   b.   Any and all expenses, loss, damage, or costs and expenses
incurred by the Town, including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
engineering fees, and other expert and consulting fees caused by the
violation or discharge; and



   c.   Any and all other consequential damages, foreseen or otherwise,
to the Town, including, but not limited to, fees, penalties, damages and
costs of injunctive relief that are incurred by the Town, including the costs
and expenses of legal proceedings and/or litigation, including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, engineering fees, and other expert or consulting
fees, incurred in the Town's defense against claims for such consequential
damages.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-110  Effective Date of Ordinance.



   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and publication as provided by law.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-111  Construction of Ordinance.



   a.   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision
of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this
Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.



   b.   Whenever another law, regulation or standard is referenced, it
means the latest version as it is amended from time to time.  (Ord. 97-5,
3-11-97)



Sec. 9-112  Severability and Conflicts.



   a.   If any provision, paragraph, work, section or chapter of this
Ordinance is invalidated by the court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions, paragraphs, works, sections, and chapters shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect.



   b.   In the event other Ordinance or parts of other ordinances are
inconsistent or conflict with any part of this ordinance, this ordinance
shall take precedence.  (Ord. 97-5, 3-11-97)



Sec. 9-113 through Sec. 9-124  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 6. SEWAGE WORKS.



Division I. Schedule of Rates and Charges.



Sec. 9-125  Definitions.



Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of items
used in the Ordinances shall be as follows:



   a.   “Ammonia, (or NH3-N)” shall mean the same as Ammonia
Nitrogen measured as Nitrogen. The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” as defined in
this article.



   b.   “Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (or CBOD)” of
sewage, sewage effluent, polluted waters or industrial wastes shall mean the
rate at which microorganisms use the oxygen in water or wastewater while
stabilizing decomposable carbonaceous organic matter under aerobic
conditions. The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in “Standard Methods” as defined in this Section.



   c.   “CFR” means Code of Federal Regulations.



   d.   “Commercial User” shall mean any establishment involved in
a commercial enterprise, (for profit or not for profit) business or service
which, based on determination by the Town, discharges primarily segregated
domestic waste or waste from sanitary conveniences.



   e.   “Debt Service Cost” shall mean the average annual principal
and interest payment on all proposed revenue bonds or other long-term capital
debt.



   f.   “Dwelling Unit” shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or
any other space in which cooking facilities are provided and having
individual sink and toilet facilities.



   g.   “Excessive Strength Surcharge” shall mean an additional
charge which as billed to users for treating compatible sewage wastes with an
average strength in excess of “normal domestic sewage.”



   h.   “Heavy Demand Substances” are concentrations of phosphorus,
ammonia, total suspended solids or carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand in
sewage which exceed the levels established in this code.



   i.   “Industrial User” shall mean any manufacturing or
processing facility that discharges industrial waste.



   j.   “Industrial Wastes” shall mean any solid, liquid or gaseous
substances or form of energy discharged, permitted to flow or escape from an
industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of any natural resource carried on by a
person and shall further mean any waste from an industrial sewer.



   k.   “mg/l” means milligrams per liter.



   l.   “Multiple Family Unit” shall mean a building, or a portion
thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other.



   m.   “Normal Domestic Sewage” (for the purpose of determining
surcharges) shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily
concentration as follows:



   TSS               not more than 200 mg/l



   CBOD               not more than 175 mg/l



   Ammonia-Nitrogen      not more than 25 mg/l



   Phosphorus            not more than 10 mg/l



   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated domestic and/or
sanitary conveniences are distinct from industrial processes.



   n.   “NPDES Permit” - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permit setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States
pursuant to Section 402 of Public Law 95-217.



   o.   “Operation and Maintenance Cost” include all costs, direct
and indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport
and treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving
waters that conform with all related Federal, State and local requirements.
(These costs include replacement.)



   p.   “Other Service Charges” shall mean tap charges, connection
charges, area charges and other identifiable charges other than excessive
strength surcharges.



   q.   “Person” shall mean any and all persons, natural or
artificial, including, but not limited to, any individual, firm, company,
municipal or private corporation, partnership, copartnership, joint stock
company, trust, estate, association, society, institution, enterprise,
governmental agency, the State of Indiana, the United States of America, or
other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include
the plural where indicated by the context.



   r.   “Publicly Owned Treatment Works (or POTW)” shall mean a
“treatment works,” as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292)
which is owned by the Town.  This definition includes any devices or systems
used in collection, storage, pumping, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



   s.   “Replacement Costs” shall mean the expenditures for
obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are
necessary during the useful life of the POTW to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.



   t.   “Residential User” shall mean a user of the POTW whose
premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more
persons, including all dwelling units, etc.



   u.   “Sewage” shall mean the combination of the liquid and
water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions (including polluted cooling water). The three most common
types of sewage are:



      1.   Sanitary Sewage shall mean the combination of liquid and
water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing
facilities.



      2.   Industrial Sewage shall mean a combination of liquid and
water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and
resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment (this
shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling
water).



      3.   Combined Sewage shall mean wastes including sanitary
sewage, industrial sewage, storm water, infiltration and inflow carried to
the wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



   v.   “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage,
including manholes and other appurtenances.



   w.   “Shall” means mandatory.



   x.   “Standard Methods” shall mean the laboratory procedures
approved by the EPA and set forth in 40 C.F.R., Part 136.



   y.   “Storm Sewer” shall mean a sewer for conveying water,
ground water or unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or
industrial wastes are not intentionally introduced.



   z.   “Total Suspended Solids (or TSS)” shall mean solids which
either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or
other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtration. Their
concentration shall be expressed in milligrams per liter. Quantitative
determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in
“Standard Methods.”



   aa.   “Town” shall mean the Town of Dyer acting through its Town
Council or duly authorized officials or Boards acting in its behalf.  (Ord.
No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-126  Rates and Charges.



   a.   There shall be and are hereby established for the use of and
the service rendered by the sewage works system of the Town of Dyer, the
following rates and charges:



Flow charge - per 1,000 gallons:      $5.48



PLUS:



Base rates - per month:



   Water Meter Size (Inches)



   5/8 to 1                  $  14.55



   1 1/4                  $  55.85



   1 1/2                  $  81.75



Unmetered:



   Residential:



   Single family dwelling      $44.75



   Apartment/unit            $33.60



   Commercial:                  



   First 3 employees            $44.75



   Each additional employee      $11.20



Monthly Surcharge Rates (per pound):



   TTS in excess of 200 mg/l      $0.23



   CBOD in excess of 175 mg/l   $0.38



   Ammonia - Nitrogen in excess of 25 mg/l   $0.61



   Phosphorus in excess of 10 mg/l   $0.38



   b.   The Town hereby elects to earn a reasonable return on the
sanitary sewer utility plant.



   c.   The Town hereby elects to receive payments in lieu of taxes
from the sanitary sewer utility plant.



(Ord. No. 97-6; Am. Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 8-21-01; Am. Ord. No. 2009-15,
11-4-09; Am. Ord. No. 2016-28, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-127  Special Metering.



The quantity of water discharged into the POTW and obtained from sources
other than the utility that serves the Town shall be determined by the Town
in such manner as the Town shall reasonably elect, and the sewage service
shall be billed at the above appropriate rates; further, as is hereinafter
provided in this section, the Town may make proper allowances in determining
the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to be consumed,
but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the Town that such quantities
do not enter the POTW.



   a.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the
POTW, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess of 10,000
gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Town that a
portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters does not and cannot
enter the POTW, then the owner or other interested party shall install and
maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and
approved method of measurement acceptable to the Town for the determination
of sewage discharge and then the Town may, at its discretion, adjust the
sewer charges accordingly.



   b.   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste water or other liquids into the
POTW, either directly or indirectly and the use is:



      1.   A user of water obtained from a source other than the
municipal waterworks of the Town; or



      2.   A user of water of the municipal waterworks of the Town
and in addition uses water from another source; or



      3.   A user who diverts a portion of the water used on or in
the premises away from the sanitary sewage system; or



      4.   A user who uses a material amount of water in a product;
or



      5.   A user with a material amount of the water used in or on
the premises evaporated and not discharged to the sanitary sewage system; or



      6.   A user who has for any other reason water entering the
sanitary system under circumstances where the sewage flow is not accurately
measured by metering devices.



then the amount of water used and returned to the sanitary sewer shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the owner or other interested party or
the Town, at its discretion, at the owner or  other interested parties
expense by the installing and maintaining of meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate method of measurement approved by the Town
for determination of sewage discharge.



   c.   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into
the POTW, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and the quantity
of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case for billing
purposes the quantity of water used shall be averaged for each user and the
base charge shall apply to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of
real estate or buildings served through the single water meter.



   d.   In the event two or more dwelling units such as trailers,
apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the POTW, either directly or indirectly, are users of water and
the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case,
for billing purposes a base charge of $5.00 shall apply to each of the number
of trailers, apartments or housekeeping rooms.



   e.   No lot, parcel of real estate or building located outside the
corporate limits of the Town shall discharge sanitary sewage, industrial
waste, water or other liquids into the POTW, either directly or indirectly,
without the prior written consent of the Town.



   f.   Sewage rates and charges for Town residents serviced by the
Water Utility for the months of June, July and August of each year, for which
bills are rendered in July, August and September will be based on each
resident's average water consumption for the previous months of October,
November, December, January, February, and March, as billed in November,
December, January, February, March, and April for billing for said three (3)
months.  (Ord. No. 97-6; Am. Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 8-21-01)



Sec. 9-128  Billing.



Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the Town in
the manner provided by law and ordinance.



   a.   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and
billed monthly.



   b.   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties
served, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the Town for the purpose of determining
whether bill have been paid by such tenant or tenants, provided that such
examination shall be made at the office at which said records are kept and
during hours that such office is open for business.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-129  Laws and Regulations by the Town.



The Town shall make and enforce such ordinances and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management of the
POTW.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-130  Delinquent bills.



As provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when due are hereby
declared to be delinquent and a penalty often percent (10%) of the amount of
the rates or charges shall be attached thereto. The time at which such rates
or charges shall be paid is now fixed at the 28th day of the month in which
the bill is mailed. In the event the Town chooses to employ the services of
an attorney for purposes of collection, the delinquent user shall be liable
also for any and all costs of collection including attorney fees and court
costs.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-131  Connections Tap-In and Permit Fees.



   a.   In addition to the sewage rates and charges based upon the
quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to said
rates and charges as set forth above, there shall be charged to the owner of
each and every lot and parcel of real estate that is connecting with the
Town's sanitary sewer system, a connection fee or charge in the amount of six
hundred twenty-five ($625.00) dollars plus the actual cost of construction of
the connection.  The connection fee shall cover the cost of work performed
to install the lateral sewer from the sewer line to the property line.  Said
payment shall be credited by the Clerk-Treasurer to the Dyer Sewer
Improvement Fund.



   b.   In addition, the owner of each and every lot and parcel of real
estate that is connecting with the Town's sanitary sewer system shall pay a
tap-in charge of two hundred seventy-five ($275.00) dollars per unit. For
purposes of this ordinance, a unit shall be defined as an apartment building
not exceeding three (3) units, single family residence, duplex, commercial
establishment not exceeding two (2) units, or any other building or portion
of a building connected to the POTW. Each three (3) apartments in a
multi-unit building and each two (2) commercial units in a multi-unit
commercial building shall be assessed a tap-in charge of two hundred
seventy-five ($275.00) dollars as provided above.



   c.   Said connection fee or charge shall be paid at the time of
making application for a sewer connection.



   d.   Industrial Users that are required to obtain a Wastewater
Discharge Permit shall be charged a permit fee in the amount equal to the
cost to the Town. Said Wastewater Discharge Permit fee shall be paid prior to
issuing of the permit.



   e.   Where videotape inspection of building sewers must be
performed, the inspection may, upon agreement between the owner and Town of
Dyer, be performed by the Town of Dyer. The fee for video inspection shall be
$1.25 per lineal foot of sewer inspected. If the Town must clean the sewer
prior to video inspection, the fee for cleaning shall be $5.00 per lineal
foot of sewer cleaned.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-132  Excessive Strength Surcharge.



   a.   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably
adjusted to service rendered to users, the Town shall base its charges not
only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the sewage and
wastes which it is required to treat and dispose of. The Town shall have the
night to require the user to measure and/or determine the strength and
content of all sewage and wastes discharged either directly or indirectly
into the POTW, in such manner and by such method and at such times as the
Town may deem practicable in light of the conditions and attending
circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge. The user
shall furnish a central sampling point available to the Town at all time.



   b.   Additional charges for treating excessive strength domestic
sewage waste shall be made on the following basis:



      1.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon TSS. There shall be an
additional charge of eighteen cents ($.18) per pound of TSS for TSS received
in excess of 200 mg/l of fluid.



      2.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon CBOD.  There shall be an
additional charge of thirty cents ($.30) per pound of CBOD for CBOD received
in excess of 175 mg/l of fluid.



      3.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon Ammonia-Nitrogen.  There shall
be an additional charge of forty- eight cents ($.48) per pound of
ammonia-nitrogen received in excess of 25 mg/l of fluid.



      4.   Rate Surcharge Based Upon Phosphorus. There shall be an
additional charge of thirty cents ($.30) per pound of phosphorus received in
excess of 10 mg/l of fluid.



   c.   The determination of TSS, CBOD, Ammonia-Nitrogen and Phosphorus
contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods.  (Ord. No. 97-6; Am. Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 8- 21-01)



Sec. 9-133  Authorization to Enforce Regulations.



The Town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes into the Town's
sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to the operation
of the POTW or to require methods affecting pretreatment of said wastes to
comply with pretreatment standards included in the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit issued to the POTW, if any, or as
contained in the EPA General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 C.F.R. Part 403 or
the Town's Pretreatment Program.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-134  Fire Protection and Adjustments.



Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as well as for other
uses, the Town may, at its discretion, make adjustments in the user charges
as may be equitable.  (Ord. No. 97-6)



Sec. 9-135  Compliance with State and Federal Requirements.



All provisions of this Ordinance and limits set herein shall comply with any
applicable State and/or Federal requirements.  (Ord. 97-6)



Sec. 9-136  Authorization to Enter into Special Rate Contracts.



The Town is hereby authorized to enter into special rate contracts with
customers of the POTW where reduction in cost to the sewage works can be
determined, and such reduction shall be limited to such reduced costs. 
(Ord. 97-6)



Sec. 9-137  Effective Date of Ordinance Rates and Charges.



The rates and charges as herein set forth shall become effective on the first
full billing period occurring after the adoption of this Ordinance.  (Ord.
97-6)



Sec. 9-138  Effective Date of Ordinance.



This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and publication as provided by law.  (Ord. 97-6)



Sec. 9-139  Construction of Ordinance.



   a.   The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision
of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this
Ordinance which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.



   b.   Whenever another law, regulation or standard is referenced, it
means the latest version as it is amended from time to time.  (Ord. 97-6)



Sec. 9-140  Severability and Conflicts.



   a.   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or chapter of this
ordinance is invalidated by the court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions, paragraphs, works, sections, and chapters shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect.



   b.   In the event other ordinances or parts of other ordinances are
inconsistent or conflict with any part of this ordinance, this ordinance
shall take precedence.  (Ord. 97-6)



Sec. 9-141  System Development Charges.



A system development charge will be collected from new customers of the Town
municipal sewer system in accordance with the following schedule:



 

 
   Meter Size


 
5/8"
 
1"
 
1-1/2"
 
2"
 
3"
 
4"


Ratio
 
1.0
 
1.0
 
5.8
 
10.0
 
23.0
 
40.0



 



 

Year
 
   Connection Fees


2013 and thereafter
 
1,760
 
1,760
 
10,208
 
17,600
 
40,480
 
70,400



 



*   Non-metered residential user connection fees are equivalent to those
for 5/8" meter users.



(Ord. No. 2006-10, 8-16-06)



Sec. 9-142  through Sec. 9-144 Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Funds Related to Sewage Works.



Sec. 9-145  Revenue Fund.



There is continued a fund known as the Revenue Fund (the “Revenue Fund”)
into which all income and revenues of the sewage works shall be deposited
upon receipt. This fund shall be maintained separate and apart from all other
accounts of the Town. All monies deposited in the Revenue Fund may be
invested in accordance with Indiana Code, § 5-13-9 and other applicable
laws. (Ord. No. 92-27, § 9, 9-8-92)



Sec. 9-146  Operation and Maintenance Fund.



The Operation and Maintenance Fund created by Ordinance No. 89-30 is
continued herein. There shall be credited on the last day of each calendar
month a sufficient amount of the revenues of the sewage works so that the
balance in the Operation and Maintenance Fund shall be sufficient to pay the
expenses of operation, repair and maintenance for the then next succeeding
two calendar months. The monies credited to the Operation and Maintenance
Fund shall be used for the payment of the reasonable and proper operation,
repair and maintenance expenses of the sewage works on a day-to-day basis.
Any monies in the Operation and Maintenance Fund in excess of the expected
expenses of the operation, repair and maintenance for the next succeeding
month may be transferred to the Sinking Fund if necessary to prevent a
default in the payment of principal of or interest on the outstanding bonds
of the sewage works. (Ord. No. 92-27, § 10, 9-8-92)



Sec. 9-147  Sewage Works Sinking Fund.



   a.   Sewage Works Sinking Fund. There is continued a sinking fund
for the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds which by
their terms are payable from the Net Revenues of the sewage works, and the
payment of any fiscal agency charges in connection with the payment of bonds
and interest, which fund shall be designated the Sewage Works Sinking Fund
(the “Sinking Fund”). There shall be set aside and deposited in the
Sinking Fund, as available, and as provided below, a sufficient amount of the
Net Revenues of the sewage works to meet the requirements of the bond and
Interest Account and of the Reserve Account hereby continued in the Sinking
Fund. Such payments shall continue until the balance in the Bond and Interest
Account, plus the balance in the Reserve Account described below, equals the
amount needed to redeem all of the then outstanding bonds.



   b.   Bond and Interest Account. There shall be transferred, on the
last day of each calendar month, from the Revenue Fund and credited to the
Bond and Interest Account an amount of the Net Revenues equal to (i)
one-sixth (1/6) of the interest on all then outstanding bonds payable from
Net Revenues on the next succeeding interest payment date and (ii) one-sixth
(1/6) of the principal on all outstanding bonds payable on the next
succeeding principal payment date, until the amount of interest and principal
payable on the next succeeding interest and principal payment dates shall
have been so credited.  There shall similarly be credited to the Account any
amount necessary to pay the bank fiscal agency charges for paying principal
and interest on the bonds as the same become payable. The Town shall, from
the sums deposited in the Sinking Fund and credited to the Bond and Interest
Account, remit promptly to the registered owner or to the bank fiscal agency
sufficient monies to pay the principal and interest on their due dates
together with the amount of bank fiscal agency charges.



   c.   Reserve Account. Beginning with the first month after any
series of Bonds are delivered, the Town shall deposit  on the last day  of
each calendar month an amount of Net Revenues into the Reserve Account until
the balance therein equals  but does not exceed the least  of (i) the
maximum  annual debt service  on the Bonds and 1989 Bonds, (ii) one hundred
twenty-five (125%) percent of average annual debt service on the Bonds and
1989 Bonds, or (iii) ten (10%) percent of the proceeds of the Bonds and 1989
Bonds, plus a minor portion thereof as  defined  in  the  Internal 
Revenue  Code of 1986 (the “Reserve Requirement”). The monthly deposits
of Net Revenues shall be equal in amount and sufficient to accumulate the
Reserve Requirements within five (5) years of the date of delivery of any
series of Bonds. For purpose of federal tax law, the Reserve Account shall be
allocated between the 1989 Bonds and each series of Bonds issued hereunder
according to their original face amounts.



The Reserve Account shall constitute a margin for safety and protection
against default in the payment of principal and interest on outstanding
bonds, and the monies in the Reserve Account shall be used to pay current
principal and interest on outstanding bonds to the extent that monies in the
Bond and Interest Account are insufficient for that purpose. Any deficiency
in the balance maintained in the Reserve Account shall be promptly made up
from the next available Net Revenues remaining after credits into the Bond
and Interest Account. If monies in the Reserve Account are transferred to the
Bond and Interest Account to pay principal and interest on outstanding bonds,
then this depletion of the balance in the Reserve Account shall be made up
from the next available Net Revenues after the credits into the bond and
Interest Account. Any monies in the Reserve Account in excess of the Reserve
Requirement may, in the discretion of the Town Council, be transferred to the
Sewage Works Improvement Fund or be used for the purchase of outstanding
bonds or installments of principal of duly registered bonds at a price not
exceeding par and accrued interest. (Ord. No. 92-27, § 11, 9-8-92)



Sec. 9-148  Improvement Fund.



After meeting the requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund and the
Sinking Fund, any excess revenues may be transferred or credited to the
Sewage Works Improvement Fund, created by Ordinance No. 89-30 and hereby
continued, and said Fund shall be used for additions, extensions,
replacements and improvements. Monies in the Sewage Works Improvement Fund
shall be transferred to the Sinking Fund if necessary to prevent a default in
the payment of principal and interest on the then outstanding bonds or, if
necessary, to eliminate any deficiencies in credits to or minimum balance in
the Reserve Account of the Sinking Fund, or may be transferred to the
Operation and Maintenance Fund to meet unforeseen contingencies in the
operation and maintenance of the sewage works. (Ord. No. 92-27, § 12, 9-8-92)



Sec. 9-149  Priority of Payments.



The revenues of the Sewer works shall be applied towards the payment of, in
order of priority, the following: first, the expenses of operation, repair
and maintenance; second, on a pari passu (parity) basis, the principal of and
interest on the 1989 Bonds and the Bonds; third, to meet the requirements of
the reserve required for the 1989 Bonds and the Bonds; and fourth, expenses
or costs that may be paid from the Sewage Works Improvement Fund. (Ord. No.
92-27, § 13, 9-8-92)



Sec. 9-150  Maintenance of Accounts. 10



The Sinking  Fund  shall  be deposited  in  and  maintained  as a 
separate  account  or  accounts  from  all  other accounts  of the 
Town. The  Operation and  Maintenance Fund  and the  Sewage Works 
Improvement  Fund may be maintained in a single account, or accounts, but
such account, or accounts, shall likewise be maintained separate and apart
from all other accounts of the Town and apart from the Sinking fund account
or accounts. All monies deposited in the accounts shall be deposited, held
and secured as public funds in accordance with the public depository laws of
the State of Indiana; provided that monies therein may be invested in
obligations in accordance with the applicable laws, including particularly
Indiana Code, Title 5, Article 13, as amended or supplemented, and section 20
and in the event of such investment the income therefrom shall become a part
of the funds invested and shall be used only as provided in this ordinance.
(Ord. No. 92-27, §14, 9-8-92)



                 



10   A complete copy of Ord. No. 92-27, which is continued in full force
and effect, is on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Sec. 9-151 through Sec. 9-157  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Miscellaneous Regulations Related to the Sewage Works.



Sec. 9-158  Release of Sewer Taps. 11



Upon the affirmative vote of the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Indiana
lifting the moratorium on the issuance of new residential sewer taps by the
Town of Dyer, Indiana, thirty-three (33) residential sewer taps released by
the lifting of the moratorium shall be reserved for the use of Parkview
Terrace 7th Addition, being currently developed. (Res. No. 93-14, 8-10-93)



                     



11   Editor's Note: Res. No. 92-29 is similar to Res. No. 93-4 in that it
reserves a total of 121 sewer taps in the name of the developers of Autumn
Chase, Brighton Woods, and Heritage Estates Unit 6, and is continued in full
force and effect. It should be noted that Res. No. 91-5, adopted March 12,
1991, addressed a moratorium in the issuance of sewer taps.



Sec. 9-159  Assessment of a Surcharge for Disposal of Ground Water into the
Dyer Sanitary Sewer System.



The Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Dyer shall assess a surcharge of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per month to each user of the sewer treatment system who has
been determined to have an illegal connection into the Dyer wastewater
treatment system. Prior to assessment of the surcharge, the subject property
shall be inspected by a duly authorized representative of the Town of Dyer
(unless said property has already been inspected within the past 12 months)
and notice of deficiency shall be sent to the owner of said property by
certified mail, return receipt requested, which notice shall be deemed given
when mailed. In the event the illegal connection has not been removed from
the sewer treatment system within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing
of said notice of deficiency, the name and address of the involved user shall
be submitted by the Town Council to the Clerk-Treasurer, who shall assess a
surcharge to the user in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) per month,
which surcharge shall continue until the illegal connections have been
removed from the sewer system and the work inspected and approved by a duly
authorized representative of the Town of Dyer. The surcharge shall be
deposited to the Sewer Improvement Fund (Ord. No. 90-21, 6-12-90)



Sec. 9-160  Payment in Lieu of Taxes.



   a.   The Town of Dyer is entitled to assess and collect a payment in
lieu of property tax from the Dyer Sewer Utility based on the assessment
value of the property and holdings of the Dyer Sewer Utility pursuant to
Burns Annotated Statutes, Code Edition § 8-1.5-3-8. (Ord. No. 89-45,
12-12-89)



   b.   An ordinance pursuant by the Town Council is necessary to
implement the provisions of this Section.



Sec. 9-161 through Sec. 9-179  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 7. PROCEDURES REGARDING “UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS”.



Sec. 9-180  Definitions.



Whenever in this ordinance the words or phrases hereinafter in this section
defined are used, they shall have the following definitions:



   a.   “Commission” shall mean the public service commission of
the State of Indiana.



   b.   “Poles, Overhead Wires and Associated Structures” shall
mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication
circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service.



   c.   “Underground Utility District or District” means that areas
in the Town of Dyer within which poles, overhead wires, and associated
overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution
adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 1 of this ordinance or as such
an area is delineated as a subdivision on a filed final map or parcel map.
(Ord. No. 83-33, § 1, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-181  Public Hearing.



The Town Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain
whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal
of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures and the
underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric,
communication, or similar or associated service within designated areas of
the Town. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall notify all affected property owners
and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at
least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to
the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all
persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of
the Town Council shall be final and conclusive. Such hearing shall be
unnecessary in the case of a new subdivision which is to become an
underground utility district pursuant to the zoning and subdivision
ordinance. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 2, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-182  Designation of Underground Utility District.



If, after any such public hearing, the Town Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such
underground installation within a designated area,  the  Council  shall, 
by  resolution,  declare  such  designated area an underground utility
district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution
shall include a description of a map of the area comprising such district and
shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation
shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready
to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such
removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability
of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the
installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.



In case of a new subdivision, the area shall become an underground utility
district upon the filing with the county recorder of the final map or parcel
map of said subdivision. Affected property owners must be ready to receive
underground service and such removal and underground installation must be
accomplished prior to the Town approving the improvements in the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 83-33, § 3, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-183  Unlawful Acts.



Whenever the Town Council creates an underground utility district and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in Section 9-142, it shall be unlawful for any person or
utility to erect, construct, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or
occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 9-148
hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after
said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 4, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-184  Exception, Emergency, or Unusual Circumstances.



Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without
authority of the Town Engineer in order to provide emergency service. The
Town Engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem
appropriate, in cases of emergency or unusual circumstances, without
discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install,
maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 5, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-185  Other Exceptions.



This ordinance and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-142 hereof
shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not to apply to the
following types of facilities:



   a.   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.



   b.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting,



   c.   Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing
through a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited when such
wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures are not prohibited.



   d.   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used
for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
thirty-four thousand, five hundred (34,500) volts.



   e.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building
by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or extending from the
building to another building without crossing any public street.



   f.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used
by a utility for furnishing communication services.



   g.   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets, and concealed ducts.



   h.   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.



   i.   Overhead wires originating from outside the district which
connect to buildings on the perimeter of such district, provided such
overhead wires shall not cross any street within the district. (Ord. No.
83-33, § 6, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-186  Notice to Property Owners and Utility.



Within ten (10 ) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to Section 9-182 hereof, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall notify all
affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district
created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said Clerk-Treasurer
shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if
they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive
electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such
occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as
to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities
at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of
the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. (Ord. No.
3-33, § 7, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-187  Responsibility of Utility.



Notification by the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be made by mailing a copy of
the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 9-182 hereof, the supplying
utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductor and associate
equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs on file with the commission; provided that if any
provision of any agreement between the Town of Dyer and the supplying utility
is in conflict with any provision of the Section, the provision of the
agreement shall prevail. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 8, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-188  Responsibility of Property Owners.



   a.   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in Section 9-147 and the termination facility on or within the
building or structure being served, subject to applicable rules, regulations
and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
commission.



   b.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying
or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (a)
of this section within the time provided for by section 9-146, the Plan
Commission shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty
(30) days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to the property. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 9, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-189  Responsibility of Town.



In the event that any act required by this ordinance or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to Section 9-182 hereof cannot be performed within the time
provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public
authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other
circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which
such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to
the time of such limitation. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 10, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-190  Extension of Time.



In the event that any act required by this ordinance or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to Section 9-182 hereof cannot be performed within the time
provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public
authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other
circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which
such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to
the time of such limitation. (Ord. No. 83-33, § 11, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-191  Penalty.



Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this ordinance
shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each say during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. No. 83-33, § 12, 8-9-83)



Sec. 9-192 through Sec. 9-199  Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 8. SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITIES. 12



               



12   I.C., § 36-9-30-1, et seq., addresses Solid Waste Disposal Act.



Sec. 9-200  Quad-Town Council and Intergovernmental Cooperation.



   a.   The Dyer, Schererville, St. John, and Highland Town Councils
further attest to the necessary lessening of Solid Waste landfill use for
specific types of waste products.



   b.   The four (4) communities of Dyer, Schererville, St. John, and
Highland are presenting separate and joint efforts in administering to this
cause.



   c.   The practice of composting will positively impact the above
stated purpose the signatures of the Quad-Town Council approve and promote
these efforts of Intergovernmental Cooperation.



   d.   Other Solid Waste Management Components will be reviewed,
evaluated, and acted upon to further promote the lessening of Solid Waste
Landfill use. (Res. No. 5, 6-12-90)



Sec. 9-201  Charges for Collection and Disposal of Solid Waste.



   a.   The Town of Dyer shall charge, beginning February 1, 2015, the
sum of fifteen and 25/100 ($15.25) dollars, and as of February 1, 2016, the
sum of fifteen and 35/100 ($15.35) dollars, and as of February 1, 2017, the
sum of fifteen and 81/100 ($15.81) dollars, and as of February 1, 2018, the
sum of sixteen and 28/100 ($16.28) dollars per month per single family
dwelling unit for the collection and disposal of solid waste, which charge
shall be payable by the user of the facility which shall be defined to be the
occupant or occupants of the dwelling unit.  (Ord.  No. 94-15, § 1,
9-13-94;  Am. Ord. No. 97-12, 6-10-97; Am. Ord. No. 2000-38, § 1, 12-19-00;
Am. Ord. No. 2007-17, 9-19-07; Am. Ord. No. 2009-02, 1-28-09; Am. Ord. No.
2015-03, 2-26-15)



   b.   In addition, the occupant or occupants of each single family
dwelling unit shall be requested to make a voluntary contribution of 25¢ per
month which shall be used by the Town for promotion of Independence Day
Celebration and such other promotional functions of the Town as determined
from time to time by the Town Council. (Ord. No. 88-16, § 1, 3-8-88)



   c.   Fee for purchase and repair of equipment.



      1.   A solid waste fee in the sum of three dollars ($3.00) per
residential household is hereby established effective February 1, 2017.



      2.   Any monies received from said solid waste fee shall be
deposited in the Solid Waste Fund and shall be utilized for the purchase and
repair of equipment utilized in limb and leaf pickup and disposal and for
personnel costs related to employees operating and maintaining said equipment.



      3.   Said solid waste fee shall be billed by the Town to
residential customers together with the trash service fee heretofore
established by the Town.



(Ord. No. 2008-21, 12-17-08; Am. Ord. No. 2015-02, passed 2-12-15; Am. Ord.
No. 2016-30, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-202  Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund.



All revenues collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to be the
revenues of the solid waste disposal facilities and shall be maintained in a
separate fund to be known as the Solid Waste Disposal Facilities Fund. (Ord.
No. 80-71, § 2, 12-23-80)



Sec. 9-203  Monthly Billing Procedure.



The charges herein set forth shall be billed monthly and shall be paid not
later than the 28th day of each month and in the event said charges are not
paid within thirty (30) days after the same are due, a ten percent (10%)
penalty shall be added to the charges. In the event the Town of Dyer is
required to institute a civil action to collect said charges and penalties, a
reasonable attorney fee may be recovered in addition to all sums due for said
charges and penalties.  (Ord. No. 80-71, § 3, 12-23-80; Am. Ord. No.
2016-30, 12-8-16)



Sec. 9-204  Used Funds.



All rates or charges herein set forth shall be applied solely for the use of
solid waste disposal facilities, including but not limited to payments on
contract with persons for the collection or disposal of solid waste disposal
facilities, interests on bonds issued for the purpose of establishing solid
waste disposal facilities, engineering and legal expenses, expenses for
estimates of cost and revenues, expense for surveys and plans, and other
expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or
practicability of the method or methods to be used for the disposal of
refuse, administrative expense and such other expenses as may be necessary or
incident to the financing herein authorized. (Ord. No. 80-71, § 4, 12-23-80)



Sec. 9-205  Yardwaste Stickers.



A fee of one dollar ($1.00) is required for the yardwaste stickers to cover
the costs incurred by the Town for the yardwaste collection services. This
will apply for all yardwaste stickers sold in the years 1994 and 1995. The
required yardwaste stickers shall be sold by the Clerk-Treasurer's Office in
a minimum lot of five (5) stickers at any one time. (Ord. No. 1994-14, § 1,
9-13-94)



Sec. 9-206  Size and Weight Limitations.



Effective as of October 1, 1994, all yardwaste shall be placed in kraft bags
or cans no larger than thirty (30) gallons in size and no more than seventy
(70) pounds, and shall be properly tagged with the required yardwaste
stickers in order to be collected.



(Ord. No. 1994-14, § 2, 9-13-94)



Sec. 9-207  Role of Town Council President.



The Town Council authorizes the Town Council President to sign the Addendum
to the Existing Yardwaste Collection Contract for yardwaste collection
services.



(Ord. No. 1994-14, § 3, 9-13-94)



Sec. 9-208  Solid Waste/Recycling Commission.



   a.   Establishment.  There is hereby established a Solid
Waste/Recycling Commission for the Town of Dyer.



   b.   Appointment of Commission Members; Qualifications; Terms of
Office; Removal from Office; Oaths; Compensation.



      1.   The Solid Waste/Recycling Commission shall be appointed
by the Town Council and consist of seven (7) members. Each Commission Member
appointed must be of good moral character and a legal resident of the Town.
No political affiliation shall be required for appointment. The initial term
of office for all Commissioners shall be when such appointment is made in
calendar year 2001, with each initial appointment terminating on December 31,
2001. Commencing in year 2003, Commissioners' initial terms of service shall
be in accordance with the following:



         (a)   Two (2) Commissioners shall serve for three (3)
year terms;



         (b)   Two (2) Commissioners shall serve for two (2) year
terms;



         (c)   The remaining Commissioners shall serve for a one
(1) year term.



         (d)   At the expiration of each Commissioners' initial
term, as described above, the Town Council shall fill the vacancy by
appointing a new Commissioner for a term of three (3) years. The Commission
shall annually elect a President, a Vice-President and a
Recording/Corresponding Secretary from its existing membership. Election of
persons to these positions shall take place at the Commission's annual
organizational meeting to be held in January of each calendar year.



      2.   All Commission Members appointed shall serve only upon
the giving of an oath for said position.



      3.   Each Commission Member shall be subject to removal by a
majority of the Town Council for any cause deemed sufficient by the Town
Council.



      4.   Before entering upon his or her duties, each Commission
Member shall take and subscribe an oath of office before the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.



      5.   The salary of the Commission Members may be fixed by the
Town Council. In the event that the Town Council does establish a salary or
compensation for the Commission Members appointed to such positions, the same
shall be payable out of the General Fund of the Town. Salary or compensation
shall be established by appropriate amendment and inclusion in the Town
Salary Ordinance, as amended from time to time.



   c.   Powers and Duties of Solid Waste/Recycling Commission.  The
Solid Waste/Recycling Commission will undertake the following duties and
responsibilities, namely:



      1.   Communicate with the then-current Town Garbage-Recycling
vendor regarding service, contract provisions, public relations,
communications, education, and the like.



      2.   Supervise, oversee and operate the “FUN IN THE PARK”
annual fund-raising program, including, but not limited to, overseeing and
having jurisdiction over the garage sale, distribution of recycling
information, and utilization of resources from the Lake County Solid Waste
Management District for the same.



      3.   Monitor and stay current with the actions and activities
of the Lake County Solid Waste Management District, including, but not
limited to, monitoring and reviewing Lake County Solid Waste Management
District Board Meeting Minutes, Resolutions, budget matters and disbursements
to the Town of Dyer.



      4.   Review and recommend appropriate uses for the Grant
Monies distributed to the Town from the Lake County Solid Waste Management
District annually.



      5.   Attend, when able, Lake County Waste Management District
meetings.



      6.   Submit proposed budgets for the operation of the Solid
Waste/Recycling Commission for travel and educational expenses for the
Members of the Solid Waste/Recycling Commission. This budget is required to
be prepared and submitted in a timely fashion so as to be included in the
general budget as is proposed for the operation of the Town each calendar
year.



      7.   Monitor and remain informed regarding all current events
and circumstances pertaining to solid waste and recycling issues and matters
of concern to the Town.



      8.   Monitor and remain informed pertaining to legislation,
whether local, State or Federal, that is of importance to the Town and/or
will impact the Town.



      9.   Provide recommendations regarding solid waste and
recycling matters to the Town Council, as Legislative Body of the Town, for
all matters related to solid waste and recycling.



      10.   Promulgate appropriate rules and regulations for solid
waste and recycling matters and circumstances in the Town of Dyer, and
provide recommendations of the same to the Town Council.



(Ord. No. 2001-06, §§ 1-3, 3-20-01; Am. Ord. No. 2002-35, 11-19-02; Am.
Ord. No. 2007-03, 2-21-07)



Sec. 9-209 through Sec. 9-239  Reserved for Future Use.



CHAPTER 10
ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS



ARTICLE 1. DYER FLOOD HAZARD AREA ORDINANCE.



   Division I.  Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and
Objectives.



Sec. 10-1   Statutory Authorization.



Sec. 10-2   Findings of Fact.



Sec. 10-3   Statement of Purpose.



Sec. 10-4   Objectives.



Sec. 10-5   Definitions.



   Division II. General Provisions.



Sec. 10-6   Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies.



Sec. 10-7   Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data.



Sec. 10-8   Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.



Sec. 10-9   Compliance.



Sec. 10-10   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.



Sec. 10-11   Discrepancy Between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground
Elevations.



Sec. 10-12   Interpretation.



Sec. 10-13   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.



Sec. 10-14   Penalties for Violation.



   Division III. Administration.



Sec. 10-15   Designation of Administrator.



Sec. 10-16   Permit Procedures.



Sec. 10-17   Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.



   Division IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.



Sec. 10-18   General Standards.



Sec. 10-19   Specific Standards.



Sec. 10-20   Standards for Subdivision Proposals.



Sec. 10-21   Critical Facility.



Sec. 10-22   Standards for Identified Floodways.



Sec. 10-23   Standards for Identified Fringe.



Sec. 10-24   Standards for SFHAs Without Established Base Flood Elevation
and/or Floodways/Fringes.



Sec. 10-25   Standards for Flood Prone Areas.



   Division V. Variance Procedures.



Sec. 10-26   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board.



Sec. 10-27   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.



Sec. 10-28   Variance Procedures.



Sec. 10-29   Conditions for Variances.



Sec. 10-30   Variance Notification.



Sec. 10-31   Historic Structure.



Sec. 10-32   Special Conditions.



ARTICLE 2.  RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.



ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   Division I. Policy,  Purpose and Authority.



Sec. 10-36   Title.



Sec. 10-37   Policy.



Sec. 10-38   Purposes of These Regulations.



Sec. 10-39   Authority and Jurisdiction.



Sec. 10-40   Definitions.



Sec. 10-41 through Sec. 10-44 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II. Procedures.



Sec. 10-45   Initial Submission - Requirements - Staff Meeting.



Sec. 10-46   Plan Commission Study Session.



Sec. 10-47   Request for Public Hearing.



Sec. 10-48   Primary & Secondary Approvals.



Sec. 10-49 through Sec. 10-54 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division III. Procedure for Subdivision Control.



Sec. 10-55   General Improvements.



Sec. 10-56 through Sec. 10-59 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV. Streets.



Sec. 10-60   General Requirements for Streets.



Sec. 10-61   Grading and Improvement Plan.



Sec. 10-62   Topography and Arrangement.



Sec. 10-63   Blocks.



Sec. 10-64   Access to Collector Streets.



Sec. 10-65   Access to Primary Arterials.



Sec. 10-66   Street Regulatory Signs.



Sec. 10-67   Street lights.



Sec. 10-68   Construction of Streets.



Sec. 10-69   Design Standards.



Sec. 10-70   Intersections.



Sec. 10-71   Street Dedications and Reservations.



Sec. 10-72   Lot Improvements.



Sec. 10-73   Drainage and Storm Sewers.



Sec. 10-74   Extension of Municipal Services.



Sec. 10-75   Replacement of Special Driveway Aprons.



Sec. 10-76   through Sec. 10-77 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VI. Mandatory Park Dedication.



Sec. 10-78   Conditions for Secondary Subdivision Approval.



Sec. 10-79   Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreation Land Dedication.



Sec. 10-80   Reservation of Additional Land.



Sec. 10-81   Improved Sites.



Sec. 10-82   Procedure.



Sec. 10-83   Applicable only to Residential Zoned Subdivision.



Sec. 10-84   Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VII. Construction Procedures.



Sec. 10-85   Liability Insurance.



Sec. 10-86   Pre-Construction Conference.



Sec. 10-87   Advanced Notification.



Sec. 10-88   Inspection Checklist.



Sec. 10-89   Acceptance Procedures.



Sec. 10-90 through Sec. 10-93 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division VIII.  General Provisions.



Sec. 10-94   Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability.



Sec. 10-95   Saving Provision.



Sec. 10-96   Repealer.



Sec. 10-97   Amendments.



Sec. 10-98   Conditions.



Sec. 10-99   Resubdivision of Land.



Sec. 10-100   Vacation of Plats.



Sec. 10-101   Modifications.



Sec. 10-102   Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties.



Sec. 10-103   Reserved for Future Use.



   Division X.  Certificates.



Sec. 10-104   Certificates Required.



Sec. 10-105   Certificate of Approval.



Sec. 10-106   Land Surveyor's or Registered Professional Engineer's
Certificate.



Sec. 10-107   Legal Description Certificate.



Sec. 10-108   Acknowledgement Certificate.



Sec. 10-109   Dedication Certificate.



Sec. 10-110   Provision for Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants.



Sec. 10-111   Other Certificates.



Sec. 10-112   Enactment.



Sec. 10-113   Table 1 – Design Standards–Streets.



Sec. 10-114   Table 2 – Intersection Design Standards.



   Division XI.  Design Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control.



Sec. 10-115.1   Permit for Installation of Erosion and Sediment Control
Systems.



Sec. 10-115.2   Review and Approval



Sec. 10-115.3   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



Sec. 10-115.4   Design Requirements.



Sec. 10-115.5   Inspection.



Sec. 10-116 through Sec. 10-118 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4.  ZONING.



   Division I.  Zoning Ordinance.



Sec. 10-119   Schedule of Fees.



Sec. 10-120   Definitions.



Sec. 10-121   Establishment of Districts – Provisions for Official
Zoning Map.



Sec. 10-122   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries.



Sec. 10-123   Application of District Regulations.



Sec. 10-124   Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land,
Non-Conforming Structures, Non- Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises.



Sec. 10-125   Protection of Shoreland, Watercourses and Wetlands.



Sec. 10-126   Excavations.



Sec. 10-127   Private Swimming Pools.



Sec. 10-128   Temporary Tract Offices.



Sec. 10-129   Filling Stations.



Sec. 10-130   Schedule of Zoning Districts Adopted.



Sec. 10-131   Supplementary District Regulations.



Sec. 10-132   Off-Street Parking Lots and Loading Areas.



Sec. 10-133   Administration and Enforcement - Building Permits and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance.



Sec. 10-134   Board of Zoning Appeals - Establishment and Procedure.



Sec. 10-135   The Board of Zoning Appeals - Powers and Duties.



Sec. 10-136   Appeals From the Board of Zoning Appeals



Sec. 10-137   Duties of Administrative official, Board of Zoning Appeals,
and Courts on Matters of Appeal.



Sec. 10-138   Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses.



Sec. 10-139   Amendments.



Sec. 10-140   Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements.



Sec. 10-141   Complaints Regarding Violations.



Sec. 10-142   Penalties for Violations.



Sec. 10-143   Severability Clause.



Sec. 10-144   Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances - Effective Date.



Sec. 10-145   Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 10-146   Sign Regulations.



Sec. 10-146.1   General Provisions.



Sec. 10-146.2   Prohibited Signs.



Sec. 10-146.3   Off Premises Signs.



Sec. 10-146.4   Restrictions.



Sec. 10-146.5   Signs in Residential Districts.



Sec. 10-146.6   Signs in B-2, B-3 and I Districts.



Sec. 10-146.7   Signs in B-1 Business Districts.



Sec. 10-146.8   Exemptions.



Sec. 10-146.9   Enforcement.



Sec. 10-146.10   Sign Permit Fees.



Sec. 10-146.11   Definitions.



Sec. 10-146.12   Signs in Special Use Districts.



Sec. 10-147   Landscaping Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.1   Purpose.



Sec. 10-147.2   Applicability.



Sec. 10-147.3   Planting Standards.



Sec. 10-147.4   Conflicts in Standards.



Sec. 10-147.5   General Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.6   Screening Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.7   Bufferyard Landscaping Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.8   Landscape Plan Required; Content.



Sec. 10-147.9   Design Standards.



Sec. 10-147.10   Maintenance Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.11   Property Interior Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.12   Parking Lot Perimeter Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.13   Parking Lot Interior Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.14   Appendix A through D.



Sec. 10-148   Exterior Light Requirements.



Sec. 10-148.1   Purpose.



Sec. 10-148.2   Applicability.



Sec. 10-148.3   Definitions.



Sec. 10-148.4   Regulations.



Sec. 10-148.5   Light Trespass.



Sec. 10-148.6   General Lighting Design Requirements.



Sec. 10-148.7   Site Plans.



Sec. 10-148.8   Exemptions.



Sec. 10-148.9   Street Lighting.



Sec. 10-148.10   Injunction.



Sec. 10-148.11   Immunity from Prosecution.



Sec. 10-148.12 through 10-148.99 Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 10-149 through Sec. 10-154 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division II.  Special Use Districts.



Sec. 10-155   Definition of Special Use District (SUD).



Sec. 10-156   Applicability of Special Use District Regulations.



Sec. 10-157   Purpose for Special Use District Regulations.



Sec. 10-158   Outline Development Plan.



Sec. 10-159   Application Process: Preliminary Development Plan.



Sec. 10-160   Application Process: Final Development Plan.



Sec. 10-161   Special Use District - West U.S. 30 Corridor



Sec. 10-161.1   Application.



Sec. 10-161.2   Building Types and Uses.



Sec. 10-161.3   Area Regulations.



Sec. 10-161.4   Building Standards.



Sec. 10-161.5   Parking.



Sec. 10-161.6   Utilities, Accessory Structures and Garbage.



Sec. 10-161.7   Non-Conforming Uses.



Sec. 10-161.8   Amendment to Zoning Map.



Sec. 10-162   Special Use District - Calumet Avenue Corridor.



Sec. 10-162.1   Application.



Sec. 10-162.2   Developmental Standards.



Sec. 10-162.3   Conflict.



Sec. 10-162.4   Application Process/Site Plan Review.



Sec. 10-162.5   Amendment of Zoning Map.



Sec. 10-162.6   Public Hearing on Petition; Recommendation.



Sec. 10-163   Building Standards.



Sec. 10-164   Parking.



Sec. 10-165   Utilities, Accessory Structures and Garbage.



Sec. 10-166   Non-Conforming Uses.



Sec. 10-167   Amendment to Zoning Map.



Sec. 10-167.1   Special Use District - Sheffield Avenue Corridor.



Sec. 10-167.2   Public Hearing on Petition; Recommendation.



   Division III.  Sexually Oriented Businesses.



Sec. 10-168.1   Policy.



Sec. 10-168.2   Definitions.



Sec. 10-168.3   Permit Required.



Sec. 10-168.4   Investigation and Application.



Sec. 10-168.5   Issuance of Permit.



Sec. 10-168.6   Annual Permit Fee.



Sec. 10-168.7   Inspection.



Sec. 10-168.8   Expiration of Permit.



Sec. 10-168.9   Suspension of Permit.



Sec. 10-168.10   Revocation of Permit.



Sec. 10-168.11   Judicial Review of Permit Denial, Suspension or
Revocation.



Sec. 10-168.12   Transfer of Permit.



Sec. 10-168.13   Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.



Sec. 10-168.14   Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit
Films or Videos in Video Booths.



Sec. 10-168.15   Prohibitions Regarding Minors and Sexually Oriented
Businesses.



Sec. 10-168.16   Advertising and Lighting Regulations.



Sec. 10-168.17   Hours of Operation.



Sec. 10-168.18   Nudity at Sexually Oriented Businesses Prohibited.



Sec. 10-168.19   Regulations Pertaining to Live Entertainment.



Sec. 10-168.20   Exemptions.



Sec. 10-168.21   Prohibition of Distribution of Sexual Devices.



Sec. 10-168.22   Penalties and Injunctive Relief.



Sec. 10-169 through Sec. 10-174 Reserved for Future Use.



   Division IV.  Fences.



Sec. 10-175   Front Yard Fence Regulations.



Sec. 10-176   Barbed Wire.



Sec. 10-177   Residential Fences.



Sec. 10-178   Fences in Commercial Districts.



Sec. 10-179   Fences in Industrial Districts.



Sec. 10-180   Front Yard Requirements in Commercial and Industrial
Districts.



Sec. 10-181 through Sec. 10-189 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 1. DYER FLOOD HAZARD AREA ORDINANCE.



Division I.  Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and
Objectives.



Sec. 10-1  Statutory Authorization.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore,
the Town Council of the Town of Dyer does hereby adopt the following
floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-2  Findings of Fact.



   a.   The flood hazard areas of the Town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   b.   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
inadequately floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-3  Statement of Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   a.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   b.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   c.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;



   d.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage;



   e.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands;



   f.   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their
contents in the Town by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-4  Objectives.



   The objectives of this ordinance are:



      a.   To protect human life and health;



      b.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



      c.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;



      d.   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



      e.   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets,
and bridges located in floodplains;



      f.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize flood blight areas.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-5  Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.



   A zone. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30. Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The
definitions are presented below:



      1.   Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not
been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.



      2.   Zone AE and A1-A30: Areas subject to inundation by the
one-percent (1%) annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods.
Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and
revised maps in place of Zones A1-A30.)



      3.   Zone AO: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%)
annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where
average depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet. Average flood depths
derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      4.   Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent (1%)
annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average
depths are between one (1) and three (3) feet. Average flood depths derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      5.   Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.



      6.   Zone A99: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon
completion of an under-construction federal flood protection system. These
are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the
construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to
consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used
when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.



   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure).  A structure with a floor
area four hundred (400) square feet or less that is located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should
constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human
habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples
of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole
barns, and hay sheds.



   Addition (to an existing structure).  Any walled and roofed expansion
to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a
common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.



   Area of shallow flooding.  A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
(1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   Base flood.  The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   Base flood elevation (BFE).  The elevation of the one-percent (1%)
annual chance flood.



   Basement. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   Boundary river.  The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary
between Kentucky and Indiana.



   Boundary river floodway.  The floodway of a boundary river.



   Building.  See Structure.



   Community.  A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   Community Rating System (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   Critical facility.  A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   D Zone.  Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but
flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating
communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.



   Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:



      1.   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure
or any addition to a structure;



      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days;



      3.   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads, or similar projects;



      4.   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc;



      5.   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



      6.   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;



      7.   Storage of materials; or



      8.   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



   Development does not include activities such as the maintenance of
existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing
roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve fitting, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent
structures.



   Elevated structure. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   Elevation certificate. A certified statement that verifies a
structure's elevation information.



   Emergency Program. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM).  An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   Flood Insurance Study (FIS).  The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   Flood prone area. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source.  See Flood.



   Flood protection grade (FPG).  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two (2) feet at any given location in the SFHA.  See Freeboard.



   Floodplain. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   Floodplain management.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   Floodplain management regulations. This ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management
regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management
requirements.



   Floodproofing (dry floodproofing).  A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   Floodproofing certificate. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   Floodway.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   Freeboard. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   Fringe. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   Hardship (as related to variances of this ordinance). The exceptional
hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance.
The Town Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional,
unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's
neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All
of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.



   Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   Historic structures.  Any structures individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of
Historic Sites and Structures.



   Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC).  The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All
renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or
after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   Letter of Final Determination (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the
new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six
(6)-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain
management regulations during this six (6)-month period unless the community
has previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   Letter of Map Change (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
The definitions are presented below:



      1.   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA).  An amendment by letter
to the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not
located in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data.
A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



      2.   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). An official revision to
the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood
zones, delineations, end elevations.



      3.   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F).  An
official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides
FEMA's determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been
elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   Lowest adjacent grade. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   Lowest floor.  The lowest elevation described among the following:



      1.   The top of the lowest level of the structure.



      2.   The top of the basement floor.



      3.   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure.



      4.   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars.



      5.   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a
basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



            (a)   The walls are designed to automatically
equalize the hydrostatic flood forces or the walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood waters by providing a minimum of two (2) openings (in
addition to doorways and windows) in a minimum of two (2) exterior walls; if
a structure has more than one (1) enclosed area, each shall have openings on
exterior walls;



            (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be
at least one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area;
the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above
the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher; and



            (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely
for the parking of vehicles and building access.



   Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.



   Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   Market value.  The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   Mitigation.  Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
mitigation is twofold, to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal
government and the private insurance industry.



   National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929.  As corrected in 1929
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   New construction.  Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.



   New manufactured home park or subdivision.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of. the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   Non-boundary river floodway.  The floodway of any river or stream
other than a boundary river.



   North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).  As adopted in 1993
is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   Obstruction.  Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   One-percent (1%) annual chance flood.  The flood that has a
one-percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any
flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent (1%)
annual chance flood.  See Regulatory Flood.



   Physical Map Revision (PMR).  An official republication of a
community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   Public safety and nuisance.  Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:



      1.   Built on a single chassis;



      2.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projections;



      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and



      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   Regular Program. The phase of the community's participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   Regulatory flood.  The flood having a one-percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as caiculated by a method and
procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory
flood elevation at any location is as defined in Sec. 10-7. The regulatory
flood is also known by the term base flood, one-percent (1%) annual chance
flood, and 100-year flood.



   Repetitive loss.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10)-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or
exceeded twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



   Section 1316.  That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   Special flood hazard area (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the Town subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the
Town are generally identified as such on the Lake County, Indiana and
Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January 18, 2012 as well as
any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown
on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   Start of construction. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   Structure. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days.



   Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.



   Substantial improvement.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement This term includes structures that
have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code requirements or any alteration of an historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as an
historic structure.



   Suspension. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   Violation.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without
the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required
in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   X Zone.  The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled
or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   Zone B, C, and X. Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Division II.  General Provisions.



Sec. 10-6  Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies.



   This ordinance shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas
within the jurisdiction of the Town.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-7  Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data.



   This ordinance's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.



   a.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for
the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town shall be as delineated
on the one-percent (1%) annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance
Study of Lake County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated January 18, 2012
and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January 18, 2012 as well
as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.



   b.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for
each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town, delineated as an A
Zone on the Lake County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate
Map dated January 18, 2012 as well as any future updates, amendments, or
revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one (1) square mile. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing
data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be
considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review and subsequently approved.



      c.   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one (1) square mile.



      d.   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD),
any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall
be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-8  Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-9  Compliance.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this ordinance and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-10  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.



   This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-11  Discrepancy Between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground
Elevations.



   a.   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   b.   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   c.   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site
shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not
be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-12  Interpretation.



   In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions
shall be:



   a.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body;



   c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-13  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this ordinance does not create
any liability on the part of the Town, the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-14  Penalties for Violation.



   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance.
All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such
in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the Town of Dyer.
All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).



   a.   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   b.   The Town Council shall inform the owner that any such violation
is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.



   c.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Division III.  Administration.



Sec. 10-15  Designation of Administrator.



   The Town Council hereby appoints the Town Administrator to administer
and implement the provisions of this ordinance and is herein referred to as
the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-16  Permit Procedures.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:



   a.   Application stage.



      1.   A description of the proposed development.



      2.   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and
streams.



      3.   A legal description of the property site.



      4.   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades.



      5.   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD.



      6.   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed.



      7.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted
to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. (See Sec.
10-17b.6. for additional information.)



   b.   Construction stage.



      1.   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated
structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey data submitted.
The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any
further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure
to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work
order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the
elevation certification shall be at the applicant's risk.



      2.   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a
floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional
engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review
the floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall correct any
deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to
proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or failure to make
correction required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project.



   c.   Finished construction.  Upon completion of construction, an
elevation certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future,
updates) which depicts, the "as-built" lowest floor elevation is required to
be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate Form 81-65 or any future updates) is required to be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-17  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.



   a.   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   b.   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but are not limited to:



      1.   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.



      2.   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations.



      3.   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to Secs. 10-22 and 10-23a. of this ordinance, and maintain a record
of such authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment).



      4.   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the
floodplain development permit.



      5.   Maintain and track permit records involving additions and
improvements to residences located in the floodway.



      6.   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.



      7.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps. Letters of Map Change
(LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this ordinance.



      8.   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or
Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA
maps of the community.



      9.   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished.



      10.   Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.



      11.   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with Sec. 10-16.



      12.   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance
with Sec. 10-16.



      13.   Perform a minimum of three (3) inspections to ensure
that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have
been satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the flood protection
grade reference mark at the development site; the second upon the
establishment of the structure's footprint/establishment of the lowest floor;
and the final inspection upon completion and submission of the required
finished construction elevation certificate. Authorized Town officials shall
have the right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



      14.   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the
work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      15.   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of the ordinance, in cases where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Division IV.  Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.



Sec. 10-18  General Standards.



   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required:



   a.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.



   b.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   c.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG.



   d.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   e.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located
at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG.



   f.   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   g.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   h.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   i.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this ordinance.



   j.   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHA shall be
constructed with permeable materials.



   k.   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume
of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be greater
than the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1.5 to 1) due to the
fill or structure. The Floodplain Administrator and the Dyer Storm Water
Board have the authority to reduce the replacement ratio to 1 to 1 if they
feel a reduction is warranted.



      1.   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.



      2.   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will
be accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding
when not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.



      3.   The excavation shall provide for true storage of
floodwater but shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood
water.



      4.   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way
leading to the floodplain.



      5.   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.



      6.   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed
stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and
shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



      7.   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled
shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site
work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this Division IV.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-19  Specific Standards.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   a.   In addition to the requirements of Sec. 10-18, all structures
to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG.
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:



      1.   Construction or placement of any structure having a floor
area greater than four hundred (400) square feet.



      2.   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure
where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the
land).



      3.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred.



      4.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.



      5.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This ordinance does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.



   b.   Residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the FPG (two (2) feet above
the base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of subsection d. below.



   c.   Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two (2) feet above the base flood elevation) or
be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to  facilitate the
unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the
standards of subsection d. below. Structures located in all A Zones may be
floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the
following:



      1.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the  effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Sec. 10-17b.12.



      2.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   d.   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above
the FPG.



      Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
fences on exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



      1.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings located in a
minimum of two (2) exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area).



      2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one (1)
foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each
opening, whichever is higher.



      3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood
waters in both directions.



      4.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



      5.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



      6.   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an
elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



      7.   Openings are to be not less than three (3) inches in any
direction in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole in
the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device.



      8.   Property owners shall be required to execute a flood
openings/vent affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be maintained as
flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the openings in any
way will violate the requirements of subsection d. above. Periodic
inspections will be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure
compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the office of the Lake County
Recorder.



      9.   Property owners shall be required to execute and record
with the structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area
below the lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure exceeds
six (6) feet) shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the
community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. The
non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Lake County
Recorder.



   e.   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
non-residential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



      1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
(1)  foot deep before compacting to ninety-five percent (95%) of the maximum
density obtainable with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method.
The results of the test showing compliance shall be retained in the permit
file.



      2.   The fill shall extend ten (10) feet beyond the foundation
of the structure before sloping below the BFE.



      3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.



      4.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      5.   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



      6.   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen
material.



   f.   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days must meet one
(1) of the following requirements:



      1.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as a result of a flood:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in subsection d. above.



         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured homes are not required to have
openings.



      2.   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that
has not bean substantially damaged by a flood:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than thirty-six (36)
inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.



         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in subsection d. above.



         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have
openings.



      3.   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than one hundred eighty (180)
days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes
as stated earlier in this section.



   g.   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



      1.   Shall not be used for human habitation.



      2.   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.



      3.   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.



      4.   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.



      5.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.



      6.   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures subsection d. above.



   h.   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas
or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-20  Standards for Subdivision Proposals.



   a.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   b.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   c.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   d.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of fifty (50) lots or
five (5) acres.



   e.   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the
SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



   f.   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of
SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-21  Critical Facility.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-22  Standards for Identified Floodways.



   a.   Located within SFHAs, established Sec. 10-7 are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-26-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction
of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial
addition/improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)



   b.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development
permit, provided the provisions contained in Division IV of this ordinance
have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive
than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive
regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



   c.   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, that will adversely affect
the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This
adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory
flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by
comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that
under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.



   d.   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the Town shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-23  Standards for Identified Fringe.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in Division IV of this ordinance have been met. The key
provision is that the top of the lowest fioor of any new or substantially
improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-24  Standards for SFHAs without Established Base Flood Elevation
and/or Floodways/Fringes.



   a.   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one (1)
square mile:



      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one (1) square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      2.   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the
one-percent (1%) annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood
protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



      3.   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper
permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or
floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development,
a floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in Division IV this ordinance have been met.



   b.   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one (1) square
mile:



      1.   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one (1) square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and one-percent
(1%) annual chance flood elevation for the site.



      2.   Upon receipt the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
Division IV of this ordinance have been met.



   c.   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one (1) foot and shall not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. No . 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-25  Standards for Flood Prone Areas.



   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps,
or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards
as required per Division IV of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Division V.  Variance Procedures.



Sec. 10-26  Designation of Variance and Appeals Board.



   The Town of Dyer Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from requirements of this ordinance,



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-27  Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
Lake County Circuit or Superior Court.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-28  Variance Procedures.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this ordinance, and:



   a.   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   b.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   c.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   d.   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   e.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   f.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   g.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   h.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   i.   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site;



   j.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-29  Conditions for Variances.



   a.   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      2.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship;



      3.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safely,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization



of the public or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   b.   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
Secs. 10-22 or 10-24a. of this ordinance may be granted.



   c.   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to Secs. 10-22 or
10-24a. of this ordinance will require a permit from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources..



   d.   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of Sec.
10-19, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half (½) acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade



   e.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   f.   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration  of any structure individually listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.



   g.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade
and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that
the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.  (See Sec. 10-30).



   h.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See Sec.
10-30).



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-30  Variance Notification.



   a.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the
lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates tor flood
insurance up to amounts high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred
dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and



      2.   Such construction below the flood protection grade
increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded
by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



   b.   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record or all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



Sec. 10-31  Historic Structure.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



Sec. 10-32  Special Conditions.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in Division V, and the
purposes of this ordinance, the Town Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2015-22, 11-12-15)



ARTICLE 2.  RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE.



ARTICLE 3. SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE.



Division I. Policy, Purpose and Authority.



Sec. 10-36  Title.



   This ordinance and the regulations contained herein shall hereafter be
known and cited as the Subdivision Control Ordinance of the Town of Dyer,
Lake County, Indiana.



(Ord. No. 94-9, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-37  Policy.



   a.   It is declared to be the policy of the Town to consider the
subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as
subject to the official comprehensive plan and related policies (contained in
the Dyer Zoning Ordinance) for the orderly and efficient development of the
Town.



   b.   Land to be subdivided shall be of such a character that it can
be developed without intentional or discoverable peril to health or
intentional or discoverable peril from flood, fire or other menace. Land
shall not be subdivided until access is made available to existing public
facilities and until improvements and proper provision have been made for
drainage, water, sewerage, other necessary new public improvements such as
schools, parks, recreation facilities; and transportation facilities are
adequate for serving the subdivision. Private wells and septic systems in
lieu of public water and sewer facilities shall be allowed in the Town upon
securing all applicable permits from  the Board of Health only in the
absence of available public water and sewer facilities within three hundred
(300) feet of the property line. This requirement may be waived at the
discretion of the Plan Commission.



   c.   Both existing and proposed public facilities serving the
subdivision shall be properly related and conform to the terms and provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § I, A, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-38  Purposes of These Regulations.



   a.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the Town.



   b.   To guide the future development and renewal of the Town in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and related policies.



   c.   To provide for the safety, comfort, and soundness of the built
environment and related open spaces.



   d.   To protect the compatibility, character, economic stability and
orderliness of all development through reasonable design standards.



   e.   To guide public and private policy and action to provide
adequate and efficient public and private facilities, the most aesthetically
pleasing and beneficial interrelationship between land uses, conserve natural
resources such as natural beauty, woodlands, wetlands and open spaces both
during and after development.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § I, B, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-39  Authority and Jurisdiction.



   a.   This ordinance which was enacted pursuant to Indiana Home Rule
and planning enabling legislation (Indiana Code, titles § 36-7-4-700 series,
as amended) authorizes the Dyer Plan Commission to review and approve or
disapprove plats for subdivisions throughout the Town, which show lots,
blocks, or sites with or without new streets or highways. This authority
extends to the development or resubdivision of undeveloped portions of
already recorded plats.



   b.   No construction of any kind shall be undertaken upon any vacant
unsubdivided parcel of land within the corporate boundaries of the Town of
Dyer.



   c.   This ordinance shall apply to all subdivision of land within
the corporate limits of Dyer. No plat or replat of a subdivision of land
located within the Town of Dyer shall be recorded until it shall have been
reviewed and approved by the Dyer Plan Commission. Such approvals shall be
entered in writing on the plat by the President and Executive Secretary of
the Plan Commission, who shall then affix the Plan Commission Seal thereto.



   d.   No lot, tract or parcel of land within a subdivision shall be
offered for sale nor shall a sale, contract for sale, or option be made or
given until the final plat of subdivision has been reviewed, officially
approved by the Dyer Plan Commission and recorded. No construction work on
any proposed subdivision, including grading, shall be made until the owner or
owners thereof, or his or their agent, have obtained from the Plan Commission
final written engineering approval of a preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, IDEM water and wastewater permits, any and all local, state and
federal permits required according to the procedures outlined herein.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § I, C, 8-9-9; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-40  Definitions.



   Accessory Building - A subordinate structure, such as a garage, storage
shed, or barn, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of
the principal building or land



   Administrator - The officer appointed by and/or delegated the
responsibility for the administration of these regulations by the Planning
Commission. This term shall be construed to include those planning staff
members working under the direction of the Administrator in the exercise of
his/her responsibilities in regard to the processing of these Subdivision
Regulations.



   Adjacent Property Owners - Those parties who are the owners of
properties adjoining or adjacent to the proposed subdivision as shown on the
sketch plan.



   Alley - A public or private vehicular right-of-way primarily designed
to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose
principal frontage is on some other street.



   Applicant - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his agent or
his legal representative.



   Block - A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemetery, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.



   Block Park - A park of one (1) acre or less in size.



   Bond - Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond,
collateral, property, or instrumental credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Town Council. All bonds shall be approved by the Town
Council wherever a bond is required by these regulations.



   Book of Standards - The document which accompanies the Subdivision
Control Ordinance and contains construction and design standards for all
required infrastructure improvements.



   Buffer Landscaping - Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, or
related landscaping features required under this ordinance or the Zoning
Ordinance on private lots and privately maintained buffering lots from
adjacent and/or properties or public rights of way for the purpose of
increasing visual privacy. (See Screening also.)



   Building - Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, or movable property of any kind.



   Building Code - That Town ordinance or group of ordinances establishing
and controlling the standards for constructing buildings, utilities,
mechanical equipment and all forms of structures and permanent installations
and related matters, within the Town. Also referred to herein as the Dyer
Building Code.



   Building Inspector - That official of local government authorized to
issue building permits.



   Building Permit - A certificate issued by the Building Inspector of a
governing body permitting a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any
building or structure within its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done.



   Capital Improvements Program - A proposed schedule of all future
projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major
projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual
local government's operating expenses for the purchase, construction or
replacement of the more durable, longer lived physical assets for the
community are included.



   Central Sewer System - A community sewer system including collection
and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision or an existing sewer system.



   Central Water Systems - A community water supply system including
existing and new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes, treatment
facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above facilities
established by the developer to serve a new subdivision.



   Certificate - The signed and attested document which indicates that a
subdivision has been granted secondary approval by the Commission subsequent
to proper public notice of its hearing.



   Commission - The Dyer Plan Commission.



   Commission Attorney - The licensed attorney designated by the Dyer Town
Council to furnish legal assistance for the administration of this ordinance
or as provided by statute.



   Community Park - A park in excess of ten (10) acres.



   Comprehensive Plan - Inclusive physical, social and economic plans and
policies in graphic and verbal statement forms for the development of the
Town, prepared and adopted by the Commission and Town Council, pursuant to
the State Acts, and including any part of such plan and/or policies
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan and/or policies, or parts
thereof.



   Condominium - The division of building(s) and the related land into
horizontal property interests meeting the requirements of and controlled by
Indiana statutes for condominiums as prescribed by Indiana Code, §§
32-1-6-1 through 31.



   Construction  Plan(s) - The preliminary and/or final drawings
accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design
of improvements to be installed for the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of this ordinance as a condition of the approval of the plat.



   Cul-de-Sac - A local street with only one (1) outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement
including public safety vehicles.



   Dead-End Street - A street or a portion of a street with only one (1)
vehicular traffic outlet, and no turnaround at the terminal end.



   Developer - The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or one who is
hired by the owner to subdivide or develop the land. Consent for making
applications for development approval shall be required from the legal owner
of the premises.



   Drives, Private - Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved,
which are wholly within private property, except where they intersect with
other streets within public rights-of-way.



   Easement - An authorization grant by a property owner for the use by
another of any designed part of his property for a clearly specified
purpose(s).



   Engineer (Design) - Professional engineer hired by a developer/private
party for the purposes of designing a particular project.



   Engineer (Town) - Professional engineer or engineering firm employed by
the Town of Dyer either as a Town employee or as a consulting engineer.



   Escrow - A deposit of cash with the Town Council in lieu of an amount
required and still in force on a performance or maintenance bond. Such escrow
funds shall be held by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   Final Plat - The map, drawing or plan described in this ordinance of a
subdivision and any accompanying material submitted to the Commission for
secondary approval, and which, if approved and signed by the designated
officials, may be submitted to the County Recorder for recording.



   Flood Hazard Areas - Those flood plains which have not been adequately
protected from flooding by the Regulatory Flood by means of dikes, levees, or
reservoirs, and are shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration or maps provided to the Commission from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



   Flood Plains - The area adjoining the river or stream which has been or
may hereafter be covered by flood water from the Regulatory Flood.



   Flood Protection Grade - The elevation of the lowest point around the
perimeter of a building at which flood waters may enter the interior of the
building.



   Floodway Fringe - Those portions of the Flood Hazard Areas lying
outside the Floodway, shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.



   Foundations - The supporting member of a wall or structure.



   Frontage - That side of a lot abutting on a street or way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot. Corner lots will be considered
to front on both intersecting streets. (No access for any one lot is
permitted to more than one street and that street generally will be the one
calculated to have lower traffic volumes and less frequent intersections.)



   Frontage Street - Any street to be constructed by the developer or any
existing street in which development shall take place on both sides.



   Front Yard - A yard as defined herein, encompassing the horizontal
space between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line,
extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance
from that foundation to the right-of-way line.



   Governing Body - The Dyer Town Council.



   Grade - The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in
percentage (%) terms.



   Health Department and Health Officer - The agency and person designated
by the County to administer the health regulations within the County's
jurisdiction.



   Indiana Code - The Burns Indiana Statute Code Edition, which codifies
all Indiana statutes for reference purposes. The latest edition with any
amending supplements must be referred to for the laws “now” in force and
applicable. (Usually abbreviated as I.C. herein.)



   Joint Ownership - Joint ownership among persons shall be construed as
the same owner, “constructive ownership” for the purpose of imposing
subdivision regulations.



   Landscaping - See Buffer Landscaping, Screening and Shade Trees.



   Lot - For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a subdivided and
recorded parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:



   (1)   A single lot of record.



   (2)   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record.



   Lot Frontage  - The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements
on comer lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall
be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under Yards
in this section.



   Lot Lines - The lines bounding lots as defined herein.



   Lot Measurement -



   1.   Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side
lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.



   2.   “Width” of a lot shall be considered to be the distance
between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of
the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided,
however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where
they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent
(80%) of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning
circle of a cul-de- sac or eyebrow. Examples of said measurements may be
found in Appendix “A.”



   Lot of Record - A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Lake County.



   Lot Types



   a.   “Corner Lot” is defined as a lot located at the
intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or
streets shall be considered a comer lot if straight lines drawn from the
foremost points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet
at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).



   b.   “Interior lot” is defined as a lot other than a corner lot
with only one frontage on a street.



   c.   “Through lot” is defined as a lot other than a corner lot
with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2)
streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.



   d.   “Reversed Frontage lot” is defined as a lot on which the
frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle
less than one hundred thirty-five degrees [135°]) to the general pattern in
the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot,
or a through lot.



   Major Subdivisions - Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision, including, but not limited to, subdivision of four (4) or more
lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the
local governmental facilities, to the creation of any public improvements.



   Map - A representation of a part or the whole of the earth's surface,
in signs and symbols, on a plane surface, at an established scale, with a
method of orientation indicated.



   Marker - A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is
intended to be a permanent point for record purposes.



   Master Plan - See Comprehensive Plan.



   Minor Subdivision - Any subdivision containing not more than three (3)
lots fronting on existing street which is an improved right-of-way maintained
by the Town involving no street or the extension of municipal facilities, or
the creation of any public improvements. A minor subdivision shall not
adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and shall
not conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, or this ordinance.



   Model Home - A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the kind of units that will be constructed in the subdivision.



   Monument - A physical structure which marks the location of a corner or
other survey point.



   Neighborhood Park - A park of one (1) to ten (10) acres in size.



   Nonresidential Subdivision - A subdivision whose intended use is other
than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall
comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations.



   Off-Site - Any premises not located within the area of the property to
be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for
subdivision's approval.



   Official Map - The zoning map established by the Town pursuant to law
and any amendments or additions thereto adopted by the Town or additions
thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the Commission
and the subsequent filing of such approved plats.



   Ordinance - Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local
government which has the force of law, including any amendments or repeal of
any ordinance.



   Owner - Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought
to be subdivided under these regulations.



   Parcel - A part or portion of land having a legal description formally
set forth in a conveyance together with the boundaries thereof, in order to
make possible its easy identification.



   Perimeter Street - Any existing street to which the parcel of land to
be subdivided abuts on only one side.



   Person - A person includes a corporation, partnership and an
unincorporated association of persons such as a club.



   Plan Commission - That Commission established by the Town of Dyer in
accordance with Indiana Code, § 36-7-1-2.



   Planned Unit Development - A means of land regulation which permits a
unified land development in a configuration and possibly a mix of uses not
otherwise permitted “as of right” under the Town Zoning Ordinance, but
requiring under that ordinance or a special ordinance a special review and
approval process.



   Primary Approval - An approval (or approval with conditions imposed)
granted to a subdivision by the Commission after having determined in a
public hearing-that the subdivision complies with the standards prescribed in
this ordinance (per Indiana Code, § 36-7-4-700 series: Subdivision Control).



   Primary Plat - The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to
be submitted to the Commission for approval which include full engineering
drawings.



   Principal Use Building - A building in which the principal use of the
lot or parcel is conducted. Standards recognized by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council shall be used to determine whether a given
structure constitutes one or more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.



   Public Improvement - Any drainage ditch, street, highway, parkway,
sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot
improvement, or other facility used by the general public and not intended
for private use.



   Rear Yard - A yard defined herein, encompassing the horizontal spaces
between the nearest foundation of a building to a rear lot line and that rear
lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the
shortest distance from that foundation to the real lot line. The rear yard of
a corner lot shall be that yard at the opposite end of the lot from the front
yard.



   Registered Land Surveyor - A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of
Indiana.



   Registered Professional Engineer - An engineer properly licensed and
registered in the State of Indiana or permitted to practice in Indiana
through reciprocity.



   Regulatory Flood - That flood having a peak discharge which can be
equaled or exceeded on the average of once in one hundred (100) year period,
as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); this flood is equivalent
to a flood having probability of occurrence of one percent (1%) in any given
year.



   Regulatory Flood Elevation - The maximum elevation, as established by
FEMA, reached by the Regulatory Flood at the location in question relevant to
approval of a given subdivision under consideration.



   Regulatory  Floodway - The channel of a river or stream and those
portions of the Flood Plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably
required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flow of the Regulatory
Flood of any river or stream shown on the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the
Federal Insurance Administration.



   Restrictive Covenants - Regulations of various kinds on the usage of
lots or parcels of land within a subdivision which are proposed by the
subdivision, and in the case of public health, safety, and welfare by the
Commissions, that are recorded with the plat and run with the land.



   Resubdivisions - A change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat.



   Right-of-Way - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied, by
a street, pedestrian-way, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line,
oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, special
landscaping, or for another special use. The usage of term “right-of-way”
for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the
lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the
dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for
streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, screening or
special landscaping, or any other use involving maintenance by a public
agency shall be dedicated to public use by the subdivider on whose plat such
right-of-way is established.



   Sale or Lease - Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any
possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise,
intestate succession, or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part
thereof, whether by metes and bounds, deeds, contract, plat, map, lease,
devise, intestate, succession, or other written instrument.



   Same Ownership - Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm,
entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations
in which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or member of his family owns
an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated
association.



   Screening - Either (a) a strip of at least ten (10) feet wide, densely
planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least
four (4) feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year
round dense screen at least six (6) feet high; or (b) an opaque wall or
barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet high. Either (a) or
(b) shall be maintained in good condition at all times and may have no signs
affixed to or hung in relation to the outside thereof except as permitted or
required under the Zoning Ordinance. Where required by the Zoning Ordinance,
a screen shall be installed along or within the lines of a plot as a
protection for adjoining or nearby properties. Earth berms may be
incorporated as part of such screening measures where appropriate.



   Secondary Approval - The stage of applications for formal Plan
Commission approval of a  final  plat  of  a  subdivision  the 
construction of which has been completed or substantially completed which, if
approved and signed by the designated officials, may be submitted to the
County Recorder for filing.



   Setback - A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line
(front, back, side) between which no buildings or structures may be erected
as prescribed in the Town Zoning Ordinance.



   Shall - Mandatory without exception.



   Side Lot Lines - Any lines separating two lots other than front or rear
lot lines.



   Sketch Plan - The initially submitted graphic representation of a
proposed subdivision, drawn to the approximate scale, whether superimposed
upon a print of a topographic survey or presented in any other suitable
graphic medium or form acceptable to the Commission. Drawing or drawings
indicating the proposed manner of layout of the subdivision meeting the
conditions of the subdivision ordinance to be submitted to the Commission for
primary approval.



   Special Landscaping - Areas of tree planting, shrubs, or other
landscape feature serving a public purpose and maintained by the Town. (See
also Buffer Landscaping and Screening.)



   State Acts - Such legislative acts of the State of Indiana as they
affect these regulations.



   State Plan Coordinates System - A system of plan coordinates, based on
the Transverse Mercator Projection for the Western Zone of Indiana,
established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey for the State of
Indiana.



   Street, Public - All major secondary and minor streets which are shown
on the subdivision plat and are to be dedicated for public use.



   Street, Approved - Any street, whether public or private, meeting
standards and specifications of the Town. Specific street classifications are
defined in Section 1 of the Design Standards for Improvements in the Town of
Dyer, in the attached appendix.



   Street Line - The right-of-way line of a street.



   Street Right-of-Way Width - The distance between property lines
measured at right angles to the center line of the street.



   Structure - Anything constructed or erected that requires location on
or in the ground or is attached to something having a location on or in the
ground.



   Subdivider - Any person, or his legally designated Attorney-in-Fact by
a Power of Attorney properly executed and recorded in the Miscellaneous
Records of Lake County Indiana, who (1), having a proprietary interest in
land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or
who (2) directly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or
develop, or advertise for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot,
parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or who (3) engages directly, or
through an agent, in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or
offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision of  any interest,
lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision; or (4) is directly or
indirectly controlled by, or under direct, or indirect common control with
any of the foregoing.



   Subdivision - The division of a parcel of land into one or more lots
for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. If a new
street is involved, any division of a parcel of land is considered to be a
subdivision. The term “subdivision” includes resubdivision and; when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to
land being subdivided.



   Subdivision Plat - A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land filed or intended to be filed of record with the County Recorder.



   Temporary Improvement - Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and intended to be replaced
by a permanent improvement.



   Temporary Turnaround - Turnaround improvements at the ends of stub
streets intended to be replaced when the adjoining area is developed and the
through street connection is made.



   Thoroughfare Plan - That part of the Comprehensive Plan for Dyer now or
hereafter adopted, which includes a Major Thoroughfare Plan and sets forth
the general or approximate location, alignment, dimensions, identifications
and classifications of existing and proposed highways and other thoroughfares
(including streets as defined hereinabove) located with the Town of Dyer.



   Yard - A space on the same lot with a principal building, such space
being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from
ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are
expressly permitted.



   Zoning Ordinance - That Town ordinance setting forth the regulations
controlling the use of land in the Town of Dyer. (Ord. No. 94-9, § II,
8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-41 and Sec. 10-44  Reserved for Future Use.



Division II. Procedures.



Sec. 10-45  Initial Submission - Requirements - Staff Meeting.



   a.   Official Submission Dates. The deadline for submittal of the
primary plat application (Form #1) for review of primary plat shall be at
least sixty (60) days prior to the date of public hearing, at which the
petitioner intends to have his primary plat submission heard by the Plan
Commission. Such submittal shall include payment of all necessary and
required fees in accordance with the fee schedule found in Section 10-119.



   b.   Submission Requirements. The submission shall:



      1.   Have all its construction plans conform to the Design
Standards for Improvements in the Town of Dyer, as set forth in Appendix A to
Ordinance No. 2007-25 and incorporated herein by reference.



      2.   Be made on forms available at the office of the
Commission and be submitted with the fee as set forth in the fee schedule in
Section 10-119.



      3.   Include indication of all land which the petitioner
proposes to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent and across any street
or railroad right-of-way, extending three hundred (300) feet therefrom.



      4.   Be accompanied by five (5) copies of full engineering and
fifteen (15) copies of lot layout only.



   c.   Petitioner shall attend a staff meeting as scheduled by the
Zoning Administrator.  Such staff meeting shall be at least ten (10) days
prior to the regularly scheduled Plan Commission Study Session at which the
project is to be discussed.  Petitioner shall submit a sketch of his/her
proposal (10 copies) to the Zoning Administrator at least ten (10) days prior
to the staff meeting.



(Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. 2007-25, 12-19-07)



Sec. 10-46  Plan Commission Study Session.



   Subsequent to the staff meeting, petitioner shall attend a Plan
Commission Study Session, as scheduled by the Zoning Administrator.  At that
study session, the petitioner shall provide sufficient individual copies of
their proposed plan for all members of the Plan Commission, and a copy in a
compatible electronic format for viewing. The petitioner will briefly
describe their plan and receive feedback from the Commission and staff.
Following attendance at the study session, the petitioner shall become
eligible to request a public hearing on their petition, pursuant to Section
10-47.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § III, A, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41,  12-19-00; Am. Ord.
2007-25, 12-19-07)



Sec. 10-47  Request for Public Hearing.



   At a public meeting of the Plan Commission a petitioner shall request
that the Commission set a date for a public hearing to be held on the
petitioner's proposal. At this meeting, the petitioner shall give a brief
overview of their proposal and confirm that the following items have been
submitted to the Zoning Administrator:



   a.   Sufficient copies of all required drawings and plans have been
provided, both in hard copy and compatible electronic format;



   b.   Documentation indicating proof of an ownership interest in the
subject property, such as but not limited to, a deed, purchase contract, or a
power of attorney, for review by the Commission's attorney; and



   c.   All required fees have been paid in full.



   Upon a finding that the petition is in order, per the requirements
above, the Plan Commission shall then make a motion setting a date for a
public hearing on the petitioner's plan. Further, the Commission, through the
Zoning Administrator, shall distribute all necessary copies of the plan to
those individuals or agencies identified in the Primary Plat Review Process,
as found in Section 10-48(b).



(Ord. No. 94-9, § III, C, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 2007-25, 12-19-07)



Sec. 10-48  Primary & Secondary Approvals.



   a.   General Procedures for Primary and Secondary Approval. The
petitioner seeking approval of a subdivision shall submit the previously
reviewed primary plat to be approved, conditionally approved, or rejected by
the Commission at a public meeting, and a final subdivision plat which must
be found in compliance with the primary plat as approved by the Commission or
otherwise approved in order to be signed and recorded.



   b.   Primary Plat Review Process After a public hearing date has
been set by the Plan Commission, the Lake Central School Board, Dyer Fire
Department, Dyer Police Department, Dyer Park Department, Dyer Public Works
Director, Dyer Town Engineer, Dyer Storm Water Management Board, Dyer
Sanitary Board and Dyer Water Board shall have an opportunity to study the
proposal and submit reports thereon. The Zoning Administrator shall meet with
the petitioner to discuss any pertinent aspects of the possible modifications
and/or changes that may be suggested or required by this ordinance.



   c.   Primary Plat Procedures for Primary Approval.



      1.   Placement on the Commission Agenda. Subsequent to the
submission for primary approval, the Commission shall place the matter on its
next regular meeting agenda for formal action.



      2.   Public Hearing Notification Requirements. The Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the primary plat and notice of such hearing
shall be given to all interested parties in accordance with I.C., 36-7-4-706
and the Rules of Practice and Procedure of the Plan Commission of the Town of
Dyer, Indiana.



      3.   Primary Approval of the Primary Plan.  After the
Commission has held a hearing upon the primary plat, and has reviewed the
Zoning Administrator's report, the Town Engineer's report, department head
recommendations, testimony and exhibits submitted at the public hearing, the
petitioner shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions. The
Commission will review the primary plat and determine its technical
conformity with the requirements of the subdivision control ordinance, as
well as its conformity with the factors outlined in Section 10-155(a).  The
Commission shall, at a public hearing, grant primary plat approval, or
disapprove the primary plat or table the matter if necessary. One (1) copy of
the primary plat shall be returned to the petitioner with the date of
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore
accompanying the plat within five (5) days of the public hearing. Primary
approval by the Commission is subject to review by certiorari.



         a.   Primary plat approval shall not be granted without
engineering approval of all required improvements.



         b.   Subdivision inspection fee shall be paid upon
primary plat approval in accordance with the fee schedule in Section 10-119.



      4.   Effective Period of Primary Approval. Unless extended,
the primary approval of a primary plat shall be effective for a period of
twelve (12) months after the date of primary approval, at the end of which
time secondary approval of the subdivision must have been obtained and
certified by the Commission. Any plats not receiving secondary approval
within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the
petitioner shall be required to resubmit a new application for primary plat
review and certificate subject to all the zoning restrictions and subdivision
regulations in effect at the time of resubmission. Secondary approval of a
phase of a development automatically extends primary approval of the entire
development for an additional twelve (12) months. Upon request of the
petitioner, the Commission may extend the primary approval of a primary plat
one (1) year beyond any expiration dare or extension thereof without further
notice and public hearing.



      5.   When installation of improvements is completed, including
inspection approval by Town of Dyer personnel and Town Engineer or his/her
designee the Commission shall, after all other conditions of primary approval
have been satisfied, approve the "as built" construction plans. Upon receipt
of said "as built" construction plans together with written evidence that the
required public facilities have been installed in a manner satisfactory to
the Town of Dyer and in complete conformity with the Design Standards for
Improvements in the Town of Dyer, as set forth in Appendix A of Ordinance No.
2007-25 and incorporated herein by reference, the Public Works Director and
the Town Engineer shall verify that the necessary improvements have been
accomplished. The "as built" drawings shall be submitted in electronic (CAD)
format.



   d.   Secondary Plat Procedure (Secondary Approval).



      1.   Submission Requirements.  Following primary approval or
conditional primary approval of the primary plat approval of the construction
plans and satisfactory completion of all required subdivision and off-site
public improvements as set forth therein, the petitioner shall file with the
Commission a request for secondary approval of a secondary plat. The
application (Form #2) shall:



         a.   Be submitted in writing;



         b.   Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof,
which derives access from an existing state, county, or municipal roadway;



         c.   Be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the final
plat as described in this ordinance;



         d.   Totally comply with this ordinance and the terms
and conditions of primary approval;



         e.   Be accompanied by any restrictive covenants where
they have been proposed by the subdivider.



      2.   Determination of Conformance (Secondary Approval). In
order to be recorded, a secondary plat shall be found to be in conformance
with the primary approval by the Commission at a public meeting. If the
secondary subdivision plat deviates from the primary plat that received
primary approval, the subdivision shall be resubmitted to the Commission at a
public hearing for a new primary approval. The petitioner shall request
Commission review in writing no less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to
the date of the public meeting at which he intends to have the secondary plat
reviewed. The Commission shall place the matter on its appropriate meeting
agenda. At the meeting, the Commission shall approve or disapprove the
secondary plat. If granted secondary approval, it shall be signed by the
designated officials. If not granted secondary approval, the petitioner shall
be informed as to the insufficiency of the submittal.



      3.   Secondary approval may be granted to a plat for a
subdivision in which the improvements and installments have not been
completed as required by this ordinance if:



         a.   The petitioner provides a cash escrow, or letter of
credit, that:



            (1)   Is an amount determined by the Plan
Commission to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in
compliance with the ordinance; and



            (2)   Provides surety satisfaction to the Plan
Commission; or



         b.   With respect to the installation of extension of
water, sewer, or other utility service:



            (1)   The petitioner shows by written evidence
that it has entered into a contract with the political subdivision or utility
providing the service; and



            (2)   The Plan Commission determines based on
written evidence that the contract provides satisfactory assurance that the
service will be installed or extended in compliance with this ordinance.



      4.   Unit Development.  Prior to granting secondary approval
of a major subdivision plat, the Commission may permit the plat to be divided
into two (2) or more units and may impose such conditions upon the filing of
the units as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly development of the
plat. The Commission may require that the cash escrow or letter of credit be
in such amount as will be commensurate with the unit or units of the plat to
be filed and may defer the remaining required cash escrow or letter of credit
principal amount until the remaining units of the plat are offered for
filing. Such units must contain at least twenty (20) lots or ten percent
(10%) of the total number of lots contained in the approval plat, whichever
is greater.



   e.   Signing and Recording a Plat.



      1.   Signing of Plat.



         a.   When the filing of a cash escrow or letter of
credit is required, the President and Executive Secretary of the Commission
shall endorse approval on the plat by signing the certificate only after the
cash escrow or letter of credit and the construction plans have been
approved, and all the conditions of the primary and secondary approval have
been satisfied, including payment of all fees.



         b.   When installation of improvements has been
completed, inspected and approved by Town of Dyer personnel and Town Engineer
or his/her designee, the President and Executive Secretary of the Commission
shall endorse the plat after all conditions of the primary and secondary
approval have been satisfied, all improvements satisfactorily completed and
accepted for public maintenance, "as built" construction plan submitted, a
two (2) year maintenance cash escrow or letter of credit covering all
improvements in the subdivision except the final surface coat on the streets,
and all engineering fees paid. The "as built" drawings shall be submitted in
electronic (CAD) format. Streets in the subdivision shall not have a final
surface coat laid upon them until authorized by the Town but no later than
one (1) year after the subdivision was completed. The Town requires a minimum
of one (1) year of use on the binder course prior to placing of the surface
course. The binder course shall not remain uncovered for more than two (2)
years. At that time, the petitioner shall provide a one (1) year maintenance
cash escrow or letter of credit covering the final surface coat on the
subdivision's streets. The amount of the maintenance cash escrow or letter of
credit shall be that amount as set forth on the fee schedule in Section
10-119. There shall be written evidence that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Director,
Town Engineer and that the necessary improvements have been installed,
inspected and improved by the Town of Dyer personnel and Town Engineer or
his/her designee.



      2.   The division of any lot or any parcel of land into a
subdivision, as defined in this ordinance, by the use of metes and bounds
description for the purpose of sale, or transfer, or lease resulting in the
creation of one (1) or more new building sites shall not be permitted. All
such described divisions shall be subject to all of the appropriate
requirements of this ordinance.



      3.   No improvement location permit or building permit
required under the Uniform Building Code, the zoning ordinance or this
ordinance shall be issued on any property subject to this ordinance until the
provisions of this ordinance have been complied with and all infrastructure
improvements, other than street lights and the final coat of asphalt, have
been installed, inspected and approved by Town of Dyer personnel and Town
Engineer or his/her designee. Additionally, a lot inspection shall be
performed by public works personnel prior to issuance of occupancy permit.



      4.   Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates a
provision of this ordinance or any regulations herein contained shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred
dollars ($2,500.00) for each day's violation.



      5.   Restraining Provisions.



         a.   Any land within the participating jurisdiction
subdivided in violation of the terms of this ordinance after the effective
date thereof, is declared to be a common nuisance, which may be restrained,
enjoined or abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.



         b.   The Commission may institute an injunction suit
requesting an individual governmental unit be directed to remove a structure
erected in violation of this ordinance, or to make the same comply with its
terms. If the Commission is successful in its suit, the respondent shall bear
the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney fees.



         c.   The Commission may institute a suit for mandatory
injunction requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed, where
such individual or governmental unit has violated any provisions of this
ordinance, to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. If the Commission
is successful in its suit, the respondent shall pay the Commission's
reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the enforcement of this
ordinance.



      6.   Recording of Final Plat.



         a.   The President and Executive Secretary of the
Commission shall sign three (3) recordable plats of the subdivision on mylar
or some other material such as cloth which is not easily susceptible to
damage.



         b.   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to
file the plat with the County Recorder and return an original, recorded mylar
to the Town of Dyer within thirty (30) days of the date of signature,
together with twelve (12) paper copies of said mylar. The mylar shall include
all information as is required in Section 10-48(6)(c) of this ordinance.
Failure by the petitioner to file the plat as herein provided and return to
the Town of Dyer within thirty (30) days shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance and shall void the primary and secondary approval previously
granted. The Zoning Administrator shall have the discretion to extend the
time within which the plat must be recorded and returned to the Town of Dyer
for a period of up to an additional thirty (30) days upon submission by the
petitioner of clear and convincing evidence of hardship.



         c.   Information Required on Mylar.



            1.   The Final Plat must include the following
information:



               a.   Primary control points, approved by the
Commission, or descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred.



               b.   Subdivision boundary lines,
right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and
property lines of residential lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions
deflection angles or bearings, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curves.



               c.   Name and right-of-way width of each
street or other right-of-way.



               d.   Location, dimensions and purpose of any
easements.



               e.   Lot and street numbers to identify each
lot or site. Numbers shall conform to established town numbering system and
as stated on primary plat.



               f.   Purpose for which sites, other than
residential lots, are dedicated or reserved.



               g.   Minimum building setback lines on all
lots and other sites.



               h.   Location and description of monuments.



               i.   Reference to recorded subdivision plats
of adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.



               j.   Certification and seal by Registered
Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer certifying to accuracy of
survey and plat.



               k.   Certification of ownership of land
covered by the plat, showing that applicant is the land owner.



               l.   Statement by owner dedicating streets,
rights-of-way and any sites for public uses.



               m.   Title, scale, north arrow and date.



               n.   A certificate for execution by the
Commission.



               o.   An acknowledgment certificate signed by
a Notary Public.



               p.   Such protective covenant as subdivider
deems necessary in form for recording.



               q.   Such other certificates, affidavits,
endorsements, or dedications as may be required by the Commission in the
enforcement of this ordinance.



               r.   All engineering specifications, plans
and documents required hereunder are considered to be a part of the final
plat data necessary.



               s.   Vicinity map.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § III, D, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord.
No. 2003-24, 10-21-03; Am. Ord. 2007-25, 12-19-07)



Sec. 10-49 through Sec. 10-54  Reserved for Future Use.



Division III. Procedure for Subdivision Control.



Sec. 10-55  General Improvements.



   a.   Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations. In addition to
the requirements established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply with
the following laws, rules and regulations:



      1.   all applicable state and local statutory provisions;



      2.   the Dyer Zoning Ordinance, Building Codes and all other
applicable laws and ordinances of the Town of Dyer;



      3.   the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan
and Public Utilities Plan including all streets, drainage systems, and parks
shown on the Official Map or Comprehensive Plan as adopted;



      4.   the rules and regulations of the Indiana Department of
Highways if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abut a state highway
or state frontage road;



      5.   the highways and drainage standards and regulations
adopted by the Town Engineer and all applicable boards, commissions,
agencies, and officials of the Town, County, State and Federal Government;



      6.   Storm Drainage Control Ordinance;



      7.   Design standards of the Town of Dyer set forth in
Appendix A.



   b.   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in
conformity with the above guides and requirements or with the policies and
purposes of these regulations established.



   c.   Self-Imposed Restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on
any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by
the Zoning Ordinance or these regulations, such restrictive covenants shall
be recorded on the final plat.



   d.   Character of the Land. Land which the Commission finds to be
unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, wetlands
classification, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse
earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which
might reasonably be harmful to the safety, health and general welfare of the
present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding area,
shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated
by the developer and approved by the Commission, upon recommendation of the
Town Engineer, to solve the problem created by the unsuitable land
conditions. Such land shall be set aside for such uses permitted by the
Zoning Ordinance as shall not involve any such danger.



   e.   Subdivision Name.  The proposed name of the subdivision shall
not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in the area covered by these regulations. The Commission shall
have final authority to designate the name of the subdivision which shall be
determined at the time of primary approval.



   f.   The Town shall not be responsible for policing covenants and
restrictions imposed upon a subdivision by the owners of the real estate
composing the subdivision. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IV, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-
41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-56 through Sec. 10-59  Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV. Streets.



Sec. 10-60  General Requirements for Streets.



   Frontage on Improved Streets. No subdivision shall be approved unless
the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on an existing street. Such
street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules,
regulations, or orders or be secured by a letter of credit as required under
these regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these
regulations or as indicated on the official Map or Thoroughfare Plan.
Whenever the area to be subdivided is to use an existing street frontage,
such street shall be suitably improved as provided hereinabove. Reasonable
access to the subdivision shall be afforded. (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, A, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-61  Grading and Improvement Plan.



   Streets and lots shall be graded and improved and conform to the
standards and specifications of the Town of Dyer and shall be approved as to
design and specification by the Town Engineer, in accordance with the
construction plans required to be submitted for primary approval. (Ord. No.
94-9, § V, B, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-62  Topography and Arrangement.



   a.   Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography.
Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography. A combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be avoided.
Specific standards are set forth in Appendix A.



   b.   All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated right-of-way as established on
the Official Map or Thoroughfare Plan.



   c.   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as
possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to the property.



   d.   Proposed streets shall, where appropriate, be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless this is prevented by
topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Plan
Commission such extension(s) is/are not necessary or desirable for the layout
of the subdivision undo consideration with the existing street layout or for
the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.



   e.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings,
location of rail facilities, truck loading and maneuvering areas, walkways,
bikeways, and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between
the various types of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



   f.   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential areas, except where
topographical or other conditions necessitate their use.



   g.    Street design shall conform to the Design Standards for
Improvements in the Town of Dyer, as contained in Appendix A. (Ord. No. 94-9,
§ V, C, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-63  Blocks.



   a.   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers
of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block widths
shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads, and
waterways.



   b.   The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated.



   c.   Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and
width as may be determined to be suitable by the Commission for the extended
use. (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, D, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12- 19-00)



Sec. 10-64  Access to Collector Streets.



   Where possible, lots in single family residential subdivisions fronting
on collector streets shall be avoided and lots at the corners of
intersections between local and collector streets shall front on the local
street and have driveway access to it only and not to the collector street.
In multiple family residential area, entrances to group parking lots shall
have access only to collector streets (where possible) and such entrances
shall be widely spaced. (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, E, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-65  Access to Primary Arterials.



   Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing proposed primary
arterial, the Commission may require that access to it be limited by one of
the following means:



   a.   the subdivision of the lots so as to back onto the primary
arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided
from the primary arterial and screening shall be provided within a strip of
land along the property line of such lots;



   b.   a series of cul-de-sacs, entered from, and designed generally
to be at right angles to an access street that is at some distance from and
parallel to the arterial street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots
backing onto the arterial; and,



   c.   a marginal access or service road (separate from the primary
arterial by a landscaped and/or decoratively fenced grass strip and having
access thereto at widely spaced suitable points). (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, F,
8-9-94)



Sec. 10-66  Street Regulatory Signs.



   The applicant shall provide and install a street sign at every street
intersection within his/her subdivision as required by the Town Engineer. The
Town shall inspect and approve all street signs before issuance of building
permits  for any residence on the approved streets.  (Am. Ord. No. 2000-41,
12-19-00)



Sec. 10-67  Street Lights.



   Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with the
Design Standards of the Town of Dyer as set forth in Appendix A. The
Developer shall also be responsible for all costs of operating and
maintaining street lights for a period of two (2) years after installation.
Operation and maintenance costs for street light(s) shall be collected in
advance at the time of secondary approval based upon current costs, with any
difference due to an increase in costs or extraordinary maintenance
expenditures to be collected at the conclusion of the two year period after
installation.  Street lights shall be operational prior to occupancy permits
being issued.  (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, H, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-68  Construction of Streets.



   a.   Construction of Streets Other than Cul-de-Sacs. The arrangement
of streets shall provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent
subdivisions or other properties when such continuation is necessary for the
convenient movement of traffic, for effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities, and where such continuation is in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street
must be a dead-end (stub) street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be
provided for all such temporary dead-end streets. Temporary turnarounds must
be provided at the ends of such stub streets. The Commission may limit the
length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards
in these regulations.



   b.   Cul-de-Sacs (Permanent Dead-End Streets). Where a street does
not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not
required by the Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus
shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than sixty (60) feet. However,
the Commission may require the reservations of an appropriate easement to
accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A
cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end
street in accordance with Town construction standards and specifications. 
For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire
protection, permanent dead-end streets shall be limited to length in
accordance with the design standards in these regulations (Ord. No. 94-9, §
V, I, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-69  Design Standards.



   a.   General. In order to provide for streets of suitable location,
width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford
satisfactory access for police, fire-fighting, snow removal, sanitation and
street maintenance equipment, and to coordinate street location in order to
achieve a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining
properties, the following design standards for streets are required.



   b.   Street Surfacing and Improvements. After sewer and water
utilities have been installed by the developer, the applicant shall construct
curbs and gutters and shall surface or cause the roadways  to  be surfaced
to the widths prescribed in these regulations. Said surfacing shall be of
such character as is suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with
similar improvements in the surrounding areas. Types of pavement shall be as
determined by the Design Standards. Adequate provisions shall be made for
culverts, drains and bridges. All street pavement, shoulders, drainage
improvements and structures, curbs, turn-arounds, and sidewalks shall conform
to all construction standards and specifications adopted by the Design
Standards and shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to
be submitted by the developer for plat approval.



   c.   Excess Right-of-Way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the
standards designed in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to
topography, additional width necessary to provide for adequate and stable
earth slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.



   d.   Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad right-of-way
and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivisions of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:



      1.   In residential districts a buffer strip at least
twenty-five (25) feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot
required in the district shall be provided adjacent to any limited access
highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated
on the plat: This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of
structures hereon other than earth berms, walls, fences and other landscape
screening devices approved by the Commission is prohibited.



      2.   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial
uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to a
railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to
ensure a suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.



      3.   Streets parallel to a railroad when intersecting for a
street which crosses the railroad at grade shall to the extent practicable,
be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad
right-of- way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of
the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of
appropriate approach gradients. (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, J, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-70  Intersections.



   a.   Shall be designed in accordance with the Book of Standards.



   b.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles.  Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at
any one point unless specifically approved by the Commission.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § V, 1C, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-71  Street Dedications and Reservations.



   a.   New Perimeter Streets. Street systems in new subdivisions shall
be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an
existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the
street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Commission may
authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates
the entire required right-of-way width within his own subdivision's
boundaries.



   b.   Widening and Realignment of Existing Streets. Where a
subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the Comprehensive Plan,
Official Map, Thoroughfare Plan, or zoning set back regulations indicate
plans for realignment or widening of a street that would require use of some
of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve
and dedicate such streets at his own expense. Such frontage streets and other
streets on which subdivision lots form shall be improved and dedicated by the
applicant at his own expense to the full width required by those subdivision
regulations. Land reserved for any street purposes may not be counted toward
satisfying the yard or area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. No.
94-9, § V, L, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-72  Lot Improvements.



   a.   Lot Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there
will be no foreseeable difficulties for reasons of topography or other
conditions in securing building permits to build on each of the created lots
in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and Health Regulations and in
providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from the appropriate
approved street.



   b.   Lot Dimension. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum
standards in the Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the
minimum required area for the zoning district, the Commission may require
that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening
of future streets where they would be necessary to serve all such potential
lots in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and these regulations. In
general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to the street lines (or
radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a
better street or lot plan. Corner lots shall observe the minimum front yard
setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out
for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall he adequate to provide
for all of the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the
type of use and development contemplated, as established in the Zoning
Ordinance.



   c.   Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots.



      1.   Double Frontage logs. Double frontage and reversed
frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide for the
separation of residential development from the traffic bordering arterials or
to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation affecting
the subdivided lots.



      2.   Access from Primary and Secondary Arterials. Lots shall
not, in general, derive access from a primary or secondary arterial street.
Where driveway access from a primary or secondary arterial street may be the
only possible access for several adjoining lots, the Commission may require
that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit
possible traffic hazards from multiple access to such streets. Where
possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring
vehicles to back into traffic on primary or secondary arterials.



   d.   Soil Preservation, Grading and Seeding.



      1.   Soil Preservation and Final Grading. No certificates of
occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in
accordance with the approved engineering plans.



      2.   Lot Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide
positive drainage away from all buildings and individual lot drainage shall
be coordinated with the general storm water drainage pattern  for  the 
area.  Drainage  shall be designed so as to avoid the accumulation of storm
water on any one or more lots from adjacent lots. It shall be the
responsibility of the lot owner to maintain the lot grade, as it applies to
drainage, as provided for in the approved engineering plans.



      3.   Lawn Grass Seed and Sod. Erosion control shall be in
accordance with the Soil and Conservation Service Rule 5.  Lot owner is
responsible for compliance with Rule 5.  Final landscaping to be completed
within nine (9) months of date of occupancy or issuance of occupancy permit
whichever is first.



   e.   Debris and Waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks,
stones, junk rubbish, or other waste material of any kind shall be buried in
any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of occupancy
within a subdivision, nor shall any be left or deposited in any area of the
subdivision at the time of expiration of the performance bond of public
improvements.



   f.   Fencing. Each subdivider and/or developer shall be required to
furnish and install fences wherever the Commission determines that a
hazardous condition may exist. The fences shall be constructed to the height
and material as noted on the final plat. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until said fence improvements have been duly installed.



   g.   Waterbodies and Watercourses. If a tract being subdivided
contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to
distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent
lots. The Commission may approve an alternative allocation of interests
whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water
body is so placed that it will not become a local government
responsibility.  No part of the minimum area of a lot required under the
Zoning Ordinance may be satisfied by land which is under water. Where a
watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street from which
it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or
other structure, of a design approved by the Town Engineer. (Ord. No. 94-9,
§ V, M, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-73  Drainage and Storm Sewers.



   a.   General Requirements. The Commission shall not recommend for
approval any subdivision plat which does not make adequate provision for
storm or flood water runoff channels or basins as per the Book of Standards..



   b.   Nature of Storm Water Facilities.



      1.   Location. The applicant may be required by the Commission
to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may
exist, either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage
facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way where feasible, or in
perpetual, unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the Town's construction standards and
specifications.



      2.   Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers. Where public storm
sewer/s is/are accessible, the applicant  shall  install  storm  sewer 
facilities,  or  if no other  outlets are within a reasonable distance,
adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of storm water, subject to
the specifications of the Town Engineer. However, in subdivisions containing
lots of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area and in
business and industrial districts, underground storm sewer systems shall be
constructed throughout the subdivision and be conducted to an approved
outfall. Inspection of facilities shall be conducted by the Town Engineer.



      3.   Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas. A culvert or
other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate
potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or
outside the subdivision. The Town Engineer shall approve the necessary size
of the facility as determined by Design Engineer, based on the provisions of
the required construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.



      4.   Effect on Downstream Drainage Area. The Design Engineer
shall determine the effect of each proposed subdivision with approval of Town
Engineer on the existing drainage facilities outside the area of the
subdivision. Town drainage studies together with such other studies as may be
available and appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. The
subdivision, when completely developed, shall not discharge water at a faster
rate than it did in its natural state. All excess runoff to the extent of the
amount of water anticipated in a one hundred (100) year flood event, shall be
withheld in a retention or detention basin and discharged at a rate not
greater than that of the three (3) year flood event. Where it is anticipated
that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision
will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Commission may
withhold primary approval of the subdivision until provisions (such as a
storage facility) has been made for the improvement of said potential
condition in such sum as the Commission shall determine. No subdivision shall
be approved unless adequate drainage from it will be provided to an adequate
drainage water course or facility.



      5.   Areas of Poor Drainage. Areas which are not in the Flood
Plain but contain soils which are subject to flooding may be approved for
subdivisions by the Commission, provided that the subdivider fills the
affected area of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place
building sites and streets two (2) feet above ponding levels.



      6.   Floodway Areas. If a subdivision of land is proposed
within the flood plain floodways shall be preserved and not diminished in
capacity by filling or obstruction, except as approved by the Natural
Resources Commission in writing. No residential building site may be located
within the floodway, in accordance with Section 10-18 of the Town Code.



      7.   Floodway Fringe Areas. Where a subdivision is proposed
within an area of the flood plain designated as a floodway fringe, the
Commission may approve such subdivision, provided that 1) all streets are
elevated sufficiently to be above the regulatory flood elevation: 2) all lots
for residential usage have a flood protection grade two (2) feet above the
regulatory flood elevation; 3) where provided, water and sanitary sewer
facilities are constructed to eliminate contamination of or by flood water;
[and] 4) approval to fill the area from the Department of Natural Resources
has been obtained in writing. Land below the regulatory flood elevation shall
not be used for computing the area requirement for any lot, in accordance
with Section 10-18 of the Town Code.



      8.   Flood Plain Areas. Where a subdivision is proposed within
an area of the flood plain for which floodway and floodway fringe
designations have not been made, the Commission shall not approve such a
subdivision unless all streets are raised sufficiently to be above the
regulatory flood elevation; all lots for residential usage have a flood
protection grade of two (2) feet above the regulatory flood elevation; where
provided, public water and sanitary sewer facilities are constructed to
eliminate contamination of or by flood water; and filling to achieve the
above will not raise the level of the regulatory flood elevation more than
one- tenth (1/10) of one (1) foot for that reach of the stream. All filling
in the flood plain must be approved in writing by the Department of Natural
Resources.  Lands below the regulatory flood elevation shall not be used for
computing the area requirement for any lot, in accordance with Section 10-18
of the Town Code.



      9.   Recording of Plats in the Flood Plain and Floodway
Fringe. All final plats having within their boundaries areas whose elevation
is below that of the regulatory flood elevation shall show and label the
regulatory flood boundary and elevation, as of the date the final plat is
drawn, on the final plat for recording, in accordance with Section 10-18 of
the Town Code.



   c.   Dedication of Drainage Easements.



      1.   General Requirements. Where a subdivision is traversed by
a drainage course, drainage way, channel, or stream, a storm water easement
conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width
and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose of both drainage
and maintenance of the right-of-way shall be dedicated to the Town of Dyer or
appropriate entity thereof. Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.



      2.   Drainage Easements.



         a.   Where topography or other conditions are such as to
make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street
rights-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in
width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside
the right-of-way lines and with satisfactory access to the street. Easements
shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the
street to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities.



         b.   The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by
drainage or conservation easement land on both sides of existing watercourses
of a width to be determined by the Commission and, in the case of legal
drains, the County Drainage Board.



         c.   When a proposed drainage system will carry water
across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must
be secured and indicated on the plat.



         d.   Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to
flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state
as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not
be included in the computations for determining the number of lots allowable
under the average density procedures nor for computing the area requirement
for individual lot. (Ord. No. 94-9, § V, N, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41,
12-19-00)



Sec. 10-74  Extension of Municipal Services.



   a.   General Requirements.



      1.   Utility and street improvement shall be provided in each
new subdivision in accordance with the following requirements:



         a.   Gas, water, storm sewers, phone, cable  and
electric utilities service shall be made available for all lots.



         b.   Streets and alleys shall be improved with the kind
of paving and of such width as shall meet the Town's standard requirements.



         c.   Sanitary sewers or septic systems shall be provided
for all lots of such size and grades in materials as are required by law, and
they shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.



   b.   Location of Water Mains. Unless no other reasonable engineering
alternative exists, water mains may not be located in side or rear yard
easements.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § VI, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. No.
2003-22, 10-21-03)



Sec. 10-75 Replacement of Special Driveway Aprons.



   Property owners that have special aprons that are upgraded from the
Town’s standards shall have the following options:



   a.   Consent to the Town removing the existing upgraded apron and
replacing it with a concrete apron. The contractor will remove the existing
materials without regard to salvage value. The apron will be replaced with
concrete per the Town’s standards. This will be completed at no cost to the
property owner.



   b.   Property owners can agree to install an upgraded apron at their
own expense. The Town will remove the existing apron and reimburse the owner
for an amount equal to the contract unit price for the installation of a
concrete apron. In the event there is a heating system in the apron, the
property owner shall be responsible for the shut off of all power to the
heating system prior to removal of the apron by the Town.



(Res. 2017-20, 9-14-17)



Sec. 10-76 through 10-77  Reserved for Future Use.



Division VI. Mandatory Park Dedication.



Sec. 10-78  Conditions for Primary Subdivision Approval.



   As a condition of primary approval of a subdivision, for residential
zoned real estate or real estate that is developed and or zoned for mixed
uses which include residential uses, each subdivider or developer will be
required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, in accordance
with the standards, criteria and formula set forth in this section. Such
dedication of park land may be accomplished by dedicating or donating land
that is outside of the proposed development so long as such dedication or
donation meets the standards and criteria outlined in Section 10-79(e) below.
(Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 99-02, 1-19-99; Am. Ord. No.
2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-79  Criteria for Requiring Park and Recreation Land Dedication.



   a.   Requirement and Population Ration:  The ultimate density of a
proposed development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be determined by multiplying the
ultimate population by .020, the product of which shall be the total park
acreage required.  The determination of "ultimate population" shall be
determined as follows:



   Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit



 

Housing Occupancy Average
 
2.83 persons



 



   This information was taken from Table DP-1 Profile of General
Demographic Characteristics: 2000 in the 2000 Census for the Town of Dyer. 
There were 4,805 occupied housing units in Dyer with 91.5% being owner
occupied for a total population in such unit of 12,658 people.  There were
8.5% renter occupied units for a total population in such units of 918
people.  The grand total population was 13,576.  That number divided by the
occupied housing units (4,805) = 2.82539 persons per dwelling unit.  The
average number of persons living in an owner occupied housing unit was 2.88
and the average number of persons living in a renter occupied housing unit
was 2.24 according to the 2000 Census for the Town of Dyer.



   Except as provided, however, that if the product derived by multiplying
the ultimate population of the entire proposed development by .020 does not
exceed three quarters (3/4) of an acre, no park land dedication shall be
required in the subdivision



   b.   Location: The Dyer Park Board may recommend, approve, or
disapprove the location of any proposed site. A central location, which will
serve equally the entire community, is most desirable. In large developments,
sites should be located throughout the development according to established
standards for park area distances.



The final determination concerning the acceptability of land for park use and
type shall be made by the Plan Commission at the rime of primary plat
approval.



   c.   Credit for Private Open Spaces and Recreation Areas: When
subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas
and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a portion of
the park and recreation area in subdivisions or planned unit developments
may, at the option of the Plan Commission, be provided in the form of
"private" open spaces in lieu of dedicated "public open space", The
application of the subdivider shall be referred to the Park Board for review,
report and recommendation, which review shall consider the needs of the
projected residents of the development. After receipt of the report of the
Park Board, and a finding that the application will serve the needs of the
projected residents and meets the standards set forth hereafter, the Plan
Commission shall approve the application at the time of primary approval.



      In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated
parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer
as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the Plan
Commission and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the
subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas
will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the
appropriate legal documents, including covenants. When an adjustment for
private recreation areas is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the
total park land dedication that would have been required from the subdivision
or planned unit development and then subject the credit to be given.



   d.   Standards for Private Recreation Improvements: If the Plan
Commission, after report and recommendation from the Park Board, finds that
it is in the public interest to accept certain private recreation
improvements, the following standards should be met:



      1.   yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas
required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and
regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open
space;



      2.   private ownership and maintenance of the open space is
adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or
restrictions;



      3.   use of the private open space is restricted for park and
recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor
of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated
without the consent of the Plan Commission;



      4.   the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable
for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such
factors as size, shape, topography, geology access, and location;



      5.   the facilities proposed for the open space are adequate
to serve the purpose of the open space.



   e.   Credit for Donation of Land Outside Proposed Development: The
requirement outlined in Section 10-78 may be satisfied by dedication or
donation of land, of the size required under (a) of this section, outside the
proposed development for park and recreational purposes.  The application of
the subdivider shall be referred to the Park Board for review, report and
recommendation. Such review, report and recommendation by the Park Board
shall be made in consideration of the following factors:



      1.   The proposed land to be donated must be adjacent to an
existing park within the Town of Dyer.



      2.   The proposed dedication and donation of land outside the
development is compatible with current and name uses and growth of existing
park and recreation facilities, as envisioned by The Town of Dyer's
Comprehensive Plan and the Master Plan of the Dyer Park Board.



After receipt of the report of the Park Board, and a finding that the
application meets the standards set forth in this section, the Plan
Commission shall act on the application at the time of primary plat approval.



(Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, A, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 99-02, 1-19-99; Am. Ord. No.
2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-80  Reservation of Additional Land.



   Where the recommendation of the Park Board and determination of the
Plan Commission call for a larger amount of park and recreational land in a
particular proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the
developer is required to dedicate, then the land needed beyond the
developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the Plan Commission, be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the Town or other public body designated
by the Town provided that the acquisition is made within three (3) years from
the date of approval of the final plat. (Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, B, 8-9-94;
Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-81 Improved Sites.



   All park sites shall be dedicated in a condition that includes being
provided with a sanitary sewer tap, a water tap, final grading, seeding or
sodding, as well as being provided direct access to electric, telephone, and
cable television. Additionally, parks shall have sidewalks installed along
all street frontages and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and
gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision
made therefor.  (Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, C, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41,
12-19-00; Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-82 Procedure.



   At the time of primary approval of the subdivision, the Park Board may
recommend land to be dedicated. The recommendation by the Park Board shall
include the following:



   a.   the amount of land required;



   b.   that a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation
facilities or unique natural and special features;



   c.   the location of the park land to be dedicated;



   d.   the approximate time when development of the park or recreation
facility shall commence.



   This recommendation shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission for final
determination. In making its final determination, the Plan Commission shall
be guided by the standards contained in this ordinance. After making its
final determination, the Plan Commission shall give notice to the subdivider,
the Town Council, and any other interested party.



   Prior to the time of the signing of the final plat of subdivision, the
subdivider shall dedicate the land as previously determined by the Plan
Commission.



   Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall
be submitted to the Plan Commission prior to primary approval and shall be
recorded contemporaneously with the final plat of subdivision. (Ord. No.
94-9, § VII, D, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 99-02, 1-19-99; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41,
12-19-00; Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-83 Applicable only to Residential Zoned Subdivision.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to all subdivisions zoned
residential and shall not apply to Business, Shopping Center, Industrial or
Planned Unit Development Commercial zoned subdivisions. (Ord. No. 94-9, §
VII, E, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2006-19, 10-18-06)



Sec. 10-84 Reserved for Future Use.



Division VII. Construction Procedures.



Sec. 10-85 Liability Insurance.



   The developer or developer's contractor shall purchase and maintain
such liability and other insurance as appropriate for the work being
performed and furnished and as will provide protection from claims set forth
below which may provide protection from claims set forth below which may
arise out of or result from the performance and furnishing of the work by
anyone directly or indirectly employed by the developer and the developer's
contractor and developer's other obligations under this Subdivision Control
Ordinance whether it is to be performed or furnished by contractor, by any
subcontractor, or supplier, by anyone directly or indirectly employed by any
of them to perform or furnish any of the work or by anyone for whose acts any
of them may be liable:



   a.   Workers' Compensation. Workers' Compensation in accordance with
the laws of the State of Indiana and employers' liability in an amount not
less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).



   b. General Liability.



      1.   Bodily Injury Liability and Property Damage Liability in
an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence
and in the aggregate.



      2.   Above to include Premises Operations, Blanket Contractual
Liability, Products, Completed Operations, Independent Contractors, Broad
Form Property Damage, Personal Injury (employees' exclusion deleted) and
“X”, “C” and “U” exclusions deleted.



   c.   Automobile Liability.



      1.   Bodily Injury Liability in an amount not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each person in one accident, and
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injuries sustained by two or more
persons in any one accident.



      2.   Property Damage Liability in an amount not less than two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) each accident.



      3.   Coverage shall include hired and non-owned automobile.



   d.   Excess (Umbrella) Liability.



      Coverage in an amount not less than three million dollars
($3,000,000.00) shall include, but not be limited to, excess coverage for the
Workers' Compensation, Comprehensive General Liability, and Comprehensive
Automobile Liability policies. The policies of insurance so required to be
purchased and maintained shall:



      1.   include as additional insured the Town of Dyer and Town
Engineer and all of whom shall be listed by name as additional insureds, and
include coverage for the respective officers and employees, all of such
additional insured;



      2.   remain in effect at least until final acceptance and at
all times thereafter when contractor may be correcting, removing or replacing
defective work.



      The developer's contractor shall not commence work until he has
filed with the Town Clerk-Treasurer a certificate of insurance showing
complete coverage of all insurance required, signed by the insurance
companies or their authorized agents. Each certificate shall provide that
coverage shall not be terminated or reduced without thirty (30) days advance
written notice to the Town Clerk-Treasurer.



      All bonds and insurance required by the contract documents to be
purchased and maintained by developer or developer's contractor shall be
obtained from surety or insurance companies that are fully licensed or
authorized in the jurisdiction in which the project is located to issue bonds
or insurance policies for the limit and coverages so required.



      In addition to delivering certificates of insurance, developer or
developer's contractor shall also deliver to the Town, with copies to each
additional insured, copies of all endorsements to the insurance policies
which developer is required to purchase and maintain within ninety (90)
calendar days after the date of the Pre- Construction Conference. (Ord. No.
94-9, § VIII, A, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-86 Pre-Construction Conference.



   At least seven (7) calendar days prior to initiation of construction, a
Pre-Construction Meeting is required of the developer, with the following
items being discussed:



   a.   Proposed start of construction date.



   b.   Responsibilities of all parties involved.



   c.   Names, addresses, and emergency phone numbers of all involved
parties.



   d.   Any construction restrictions set by the Town.



   e.   Approval of selected materials, trench backfill, etc.



   f.   Any questions contractor or subcontractors have regarding
plans, specifications, Town restrictions or regulations, and rules to follow
during construction.



   g.   Proposed construction schedule.



   h.   Traffic flow restrictions if applicable; responsibility for
safety.



   i.   Permits required; IDEM, INDOT, County Drainage, etc.



   j.   Any and all other items pertaining to construction.



   k.   Proper insurance coverages.



   l.   The following personnel should be present at the
preconstruction meeting:



      1.   Town Director of Public Works.



      2.   Town Engineer.



      3.   Developer's Representative.



      4.   Developer's Engineer.



      5.   General Contractor's Representative.



      6.   Subcontractor's Representative.



      7.   Public Utilities Representatives; Northern Indiana Public
Service Company, Ameritech, etc. (Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, B, 8-9-94; Am. Ord.
No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-87 Advanced Notification.



   The developer or his representative will give the Department of Public
Works seventy-two (72) hours written notice prior to commencing any
construction. After construction commences, a forty-eight (48) hour written
notice to the Town Director of Public Works shall be required prior to
starting each specialized phase of construction (earthwork, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main, curb and gutter, or street construction), and prior
to testing of any of the utilities. (Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, C, 8-9-94; Am.
Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-88 Inspection Checklist.



   During construction, the Town Engineer and the Town's Director of
Public Works will maintain periodic observation of the progress of the
construction to observe it for proper workmanship and compliance with the
approved plans and specifications. The following list indicates the minimum
items that will be checked during the periodic inspections:



   a.   Sanitary Sewers and Storm Sewers.



      1.   Location of sewer in right-of-way.



      2.   Elevation of sewer from construction stakes.



      3.   Slope of sewers.



      4.   Stone bedding materials to support sewer.



      5.   Backfill material and method of backfilling.



      6.   Special trench backfill installed where required.



      7.   Location and construction of manholes, inlets, catch
basins and dry wells.



      8.   Manhole inverts, benches, steps, frame and cover.



      9.   Manhole cleanliness.



      10.   Finished grades.



      11.   Construction of storm retention or detention ponds as
per section 900 et seq. of Appendix A to the Town of Dyer Subdivision Control
Ordinance as set forth in Article 3, Chapter 10 of the Dyer Town Code.



      12.   Infiltration, exfiltration and deflection testing of
sewers.



      13.   Location, installation, and backfilling of corporation
stops, service lines, curb stops, service b-boxes.



   b.   Watermain Systems.



      1.   Location in right-of-way.



      2.   Depth of cover from construction stakes.



      3.   Bedding of pipe.



      4.   Backfilling procedures.



      5.   Special trench backfill where required.



      6.   Location of fire hydrants.



      7.   Installation of fire hydrants.



      8.   Workability of fire hydrants, valves and curb stops.



      9.   Location, installation, and backfilling of corporation
stops, service lines, curb stops, service B-boxes.



      10.   Finished grade.



      11.   Hydrostatic, pressure, and leakage testing.



      12.   Disinfection of water system.



   The following construction and associated inspection shall begin only
after installation and approval of the above underground utilities:



   c.   Streets, Curbs and Gutters.



      1.   Location of streets in right-of-way.



      2.   Subgrade prior to placing base course (also subbase in
some cases) to include proof-rolling and/or density tests.



      3.   Curb and gutter subgrade (or base course in some cases).



      4.   Line and grade of curb and gutter after forming or
setting of string lines is completed.



      5.   Spot check installation of curb and gutter, including
location of expansion joints and contraction joints, application of curing
compound, and assure that the contractor is taking concrete compression test
cylinders.



      6.   Spot check placing of base course to assure that proper
equipment is used, proper compaction practices are followed, and proper depth
is achieved.



      7.   Check base course for final shape and compaction prior to
application of prime coat, including proof-rolling.



      8.   Spot check placing of bituminous binder course. The Town
requires a minimum of one year of use on the binder course prior to placing
of the surface course. The binder course shall not remain uncovered for more
than two (2) years.



      9.   After the minimum one (1) year required waiting period,
and before final bituminous surface course is applied, inspect curb and
gutter and binder course for defects, settlements, or construction damage.



      10. Spot check placing of bituminous surface course. (Ord. No.
94-9, § VIII, D, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. No.
2003-21, 10-21-03)



Sec. 10-89 Acceptance Procedures.



   Upon completion of an improvement, Town Engineer or its designee will
witness any remaining testing of the completed work, and if all items are in
order, will inform the Town and developer that acceptance procedures may be
initiated. Final acceptance of a subdivision by the Town shall be granted
only after all of the following criteria are satisfied:



   All subdivision improvements are completed, and have passed all testing
and inspection requirements, as per approved plans and specifications,
including:



   a.   All sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and watermain installation.



   b.   All curb and gutter, and sidewalks.



   c.   All streets, including final wearing surface.



   d.   Retention and/or detention ponds.



   e.   Trees and/or other plantings.



   f.   Street lights and street signs.



   g.   Public utilities, e.g., gas mains, electric power, telephone,
TV cable, etc.



   h.   All of the following legalities are satisfied:



      1.   Any amendments to final approved plat of development, if
applicable.



      2.   Recapture agreements, if applicable.



      3.   Plan and profile as built drawings of all improvements
supplied to the Town Director of Public Works by the developer's engineer.
Electronic drawing submittals. The developer shall, in addition to any other
forms of submittal required elsewhere in this ordinance, provide to the town
all primary and secondary plats as well as as-built engineering drawings in
an electronic form, in the Autodesk AutoCAD drawing format. The drawing
format must be in either the current or previous version of the AutoDesk
AutoCAD software. The submittal shall be provided to the town in a standard
form of magnetic or optical media that is readable by the town information
systems. Alternate drawing formats or means of submittal may be accepted upon
prior approval from the town.



      4.   One (1) year guarantee of workmanship, in writing, on
street, curb and gutter and surface improvements, to initiate upon final
acceptance.



      5.   One (1) year warranty of workmanship on underground
portions of the improvements, in writing, to initiate when the improvements
are complete and ready for acceptance.



   i.  Development has passed “Final Inspection”. The final
inspection is requested by the developer through the Town's authorized
representative. The final inspection is conducted by the Town Engineer,
accompanied by the developer or his representative (engineer), contractor,
and the Town's representative(s) (Director of Public Works, Building
Inspector, Fire Department personnel, Water Works personnel, or others) if
they wish to attend.



      The purpose of the final inspection is to verity on-site that the
final elevations of all improvements are correct as per approved plans, and
coincide correctly with the final street grades, landscaping, and storm
drainage systems of the development.



      A final inspection of the sanitary, storm, and water system
appurtenances is conducted to assure that there was no damage to these
improvements during final construction and grading work. The items that are
checked during the final inspection are as follows:



      1.   Condition of bituminous concrete surface course.



      2.   Condition of curb and gutter.



      3.   Condition of sidewalks, if applicable.



      4.   Finished grade of all manhole rims, structures, valve
vaults, valve boxes, fire hydrants, and water service B-boxes.



      5.   Manholes, storm manholes and inlets, valve vaults, fire
hydrant auxiliary valves, and any structure lids are opened to assure no
debris was deposited inside the structures during final grading.



      6.   Every water service B-box is keyed and turned to assure
proper operation.



      7.   Every fire hydrant is opened and closed to assure proper
operation.



      8.   Street lighting and street signs are checked.



      9.   Final grading and grass cover is checked in all detention
and/or retention ponds, and in parkways if applicable.



      10.   Tree or planting installation if applicable.



      11.   The Town of Dyer Public Works Department shall perform
cleaning and televising of sanitary sewers and storm sewers. A fee, charged
to the developer has been established for this service in the Dyer Town Code
at Section 10-119.



      During the final inspection, a final punchlist is prepared that
notes any deficiencies. Upon the correction of the deficiencies, a
reinspection is conducted, and if all work is satisfactorily completed, the
Town Engineer will prepare a letter recommending final acceptance by the
Town. Final acceptance shall not be granted until all requirements are
satisfied.



      These inspections and recommendations for acceptance do not
relieve the developer or his engineer or his contractor of their
responsibility for proper materials or workmanship on the project, and they
shall be responsible for correction of any defects which are discovered
during the guarantee time provided by the Town's ordinances. (Ord. No. 94-9,
§ VIII, E, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00; Am. Ord. No. 2003-24,
10-21-03)



Sec. 10-90 through 10-93 Reserved for Future Use.



Division VIII. General; Provisions.



Sec. 10-94 Interpretation, Conflict, and Separability.



   a.   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.



   b.   Conflict with Public and Private Provision.



      1.   Public Provisions - The regulations are not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, or other provision of law. Where any provision of these regulations
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of
these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher
standards shall control.



      2.   Private Provisions - These regulations are not intended
to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or
restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such enactment,
covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of
these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement,
covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations
more restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of these
regulations, or the determinations of the Commission in approving a
subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and such private provisions
are not inconsistent with these regulations or determinations thereunder,
then such private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these
regulations and determinations made thereunder.



      3.   Separability - If any part or provision of these
regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly
involved in all controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered
and shall not effect or impair the validity of the remainder of these
regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The
Town declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations
even without any such part, provision or application. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IX,
A, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-95 Saving Provision.



   These regulations shall not be construed as abating any action now
pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision regulations, or as
discontinuing abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation,
or as waiving any right of the Town under any section or provision existing
at the time of adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or annulling any
rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the
Town except as shall be expressly provided for in these regulations. (Ord.
No. 94-9, § IX, B, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-96 Repealer.



   Upon the adoption of this ordinance, according to law, the Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Dyer, adopted August 9, 1994, being Ordinance 94-9,
as amended is repealed, except for such sections expressly retained herein.
(Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-97 Amendments.



   For the purpose of providing for the public health, safety, and general
welfare, the Town, on recommendation of the Plan Commission, may from time to
time amend the provisions imposed by these subdivision regulations. Public
hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the Plan Commission in
the manner prescribed by law. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, D, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-98 Conditions.



   Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated
by the State to this Town. The developer has the duty of compliance with
reasonable conditions laid down by the Commission for design, dedication,
improvement, and restrictive use of the land in order to conform to the
physical and economical development of the Town and to the safety and general
welfare of the future plot owners in the subdivision and of the Town. (Ord.
No. 94-9, § IX, E, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-99  Resubdivision of Land.



   a.   Procedure for Resubdivision - For any change in a map of an
approved or recorded subdivision plat, if such change affects any street
layout shown on such map, or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot
line, or if it affects any map or plan legally reached prior to the adoption
of any regulations controlling subdivision, such parcel shall be approved by
the Commission by the same procedure, rules and regulations as for a
subdivision.



   b.   Procedure for Subdivisions where Future Resubdivision is
Indicated - Wherever a parcel of land is subdivided and subdivision plat
shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of  land and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller
building sites, the Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for
the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets.
Easements providing for the future opening and extension of such streets may
be made a requirement of the plat. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, F, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-100  Vacation of Plats.



   Any recorded plat or part of any recorded plat may be vacated only in
accordance with Indiana Code, § 36-7-3, as amended 1982, 1983 and 1986.
(Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, G, 8-9-94)



Sec. 10-101  Modifications.



   a.   General - Where the Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with
these regulations and/or the purposes of these regulations may be served to a
greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve variances to these
subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the
public interest secured, provided that such variances shall not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further
provided the Commission shall not approve modifications unless it shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:



      1.   The granting of the modification will not be detrimental
to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other nearby
property;



      2.   The conditions upon which the request for a modification
is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are
not applicable generally to other property;



      3.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;



      4.   The modification will not in any manner contravene the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, or Official Map as
interpreted by the Commission and the Town Engineer and;



   b.   Conditions - In approving modifications, the Commission may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations.



   c.   Procedures - A petition for any such modification shall be
submitted by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed
for the consideration of the Commission. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the
petitioner. The Plan Commission shall have no authority to grant
modifications other than those granted on petition of the subdivider filed as
part of the Petition for Subdivision. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, H, 8-9-94; Am.
Ord. 2007-25, 12-19-07)



Sec. 10-102  Enforcement, Violation, and Penalties.



   a.   General.



      1.   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner and/or
Zoning Administrator to enforce these regulations and to bring any violations
or lack of compliance to the attention of the Town Attorney.



      2.   No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of land
located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any such parcel
before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the Commission, in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations and filed with the County
Recorder.



      3.   The division of any lot or any parcel of land into a
subdivision, as defined in this ordinance, by the use of metes and bounds
description for the purpose of sale, or transfer, or lease resulting in the
creation of one or more new building sites shall not be permitted. All such
described divisions shall be subject to all of the appropriate requirements
of this ordinance.



      4.   No Improvement Location Permit or Building Permit
required under the Uniform Building Code, the Zoning Ordinance or this
ordinance shall be issued on any property subject to this ordinance until the
provisions of this ordinance have been complied with and all infrastructure
improvements, other than the final coat of asphalt, have been installed,
inspected and approved by the Town of Dyer personnel and Town Engineer or
his/her designee  Additionally, a lot inspection shall be performed by
public works personnel prior to issuance of occupancy permit..



   b.   Violations and Penalties - Any person who violates a provision
of this ordinance or any regulations herein contained shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) for each day's violation.



   c.   Restraining Provisions.



      1.   Any land within the participating jurisdictions
subdivided in violation of the terms of this ordinance after the effective
date hereof, is declared to be a common nuisance, which may be restrained,
enjoined, or abated in any appropriate action or proceeding.



      2.   The Commission may institute an injunction suit
requesting an individual governmental unit be directed to remove a structure
erected in violation of this ordinance, or to make the same comply with its
terms. If the Commission is successful in its suit, the respondent shall bear
the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney fees.



      3.   The Commission may institute a suit for mandatory
injunction requesting an individual or governmental unit be directed, where
such individual or governmental unit has violated any provisions of this
ordinance, to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. If the Commission
is successful in its suit, the respondent shall pay the Commission's
reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the enforcement of this
ordinance. (Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, I, 8-9-94; Am. Ord. No. 2000-41, 12-19-00)



Sec. 10-103  Reserved for Future Use.



Division X. Certificates.



Sec. 10-104  Certificates Required.



   Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall contain
or be accompanied by the following certificates, acknowledgments and
descriptions in substantially the following forms. (Ord. No. 791, Title XIV,
68-71)



Sec. 10-105  Certificate of Approval.



   Under the authority provided by Chapter 174, Acts of 1947, enacted by
the General Assembly of the State of Indiana, and all acts amendatory thereto
and an ordinance or amendments thereto adopted by the Town Council of the
Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana, this plat was given final approval by a
majority of the members of the Town Plan Commission of Dyer, Indiana, at a
meeting held         19    .



                              Dyer Plan
Commission



                              President



                              Secretary (Ord.
No. 791, Title XIV, § 1, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-106  Land Surveyor's or Registered Professional Engineer's
Certificate.



   Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a
certificate signed by a Registered Professional Surveyor or Registered
Professional Engineer, in substantially the following form:



   “I,                         , hereby certify that I am a
Registered Professional Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer of
the State of Indiana; that this plat correctly represents a survey completed
by me on                 , 19       , that all the monuments shown
thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, type and material are
accurately shown, and comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Ordinance.” (Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 2, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-107  Legal Description Certificate.



   The Final Plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall contain a
metes and bounds legal description prepared by the Registered Professional
Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer of the outside boundary of
the completed survey. (Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 3, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-108  Acknowledgment Certificate.



State of Indiana   )



            )   SS:



County of Lake   )



   Before me, the undersigned Notary Public in and for the County and
State, personally appeared                       (owner) and each
separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing
instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the purposes expressed
therein.



      WITNESS my hand and Notarial Seal this     day of        
          , 19  .



                                 Notary
Public



   SEAL



   My Commission Expires                     , 19  . (Ord. No.
791, Title XIV, § 4, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-109 Dedication Certificate.



   Each Final Plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a
deed of dedication, either of said Final Plat or incorporated therein by
reference, in substantially the following form:



We, the undersigned owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do
hereby lay off, plat and subdivide said real estate in accordance with the
herein plat.



This subdivision shall be known and designated as an addition to the Town of
Dyer, Lake County, State of Indiana. All streets and alleys and public open
spaces shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the public.



Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established, as shown
on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of streets, there
shall be erected or maintained no building or structure. Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are
reserved, as shown on the recorded plat. All easements shown thereon shall
inure to the benefit of the Town and the public or quasi-municipal utilities.
Within these easements, no structure, planting, or other material shall be
placed or permitted to remain, which may damage or interfere with the
installation and maintenance of utilities, or which may change the direction
of flow of drainage channels in the easements, or which may obstruct or
retard the flow of water throughout drainage channels in the easements. The
easement area of each lot and all improvements in it shall be maintained
continuously by the owner of the lots except for those improvements for which
a public authority or utility is responsible.



The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right
to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is dedicated to the public, and
reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and to
their heirs and assigns.



WITNESS OUR HANDS AND SEALS THIS     DAY OF                 , 19  .



                              Signature



                              Signature



                              Signature



(Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 5, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-110 Provision for Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants.



   The following is the suggested wording for private covenants or
restrictions:



The foregoing covenants, (or restrictions), are to run with the land and
shall be binding on all parties, and all persons claiming under them until
January 1, 19 



(a 25 year period is suggested), at which time said covenants, (or
restrictions), shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten
(10) years, unless by vote of the majority of the then owners of the lots
covered by these covenants, or restrictions, it is agreed to change such
covenants, or restrictions, in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of
the foregoing covenants, or restrictions, by judgment or Court order, shall
in no way affect any of the other covenants or restrictions, which shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 6, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-111 Other Certificates.



   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or documents as may
be required by the Commission in the enforcement of these regulations, shall
be incorporated in the Final Plat. (Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 7, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-112 Enactment.



   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, publication, and the filing with the County Recorder of a certified
copy thereof, all according to law. (Ord. No. 791, Title XV, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-113 Table 1-Design Standards-Streets.



   Street Design



   Standards                                
       Table 1



   Type of
Street                                    D
esign Standards



Arterial, Primary & Secondary
Thoroughfares               Plans, profiles and



                                       �
�        cross-sections based



                                       �
�        upon Major



                                       �
�        Thoroughfare Plan or



                                       �
�        as determined by the



                                       �
�        Commission



   Development Density



                                    Low  
    Medium   High



Residential Collector



                                       L
ow      Medium      High



Minor Residential



   Type of Curb (V=Vertical
Face)               V         V         V



Type of
Curb                              R       
  R/V      V



                                       V
=Vertical Face



                                       R
=Roll Type



                                       S
idewalk Width (ft.)*   0/455



   Maximum
Grade                           8%         
8%         8%



   Minimum
Grade                           0.5%      0.5%
      0.5%



   Marginal Access Street (R.O.W.
ft.)**            40         40/50      50/60



   Marginal Access Pavement Width
(ft.)            20         22/26      32/36



*   Installation of sidewalks on both sides of the street shall be
required. Sidewalks shall run from curb to curb. The commission may waive
this requirement along strictly rural streets, or where non-residential use
makes a walk unnecessary, or for such other reasons as it deems appropriate.
Sidewalks shall conform to Town specifications.



**   Curb and gutter shall generally not be required on the highway side.
A planting strip with a minimum of ten (10) feet may be required on the
highway side.



NOTE:   Pavement widths are measured from back of curb to back of curb.
(Ord. No. 791 Appendix, 6-8-71)



Sec. 10-114  Table 2–Intersection Design Standards.



Vertical Alignment within area   3% Maximum



Minimum Angle of Intersection   80°(90° preferred)



Minimum Curb Radius - (ft.)



§ 10-114ZONING AND SUBDIVISIONS§ 10-115.3



Minimum Centerline Offset of Adjacent Intersections (Street Jogs - Ft.)



(Ord. No. 791, Appendix, 6-8-71)



Division XI.  Design Standards for Erosion and Sediment Control.



Sec. 10-115.1  Permit for Installation of Erosion and Sediment Control
Systems.



Erosion and Sediment Control Plans shall be submitted to the Plan Commission
as part of the construction plans and specifications and shall include the
following:



   a.   Temporary erosion and sediment control measures necessary prior
to and during the initial construction and establishment phases up to final
site grading and seeding.



   b.   A permanent erosion and sediment control plan of all the graded
and non-hard surface areas within the proposed development, as planned for
completion, up to and including seeding of the final lot on which business or
residential dwellings are to be place.



   c.   Details concerning removal of temporary erosion control devices
after the initial establishment of adequate vegetative cover.



   d.   Maintenance procedures as part of the continuing plan to keep
all of the land under adequate cover and erosion at an acceptable minimum.



   e.   All erosion control measures, including, but not limited to,
those required to comply with the ordinance, shall meet the design criteria,
standards and specifications for erosion control measures similar to or the
same as those outlined in the most recent edition of the Indiana Handbook for
Erosion Control in Developing Areas.



   f.   No person shall be granted primary plat approval for a parcel
of real property having an area of 2,500 or more square feet without the
approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the Town of Dyer Plan
Commission.



   g.   Each plan shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner
or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such
firm.



   h.   Each plan shall include a statement that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan.



(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 10-115.2  Review and Approval.



   The Town of Dyer Plan Commission shall review each application for plat
of subdivision and Erosion and Sediment Control Plan to determine its
conformance with the provisions of this division.



(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 10-115.3  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



   1.   The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall include the
following:



      a.   A sequence of construction of the development site,
including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure, and the expected date on which clearing will begin, the
estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing,
installation of temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and
establishment of permanent vegetation.



      b.   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of
construction and after completion of development of the site. Depending upon
the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be
required at the close of each season.



      c.   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures.



      d.   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities,
including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.



   2.   Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner described above and may be authorized by the
Town of Dyer Plan Commission by written authorization, and shall include:



      a.   Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan
submitted to the Town of Dyer Plan Commission; and



      b.   Field modifications of a minor nature.



(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 10-115.4  Design Requirements.



   1.   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices,
and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth herein, and
shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the
satisfaction of the Town of Dyer Plan Commission.  Cut and fill slopes shall
be no greater than 2:1, except as approved by the Town of Dyer Plan
Commission to meet other community or environmental objectives.



   2.   Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and
wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all other
chapters of this Subdivision Control Ordinance. Clearing techniques that
retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns, as described herein, shall
be used to the satisfaction of the Town of Dyer Plan Commission.



   3.   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been
installed and have been stabilized.



   4.   Erosion control requirements shall include the following:



      a.   Soil stabilization shall be completed within five (5)
days of clearing or inactivity in construction;



      b.   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method
is used, it shall become established within two (2) weeks or the Town of Dyer
Plan Commission may require the site to be reseeded or a nonvegetative option
employed;



      c.   Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined
herein on steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure
stabilization;



      d.   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end
of each workday;



      e.   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch
layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion,
at the close of the construction season;



      f.   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of
dust or flow of sediment from the site;



      g.   Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed
slopes shall be employed.



   5.   Sediment controls requirements shall include:



      a.   Settling Basins.  A settlement basin is an impoundment
with a controlled stormwater release structure for the purpose of detaining
runoff to allow excessive sediment to settle.  Settlement basins shall be
required at the outlet of any disturbed areas with major grading that are
larger than ten (10) acres.  The minimum volume of a sediment basin shall be
sixty-seven (67) cubic yards per acre for the total drainage area, measured
below the top of principal spillway or riser. The cleanout volume shall be
not less than one-quarter (1/4) nor more than one-third (1/3) of the total
storage volume of a sediment basin.  Maximum slopes shall be 2:1 (H:V) for
excavated areas and for compacted embankments.  Side slopes shall be 3:1
(H:V) or flatter, which will allow people and equipment to safely negotiate
slopes or to enter the sediment basin for maintenance and repair purposes. 
The length to width ratio must be greater than 2:1 (L:W) for the principal
flowpaths in order to maximize residence time of stormwater within the
sediment basin.  The principal outlet or spillway should be sized to
adequately convey stormwater runoff from the two (2) year, twenty-four (24)
hour storm.



      b. Sediment Traps.  A sediment trap is a small temporary pond
that drains a disturbed area so that sediment can settle out.  Sediment
traps shall be required for any disturbed area which is greater than one (1)
acre and less than five (5) acres.  The minimum volume of a sediment trap
shall be sixty-seven (67) cubic yards per acre for the total drainage area. 
The outlet structure shall consist of layers of aggregate, rock or riprap
material. The cleanout volume shall be not less than one-quarter (1/4) nor
more than one-third (1/3) of the total storage volume of a sediment basin.
Maximum slopes shall be 2:1 (H:V) for excavated areas and for compacted
embankments.  Side slopes shall be 3:1 (H:V) or flatter, which will allow
people and equipment to safely negotiate slopes or to enter the sediment
basin for maintenance and repair purposes.  The length to width ratio must
be greater than 2:1 (L:W) for the principal flowpaths in order to maximize
residence time of stormwater within the sediment basin.  An emergency
overflow weir should be provided at an elevation of at least one and one-half
feet (1.5') below the top of embankment, with a minimum freeboard of one foot
(1').



      c.   Silt Fences.  Silt fencing shall be required on all
disturbed areas and shall be constructed pursuant to the following standards:



         (1)   Install silt fence at level grade parallel to the
contour of the land; extend ends upslope to allow water to pond behind fence;
excavate a trench four inches (4") wide, eight inches (8") deep; install
fence with posts on the down slope side; place twelve inches (12") of fabric
in the trench, extending the bottom four inches (4") toward the upslope side;
join silt fence sections by using a wrap joint; backfill trench with soil
materials and compact; inspect at least weekly and after each storm event,
repairing as needed and removing sediment deposits when they reach one-half
(1/2) the fence height.



         (2)   The maximum drainage area to the silt fence shall
be one-half (0.5) acre or less per one hundred feet (100') of fence.  Silt
fencing shall not be used in live or continuously flowing streams or channels
and shall not be used in ditches or swales which drain areas greater than one
(1) acre.  Silt fences shall not be used in steep ditches or swales where
the design flow is greater than two feet (2') per second.



         (3)   Silt fencing fabric shall be comprised of
synthetic filter fabric manufactured from woven or nonwoven sheets of
polypropylene, nylon or polyester.  Typical properties for silt fencing
fabric shall be as follows:



            Tensile strength at 20% elongation:   50 pounds
per linear inch



            Burst strength:               180 psi



            Trapezoidal tear strength:         50 pounds



            Apparent opening size:         20 to 30 (US
sieve size)



            Flow rate:                  0.30
gallons per minute per square foot



         (4)   The maximum length of silt fence between posts is
eight feet (8').  Wood posts shall have a minimum dimension of two inches
(2") x two inches (2") for hard woods (i.e. oak) and three inches (3") x
three inches (3") for soft woods (i.e. pine).  Typical post length shall be
forty-eight inches (48").  There shall be a minimum of five (5) fasteners
for each wood post.



         (5)   The maximum slope lengths for silt fence
installations shall be as follows:



            Land Slope         Maximum Slope Length



            Less than 2%         100 feet



            From 2% to 5%      75 feet



            From 5% to 10%       50 feet



            From 10% to 20%   25 feet



            More than 20%      15 feet



      d.   Protection for adjacent properties by the use of a
vegetated buffer strip in combination with perimeter controls.



      e.   Installation and maintenance of drop inlet protection
devices, utilizing either of the following techniques:



         1.   Silt Fence.  Construct a six inch (6") dike on the
down slope side to prevent bypass flow; dig a trench eight inches (8") deep
and four inches (4") wide; space support posts evenly against the inlet
perimeter a maximum of four feet (4') apart and drive them one and one-half
feet (1.5') into the ground; use enough fabric from a single roll to
eliminate joints and using lath and nails, fasten fabric to the posts; place
twelve inches (12") of fabric in the trench, extending the bottom four inches
(4") toward the upslope side; join silt fence sections by using a wrap joint;
backfill the trench with soil materials and compact; cross brace the comers
to prevent collapse of the structure; inspect at least weekly and after each
storm event, and repair as needed, and remove accumulated sediments after
every storm.



         2.   Placement of a pre-manufactured drop inlet
protection device around the inlet perimeter, having at least the same design
characteristics set forth in the preceding paragraph.



         3.   Block and Gravel.  Place concrete blocks
lengthwise on their sides in a single row around the perimeter of the inlet,
so that the open ends face outward and not upward.  Ends of adjacent blocks
should abut.  The height of the barrier can be varied by stacking
combinations of blocks that are typically six (6) or eight (8) inches high. 
Place geotextile filter fabric over the outside vertical face of the concrete
blocks.  If more than one strip is necessary, overlap the strips by at least
one foot (1').  Place clean stone against the geotextile filter fabric up to
the top of the concrete blocks.  Use one-half inch (1/2") to three-quarter
inch (3/4") gravel.



   5.   Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:



      a.   A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the
Town of Dyer Plan Commission if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly
during construction;



      b.   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during,
and after any in-channel work;



      c.   All on-site storm water conveyance channels designed
according to the criteria outlined herein;



      d.   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the
outlets of all pipes and paved channels.



   6.   Construction site access requirements shall include:



      a.   A temporary site access road provided at all sites,
unless the Town of Dyer Plan Commission determines that such temporary access
road is not necessary.  Such temporary site access road shall be constructed
pursuant to the following standards:



         Place six inches (6") of course aggregate (INDOT CA No. 2)
over a stable subgrade; construct the road at least twelve feet (12') wide
and fifty feet (50') long or the distance of the foundation; add stone as
needed to maintain six inches (6") of clean depth.



      b.   Other measures required by the Town of Dyer Plan
Commission in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public
streets by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains.



(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 10-115.5  Inspection.



   1.   The Town of Dyer Plan Commission shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the owner of developer wherein the work fails to
comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved.  Plans for
grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of
approval of the Town of Dyer Plan Commission shall be maintained at the site
during the progress of the work.  To obtain inspections, the owner or
developer shall notify the Town of Dyer Plan Commission at least two (2)
working days before the following:



      a.   Start of construction;



      b.   Installation of sediment and erosion measures;



      c.   Completion of site clearing;



      d.   Completion of rough grading;



      e.   Completion of final grading;



      f.   Close of the construction season; and



      g.   Completion of final landscaping.



   2.   The owner or developer or his/her agent shall make regular
inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection
schedule outlined on the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, as
approved.  The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall
effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control
measures.  All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted
to the Town of Dyer Plan Commission, or their designated Town employee(s) or
agent(s) at the time interval specified.



   3.   The Town of Dyer Plan Commission, or their designated Town
employee(s) or agent(s), shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed
necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports
filed by the owner of developer.



(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 9-15-04)



Sec. 10-116 Through Sec. 10-118 Reserved for Future Use.



ARTICLE 4.  ZONING.



Division I. Zoning Ordinance.



Sec. 10-119  Schedule of Fees.



   The following schedule of fees shall apply:



   Certificate of Zoning Compliance:



      Residential   $10.00



      Commercial   $25.00



   Maps:



      Zoning   $5.00



      Streets   $5.00



      Soils   $5.00



      Land Use   $5.00



      TIF District   $5.00



      Wards   $5.00



      Subdivision Control Ordinance   $50.00



      Book of Standards   $50.00



      Comprehensive Plan   $50.00



   Development Related Fees:



      Plan Commission:



      Rezoning Fee   $200.00



      Special Meetings requested by a Petitioner   $400.00



Public hearing signs shall be purchased by a petitioner from the town at a
cost of $25.00 and shall be posted on the property that is the subject of a
given public hearing before either the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning
Appeals in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of both bodies.



   SUD Development Review:



         Residential additions/remodels   $50.00



         Commercial   See below



      1.   Single Developer Site Plan Review



         a.   Minimum Fee - per acre   $250.00



      2.   Preliminary Site Development Review



         a.   Minimum Fee - per lot   $300.00



      3.   Preliminary Architectural Plans and Materials Review



         a.   Minimum Fee - per building   $500.00



      4.   Final Site, Architectural and Material - Construction
Documents Review



         a.   Minimum Fee - per building



            i.   From 1 - 5,000 sq. ft.   $1,000.00



            ii.   From 5,001 - 10,000 sq. ft.    $1,800.00



            iii.   For every 10,000 sq. ft. over 10,001 sq.
ft.    $500.00



      5.   Sign(s) Review



         a.   Minimum Fee - per building   $300.00



      6.   Residential (under 3 units) Review for new construction



         a.   Minimum Fee - per building   $300.00



      7.   Re-submission from Denial



         a.   Minimum Fee   $250.00



Preparation of written review, meetings and travel will be calculated at an
hourly rate of $75.00 per hour.



Minimum fee, paid by petitioner, will be used for the preparation of a
written review, meeting time and travel. If a petitioner's submission
requires additional time for meetings and/or travel, additional fees will be
calculated at an hourly rate of $75.00 per hour.



   Non-SUD Commercial Site Plan Review   $1,000.00



   Subdivision Fees:



   Pre-application Fee:



     10 lots   $500.00



     10 lots   $1,000.00



Engineering Review Fee for Residential Developments (application fee):



     10 lots   $450.00 per lot



     11-25 lots   $350.00 per lot



     26-39 lots   $300.00 per lot



     40 lots   $250.00 per lot



   Engineering Review Fee for Commercial/Industrial Developments:



   2% of the costs of site improvements whether such improvements are
public or private.  This does not include the building(s).



   Subdivision Inspection Fee:



   2% of total approved cost of construction or installation of
improvements whether such improvements are public or private.



   Maintenance letter of credit:



   10% of total cost of improvements



   Cleaning and televising of sanitary and storm lines - All costs will be
based on actual time and material



     using the rates below.



         Piece of Equipment               Cost Per
Hour



         Operator with Experience*               $ 
26.00



         Camera
Van                        $  75.00



         Sewer
Vactor/Rodder                  $140.00



*Please note that it requires a minimum of three (3) operators to clean
and/or televise any sanitary or storm line.



   Board of Zoning Appeals Hearings:



   Residential   $100.00



   Commercial   $200.00



   Special Meetings requested by a Petitioner   $400.00



Public hearing signs shall be purchased by a petitioner from the town at a
cost of $25.00 and shall be posted on the property that is the subject of a
given public hearing before either the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning
Appeals in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of both bodies.



In the event that the Engineering Review Fee (application fee), Site Plan
Review Fee, SUD Commercial Development Fee and/or the Subdivision Inspection
Fee does not cover the Town's actual costs of review or inspection, the Town
may charge additional fees for these services based upon the actual costs
incurred. In the event of an overpayment of any of these fees, a refund will
be issued to the petitioner.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2016-02, 3-10-16)



Sec. 10-120  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms or words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:



   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual.



   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.



   The word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is permissive.



   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words
“intended”, “designed”, or “arranged to be used or occupied”.



   a.   Accessory Building.  A detached subordinate building, the use
of which is clearly incidental to the principal building and that is located
on the same lot as the principal building.  Examples of such accessory
buildings are, but not necessarily limited to, cabanas, storage sheds,
playhouses, and garages.



   b.   Accessory Use of Structure. A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



   c.   Advertising Structure. A freestanding structure the purpose of
which is to inform or call attention to persons not on the premises on which
the structure is located of a business, product, event, or service.



   d.   Agricultural Use. Agricultural uses include farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal
and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating,
or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural
activities.



   e.   Alley. A minor way at the back or side of the property
affording only secondary access to the property.



   f.   Auto Burglar Alarm.  A tube that contains pyrotechnic
composition that produces a loud whistle or smoke when ignited. A small
quantity of explosive, not exceeding fifty (50) milligrams, may also be used
to produce a small report. A squib is used to ignite the device.



   g.   Basement. That portion of any structure located partly below
the average adjoining lot grade.



   h.   Billboard. A freestanding illuminated or non-illuminated
structure advertising a business, product, or event not available on the
premises where the structure is located, which billboard shall not contain
advertising space in excess of three hundred (300) square feet per side,
shall not exceed thirty five (35) feet in height, shall not be wider than
twenty five (25) feet and shall have a minimum ground clearance of twelve
(12) feet, supported by a single support pole.



   i.   Booby Trap.  A small tube with string protruding from both
ends, similar to a party popper in design. The ends of the string are pulled
to ignite the friction sensitive composition, producing a small report.



   j.   Buildable Area. The portion of a lot after required yards have
been provided.



   k.   Building. Any structure used, designated, or intended for the
protection, shelter, enclosure or support of persons or property.   



   l.   Building, Height of. The vertical distance from the average
curb level in front of the lot or the finished grade at the building line,
whichever is higher, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the gable of a
gambrel, hip, or pitch roof.



   m.   Cabana.  An accessory building or a portion of the main
building used as a bathhouse, pool house or a dressing area in connection
with a swimming pool, tennis court, hot tub, sauna, etc.



   n.   Chaser. A device, containing fifty (50) milligrams or less of
explosive composition, that consists of a small paper or cardboard tube that
travels along the ground upon ignition. A whistling effect is often produced,
and a small noise may be produced.



   o.   Cigarette Load.  A small wooden peg that has been coated with
a small quantity of explosive composition.  Upon ignition of a cigarette
containing one (1) of the pegs, a small report is produced.



   p.   Consumer Firework. A small firework that is designed primarily
to produce visible effects by combustion, and that is required to comply with
the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated
by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR 1507.
The term also includes some small devices designed to produce an audible
effect, such as whistling devices, ground devices containing fifty (50)
milligrams or less of explosive composition, and aerial devices containing
one hundred thirty (130) milligrams or less of explosive composition.
Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of charcoal, sulfur,
and potassium nitrate are not considered as designed to produce an audible
effect.  Consumer Fireworks include:



      1.   Aerial devices, which include sky rockets, missile type
rockets, helicopter or aerial spinners, roman candles, mines, and shells;



      2.   Ground audible devices, which include firecrackers,
salutes, and chasers; and



      3.   Firework devices containing combinations of the effects
described in subsections 1. and 2.



   q.   Cone Fountain.  A cardboard or heavy paper cone which contains
up to fifty (50) grams of pyrotechnic composition, and which produces the
same effect as a cylindrical fountain.



   r.   Cylindrical Fountain.  A cylindrical tube not exceeding
three-quarters (3/4) inch in inside diameter and containing up to
seventy-five (75) grams of pyrotechnic composition. Fountains produce a
shower of color and sparks upon ignition, and sometimes a whistling effect. 
Cylindrical fountains may contain a spike to be inserted in the ground (spike
fountain), a wooden or plastic base to be placed on the ground (base
fountain), or a wooden handle or cardboard handle for items designated to be
hand held (handle fountain).



   s.   Density. Number of living units per acre allowable under the
schedule of district regulations.



   t.   Detached Structure. A structure surrounded by an open space on
the same lot.



   u.   Dipped Stick or Wire Sparkler.  A stick or wire coated with
pyrotechnic composition that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition. Total
pyrotechnic composition does not exceed one hundred (100) grams per item.
Those devices containing chlorate or perchlorate salts do not exceed five (5)
grams in total composition per item. Wire sparklers that contain no magnesium
and that contain less than one hundred (100) grams of composition per item
are not included in the category of consumer fireworks.



   v.   Drive-In Restaurant or Refreshment Stand. Any place or premises
used for sale, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages in
automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve
themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments, or beverages on the
premises.



   w.  Dwelling, Mobile Home. A detached residential dwelling unit
designed for transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its
own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site where it
is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or
other temporary or permanent foundations, connections to utilities, and the
like. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home.



   x.   Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A residential building designed for
or occupied by three (3) or more families, with the number of families in
residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.



   y.   Dwelling, Single-Family. A detached residential dwelling unit
other than a mobile home, designed for and occupied by one (1) family only.



   z.   Dwelling, Two-Family. A detached residential building
containing two (2) dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than
two (2) families.



   aa.   Dwelling Unit. One (1) room, or rooms connected together,
constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner
occupancy, or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in
the same structure, and containing independent bath and sleeping facilities.



   bb.   Explosive Composition. A chemical or mixture of chemicals that
produces an audible effect by deflagration or detonation when ignited.



   cc.   Family. One (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling
unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no
such family shall contain over five (5) persons, but further, provided that
domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises
without being counted as a family or families.



   dd.   Fence. A structure erected around or along the side of any
yard, field or other open space to prevent passage in or out of the enclosed
area, including but not limited to a wall, a structure constructed of posts
carrying boards, rails, pickets, or wire, or an iron structure consisting of
vertical or horizontal bars.



   ee.   Filling Station. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil,
grease, batteries, tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail, and where in addition the following services may be
rendered and sales made, and no other:



      1.   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and
distributors and distributor parts.



      2.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or
regrooving.



      3.   Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan
belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the
like.



      4.   Radiator cleaning and flushing.



      5.   Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials.



      6.   Greasing and lubrication.



      7.   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines.



      8.   Mirror servicing and repair of carburetors.



      9.   Emergency wiring repairs.



      10.   Adjusting and repairing brakes.



      11.   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the
head or crankcase or racing the motor.



      12.   Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and
similar convenience goods for filling stations customers, as accessory and
incidental to principal operation.



      13.   Provision of road maps and other informational material
to customers; provision of restroom facilities.



      Uses permissible at a filling station do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater
than normally found in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair
garage nor a body shop.



   ff.   Firecracker or Salute.  A device that consists of a small
paper wrapped or cardboard tube containing not more than fifty (50)
milligrams of pyrotechnic composition and that produces, upon ignition,
noise, accompanied by a flash of light.



   gg.   Firework.  Any composition or device designed for the purpose
of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, items referenced in
section 8(a) of this chapter, and special fireworks. The following items are
excluded from the definition of fireworks:



      1.   Model rockets;



      2.   Toy pistol caps;



      3.   Emergency signal flares;



      4.   Matches;



      5.   Fixed ammunition for firearms;



      6.   Ammunition components intended for use in firearms,
muzzle loading cannons, or small arms;



      7.   Shells, cartridges, and primers for use in firearms,
muzzle loading cannons, or small arms.



   hh.   Flitter Sparkler.  A narrow paper tube filled with
pyrotechnic composition that produces color and sparks upon ignition. These
devices do not use a fuse for ignition, but rather are ignited by igniting
the paper at one (1) end of the tube.



   ii.   Floor Area. Area in square feet of all floors in all buildings
including elevators and stairways as measured from outside of exterior wall
to outside of exterior wall and multiplied by the number of floors 
including basements which are in the primary function of the building.



   jj.   Floor Area Ratio. The square footage of floor area on all
floors for each square foot of lot area.



   kk.   Garage, Private. A garage used for storage purposes only. 
Garages shall not be constructed without a hard surface driveway leading from
the entrance of the garage to the public or private street.  Said garage
space shall be limited to a maximum area of:



      1.   Attached garage size:



         (a)   Seven and one-half percent (7.5%) of lot size in
R-1 and R-2 not to exceed one thousand, two hundred (1,200) square feet in
R-1 districts and one thousand (1,000) square feet in R-2 districts; except
that in the case of a lot which is in excess of forty thousand (40,000)
square feet, a garage the area of which does not exceed one thousand five
hundred (1,500) square feet may be constructed.



         (b)   Eight percent (8%) of lot size for duplex
buildings in R-3 and R-4 districts not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet.



         (c)   Five hundred (500) square feet of garage space per
unit in a multi-family structure.  An attached garage shall not exceed the
height of the home to which it is attached.



      2.   Detached garage size:



         (a)   Seven percent (7%) of lot size in R-1 and R-2 not
to exceed one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet in R-1 and nine
hundred (900) square feet in R-2; except that in the case of a lot which is
in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet,  garage space the area of
which does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet may be
constructed.



         (b)   Eight percent (8%) of lot size for duplex
buildings in R-3 and R-4 districts not to exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet.



         (c)   Five hundred (500) square feet of garage space per
unit in multi-family structures.



         (d)   Detached garages shall be a minimum of five (5)
feet off of side and rear property lines.



         (e)   Detached garages shall be no more than fifteen
(15) feet in height.



   ll.   Garage, Public. Any building or premises other than a private
or storage garage where motor driven vehicles are equipped, repaired,
serviced, hired, sold, or stored.



   mm.   Ground Floor Area.  The area and square feet measured on a
horizontal plane above the ground measured from outside of exterior wall to
outside of exterior wall.



   nn.   Ground Spinner.  A small spinning device that is similar to
wheels in design and effect when placed on the ground and ignited, and that
produces a shower of sparks and color when spinning.



   oo.   Helicopter or Aerial Spinner.  A spinning device:



      1.   That consists of a tube up to one-half (1/2) inch in
inside diameter and that contains up to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic
composition;



      2.   To which some type of propeller or blade device is
attached; and



      3.   That lifts into the air upon ignition, producing a
visible or audible effect at the height of flight.



   pp.   Home Operation. An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit,
provided that:



      1.   No person other than members of the family residing on
the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.



      2.   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation
shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential
purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty five (25%) percent of the
floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home
occupation.



      3.   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the
building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one (1) sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area, non-illuminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal
building.



      4.   No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory
building.



      5.   There shall be no primary sales, either wholesale or
retail, in connection with such home occupation.



      6.   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard, except that such off-street parking shall be limited to driveways not
to exceed twenty (20) feet in width.



      7.   No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation
is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if
conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or
audible interference in any radio, television or telephone receivers off the
premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.



   qq.   Illuminating Torch. A cylindrical tube that:



      1.   Contains up to one hundred (100) grams of pyrotechnic
composition;



      2.   Produces, upon ignition, a colored fire; and



      3.   Is either a spike, base or handle type device.



   rr.   Indoor Pyrotechnics Special Effects Material.  A chemical
material that is clearly labeled by the manufacturer as suitable for indoor
use (as provided in National Fire Protection Association Standard 1126 (2001
Edition)).



   ss.   Living Space Ratio. The square footage of open space, less the
space used for vehicular movement that exists for each square foot of
building floor area.



   tt.   Loading Space, Off Street. Space logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off street parking
spaces are filled. Each said loading space shall be not less than ten (10)
feet by fifty (50) feet with a fourteen (14) foot clearance height. Required
off street loading space is not to be included as off street parking space in
computation of required off street parking space.



   uu.   Lot. For purposes of this ordinance, a lot is a subdivided and
recorded parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other
open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an
improved public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of:



      1.   A single lot of record.



      2.   A combination of complete lots of record, or complete
lots or record and portions of lots of record.



   vv.   Lot Frontage. The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements
on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall
be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under Yards
in this section.



   ww.   Lot Lines. The lines bounding lots as defined herein.



   xx.   Lot Measurement.



      1.   Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance
between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the
side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines



in the rear.



      2.   Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance
between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of
the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided
however that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where
they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent
(80%) of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning
circle of a cul-de- sac or eyebrow. Examples of said measurements may be
found in Appendix A.



   yy.   Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded
in the Office of the Recorder of Lake County.



   zz.   Lot Types.



      1.   Corner Lot, defined as a lot located at the intersection
of two (2) or more streets.



      2.   Interior Lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot
with only one (1) frontage on a street.



      3.   Through Lot, defined as a lot other than a corner lot
with frontage on more than one (1) street. Through lots abutting two (2)
streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.



      4.   Reversed Frontage Lot, defined as a lot on which the
frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angle
less than one hundred thirty five (135) degrees) to the general pattern in
the area.  A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior
lot, or a through lot.



   aaa.   Mine or Shell.  A device that:



      1.   Consists of a heavy cardboard or paper tube up to two and
one-half (2 1/2) inches in inside diameter, to which a wooden or plastic base
is attached;



      2.   Contains up to forty (40) grams of pyrotechnic
composition; and



      3.   Propels, upon ignition, stars (pellets of pressed
pyrotechnic composition that burn with bright color), whistles, parachutes,
or combinations thereof; with the tube remaining on the ground.



   bbb.   Minor Structures. Any small, movable structure or
construction such as birdhouses; play equipment; arbors; and walls and fences
under four (4) feet in height.  Such structures shall not be considered
accessory buildings and subject to the limitation in number or size as
accessory buildings are limited.



   ccc.   Missile Type Rocket.  A device that is similar to a sky
rocket in size, composition, and effect, and that uses fins rather than a
stick for guidance and stability.



   ddd.   Open Space. Total area in square feet of all uncovered open
space of the land area within the site to be developed plus one half (½) of
covered open spaces such as park shelters and carports.



   eee.   Open Space Ratio. The square footage of site open space
provided for each square foot of building floor area.



   fff.   Outdoor Advertising Business. Provision of outdoor displays
or display space on a lease or rental basis only.



   ggg.   Parking Space, Off-Street. For the purposes of this
ordinance, an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for
parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together
with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering
room. Required off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles
shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designed, maintained,
and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be
on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may be
parked and unparked without moving another. All off-street parking areas
shall be paved. At a minimum all parking areas shall be constructed with an
eight (8) inch compacted aggregate base and a two (2) inch paved surface.
Prior to surfacing, adequate surface drainage shall be provided where
necessary.



      For purposes of rough computation, an off-street parking space
and necessary access and maneuvering room may be estimated at three hundred
(300) square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to
be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided
and maintained, and improved and maintained in a manner appropriate to the
circumstances of the case.



   hhh.   Party Popper. A small plastic or paper item containing not
more than sixteen (16) milligrams of explosive composition that is friction
sensitive. A string protruding from the device is pulled to ignite it,
expelling paper streamers and producing a small report.



   iii.   Playhouse.  A freestanding building exclusively for the use
of children, with a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a maximum size of
forty (40) square feet.



   jjj.   Porch, Enclosed. A covered entrance to a building with or
without a separate roof which is enclosed. Any one (1) story or two(2) story
enclosed porch, or one having a solid foundation and capable of being
enclosed shall be considered a part of the building in the determination of
the size of yard or lot coverage, provided, however, that so long as said
porch shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet it shall not be considered in
calculating setbacks.



   kkk.   Porch, Unenclosed. A covered entrance to a building with or
without a separate roof which is not enclosed. An unenclosed one-story porch,
erected on piers, even though roofed over, may project into a required front,
side, or rear yard area a distance not to exceed six (6) feet and shall not
be considered in the determination of the size of yards or lot coverage,
provided, however, that said porch shall not exceed sixty (60)square feet and
further provided that such a portion shall not be closer than six (6) feet at
any such point to any lot line, and that no building shall have such porches
projecting into more than one (1) required sideyard.



   lll.   Portable Sign. Any device designed to inform or attract
attention of persons not on the premises on which the device is located,
which device can be easily transported or carried from place to place and
which is not attached to the real estate on which located in a permanent
manner.



   mmm.   Principal Building. The building on a lot in which is
conducted the principal use as permitted on such lot by the regulations of
the district in which it is located.



   nnn.   Pyrotechnic Composition.  A mixture of chemicals that
produces a visible or audible effect by combustion rather than deflagration
or detonation. Pyrotechnic compositions will not explode upon ignition unless
severely confined.



   ooo.   Recreation Space. Total area in square feet which is
countable as open space but is not paved in streets, walks, or driveways and
is suitable for recreation pursuits. The smallest countable recreation area
is one thousand (1,000) square feet. That part of a recreation area having a
dimension of less than twenty (20) feet shall not be included as countable
recreation space.



   ppp.   Recreation Space Ratio. The square footage of space for
active recreation provided for each square foot of building floor area.



   qqq.   Roman Candle.  A device that consists of a heavy paper or
cardboard tube not exceeding three-eighths (3/8) inch in inside diameter and
that contains up to twenty (20) grams of pyrotechnic composition. Upon
ignition, up to ten (10) stars (pellets of pressed pyrotechnic composition
that burn with bright color) are individually expelled at several second
intervals.



   rrr.   Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between a property
line and the nearest point of a building or any projection thereto, excluding
window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, stoops, and other architectural
features, provided, however, that such features shall not project more than
two (2) feet into any required yard.



   sss.   Sign. Any device designated to inform or attract attention of
persons not on the premises on which the sign is located, provided however
that the following shall not be included in the application of the
regulations herein.  Sign regulations can be found in Section 10-146.



   ttt.   Sky Rocket. A device that:



      1.   Consists of a tube that contains pyrotechnic composition;



      2.   Contains a stick for guidance and stability; and



      3.   Rises into the air upon ignition, producing a burst of
color or noise at the height of flight.



   uuu.   Smoke Device.  A tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that produces white or colored smoke upon ignition as the primary
effect.



   vvv.   Snake or Glow Worm.  A pressed pellet or pyrotechnic
composition that produces a large, snake-like ash upon burning. The ash
expands in length as the pellet burns. These devices do not contain mercuric
thiocyanate.



   www.   Snapper. A small, paper wrapped item containing a minute
quantity of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand. When dropped,
the device explodes, producing a small report.



   xxx.   Special Exception. A special exception is a use that would
not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning
division or district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location,
or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety,
welfare, morals, order, comfort,  convenience, appearance, prosperity, or
general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning division or
district as special exceptions, if specific provision for such special
exceptions is made in this zoning ordinance.



   yyy.   Stoops. A stoop will become an unenclosed, unroofed porch,
platform, entrance stairway, or small veranda at a house door not to exceed
sixty (60) square feet.



   zzz.   Storage Shed.  An accessory building to be used for the
private storage of personal items incidental to the maintenance and upkeep of
the property on which they are located.



   aaaa.   Story. For purposes of determining elevation, that portion
of a building included between the surface of a floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between
the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   bbbb.   Street. A right-of-way other than an alley, dedicated or
otherwise established for public use which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.



   cccc.   Street Line. The right-of-way line of a street.



   dddd.   Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members
of a building or structure or any substantial change in the roof or in the
exterior walls.



   eeee.   Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings mobile homes,
walls, fences, billboards, signs, and poster panels.



   ffff.   Travel Trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and
recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet.



   gggg.   Trick Match.  A kitchen or book match that has been coated
with a small quantity of explosive or pyrotechnic composition. Upon ignition
of the match, a small report or a shower of sparks is produced.



   hhhh.   Trick Noisemaker.  An item that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user.



   iiii.   Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the
zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the
ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this
ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of
structure or size of yards and open spaces. The establishment or expansion of
a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a
variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the zoning
district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.



   jjjj.   Vision Clearance. An unoccupied triangular space at the
corner of a corner lot which is bounded by the street right-of-way lines and
a setback line connecting points determined by measurements from the corner
of each street line.



   kkkk.   Wheel. A pyrotechnic device that:



      1.   Is attached to a post or tree by means of a nail or
string;



      2.   Contains up to six (6) driver units (tubes not exceeding
one half (1/2) inch in inside diameter) containing up to sixty (60) grams of
composition per driver unit; and



      3.   Revolves, upon ignition, producing a shower of color and
sparks and sometimes a whistling effect.



   llll.   Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied
and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from thirty (30)
inches above the ground level of the graded lot upward, provided however that
fences, walls, poles, posts, minor structures, and other customary yard
accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to
height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.



   mmmm.   Yard, Front. A yard extending between side lot lines across
the front of a lot adjoining a public or private street.



      In any required front yard, within any corner lot, no fence,
wall, hedge, or other structure or planting shall be erected, placed, or
maintained above the height of thirty (30) inches, within the triangular area
formed by the intersecting right-of-way lines and a straight line joining
said right-of-way lines at points which are thirty (30) feet distant from the
point of intersection, measured along said right-of-way lines.



      In the case of through lots or corner lots, unless the prevailing
front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall
be provided on all frontages. Where one of the front yards that would
normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing
yard pattern, the administrative official may waive the requirement for the
normal front yard and substitute therefor a special yard requirement which
shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.



      Depth of required front yards shall be measured at right angles
to a straight line joining the foremost points of the side lot lines. The
foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners
at street intersection shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and
front lot lines would have met without such rounding. Front and rear yard
lines shall be parallel.



   nnnn.   Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot
between inner side yard lines. In the case of through lots, there will be no
rear yards, but only front and side yards.



   oooo.   Yard, Side. A yard extending from the rear line of the
required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly
defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection
of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots,
side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards required. In the
case of corner lots, yards remaining after full-depth front yards have been
established shall be considered side yards.



      Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner
that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by
district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.



   pppp.   Yard, Special. A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a
public street, required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard,
but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term side
yard nor the term rear yard clearly applies. In such cases, the
administrative official shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as
generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district,
determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on
which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard
to the orientation and location of structures and buildable areas thereon.



   qqqq.   Zoning Administrator. The administrative official appointed
by the Town Council of the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana who shall be
charged with the daily administration of this ordinance and other duties as
more particularly set forth herein.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2009-18, 11-18-09)



Sec. 10-121  Establishment of Districts - Provisions for Official Zoning Map.



   a.   Official Zoning Map. The Town is divided into zones, or
districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all
explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this ordinance.



      The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of
the President of the Town Council attested by the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and
bearing the seal of the Town under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 2 of Ordinance
No. 83-46 as amended of the Town of Dyer, State of Indiana”, together with
the date of the adoption of this ordinance.



      If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and I.C.,
1971, § 36-7-4-607, et seq., changes are made in district boundaries or
other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be
entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been
approved by the Town Council, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as
follows: “On (date), by official action of the Town Council, the following
(change) changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of
nature of change)”, which entry shall be signed by the President of the
Town Council and attested by the Town Clerk-Treasurer. No amendment to this
ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map shall
become effective until after such change and entry has been made on said map.



      No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map
or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or
persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and punishable as
provided under Section 10-142.



      Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official
Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official
Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk- Treasurer
shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and
water area buildings, and other structures in the Town.



   b.   Changes in the Official Zoning Map - Procedures. A change in
the Official Zoning Map shall be initiated by filing a petition and payment
of the necessary fee with the office of the Zoning Administrator in a form
and manner set out in Indiana Code and the Rules of the Dyer Plan Commission.
A petition for zone change requires a public hearing and due notice to
interested parties as described in IC, 36-7-4-604 and the Rules of the Plan
Commission. At said public hearing, the Plan Commission shall consider
petitions for zone change and shall pay reasonable regard to the criteria
established in IC, 36-7-4-603, before making a recommendation, duly certified
as required by Indiana Code, to the Dyer Town Council. In considering a
petition for zone change, the Plan Commission or the Town Council may allow
or require written commitments to be executed by the petitioner in a form and
manner set out in the Rules of the Dyer Plan Commission



   c.   Replacement of Official Zoning Map. In the event that the
Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to
interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Town
Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall
supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning
Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original
Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the President of the Town
Council attested by the Town Clerk-Treasurer, and bearing the seal of the
Town under the following words: “This is to certify that this Official
Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of
adoption of map being replaced) as part of Ordinance 83-46, as amended, of
the Town of Dyer, State of Indiana.”



      Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining,
shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-122  Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



   a.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
center lines.



   b.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   c.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits
shall be construed as following such Town limits.



   d.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   e.   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line, and in the event of change in
the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams,
lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center
lines.



   f.   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in subsections a. through e. above shall be so construed. Distance
not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.



   g.   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by subsections a. through f. above, the Plan
Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.



   h.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot or parcel of real
estate not platted, which was in single ownership at the time of passage of
this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may permit, as a special
exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not
to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion
of the lot.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-123  Application of District Regulations.



   The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be
minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of
structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter provided:



   a.   No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.



   b.   No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or
altered than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the
provisions of this ordinance:



      1.   To exceed the height or bulk;



      2.   To accommodate or house a great number of families;



      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;



      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards, or other open spaces.



   c.   No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking
or loading space required or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open
space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any
other building unless specifically allowed or required by the zoning district
regulations in which said building is located.



   d.   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this
ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date
of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by
this ordinance.



   e.   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Town shall
be considered to be in the rural development, RD unless otherwise
specifically classified.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-124  Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land,
Non-Conforming Structures, Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises.



   a.   Intent. Within the districts established by this ordinance or
amendments that may later be adopted there exist:



      1.   Lots;



      2.   Structures;



      3.   Uses of land and structures;



which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit
these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival.



      Non-conforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is the intent
of this ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded
or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses
prohibited elsewhere in the same district. A non-conforming use of a
structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a non-conforming use of structure
and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of
this ordinance by attachment to a building or premises of additional signs
intended to be seen from off the premises.



      To avoid undue hardship nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed
to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which
actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual
construction is defined to include the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be
deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on
diligently.



   b.   Non-Conforming Lots of Record. In any district in which
single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, subject only to
the limitations set forth in Section 10-130, paragraph c, footnote 3. Such
lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other
lots in the same ownership at the time of adoption of this ordinance. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for
area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district,
provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to
area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located as set forth in this ordinance.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



      If two (2) or more lots or combination of lots and portions of
lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time
of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of
this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a
manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made
which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this
ordinance.



   c.   Non-Conforming Uses of Land (Or Land with Minor Structures
Only). Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land
exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a
replacement cost exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), the
use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:



      1.   No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or
increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.



      2.   No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in
part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.



      3.   If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any
reason for a period of more than six (6) consecutive months or for eighteen
(18) months during any three-year period, (except when government action
prohibit access to the land) the land shall not thereafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.



      4.   No additional structure not conforming to the
requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such
non-conforming use of land.



   d.   Non-Conforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not
be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on use,
area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other
requirements concerning the structure as set forth in the district
regulations, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:



      1.   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged,
remodeled, or altered in a way which increases its non-conformity, but any
structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.



      2.   Should such nonconforming structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost
at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance.



      3.   Should such structure be moved for any distance whatever,
it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district which it is
located after it is moved.



      4.   Should such non-conforming structure be remodeled to the
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time
of remodeling, it shall not be remodeled except in conformity with the
provisions of this ordinance. The cost of remodeling shall be deemed to be
cumulative and each successive remodeling shall be added to the cost of prior
remodeling undertaken subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance.



   e.   Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and Premises in Combination.
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or more, or of structure and
premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under
the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:



      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by
this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located.



      2.   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any
parts of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.



      3.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in
or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the non-
conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.



      4.   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure
and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6)
consecutive months or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period
(except when government action prohibits access to the premises), the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.



      5.   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure
and premises in combination, removal, or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the non-conforming status of the land.  Destruction for the
purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost at the time of destruction.



      6.   If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe due to lack of
repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the Building Commissioner to be
unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition in accordance with the
provisions of I.C., 1971, § 36-7-9-1, et seq., and is either remodeled to an
extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost or is
required to be destroyed, it shall not be remodeled, restored, repaired, or
rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it
is located.



      Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official.



   f.   Uses Under Special Exception Provisions Not Non-Conforming
Uses. Any use which is permitted as a special exception or use variance in a
district under the terms of this ordinance shall not be deemed a non-
conforming use in such district, but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-125  Protection of Shoreland, Watercourses and Wetlands.



   a.   General.



      1.   The purpose of this section is to prevent and control
water pollution; protect spawning grounds, fish and aquatic life, and to
preserve shore cover and natural beauty.



      2.   All lakes, ponds, or flowages of one (1) acre or more
shall be considered as navigable for the purposes of this ordinance.



      3.   Rivers or streams shall be considered navigable for the
purpose of this ordinance if they are indicated as “continuous” on the
United States Geological Quadrangle Survey Maps.



      4.   The provisions of this section shall apply to the
shorelands of all navigable waters.



   b.   Setbacks From The Water.



      1.   For lots that abut on navigable waters all buildings and
structures except piers, marinas, boat houses and similar uses which require
a lesser setback as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall be set
back at least one hundred (100) feet from the high water line and elevated at
least two (2) feet above the experienced high water elevation.



      2.   Seepage, pits, and soil absorption fields shall be set
back at least fifty (50) feet from the normal high water elevation. The town
engineer shall determine the normal high water elevation or line where not
established by the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps.  Furthermore, it shall
be the duty of the town engineer to determine that the design, location and
construction of private sewage disposal facilities are in conformation with
applicable state and municipal codes.



   c.   Filling, Grading and Lagooning.



      1.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required for
any filling or grading:



         a.   Of the bed of a navigable body of water.



         b.   Of an area which is within three hundred (300) feet
horizontal distance of a stream, lake or pond and twelve thousand (12,000)
feet of a lake and which has surface drainage toward the water and which
there is filling of more than five hundred (500) square feet of any wetland
which is contiguous to the water. For purposes of this section a wetland
shall be defined as any area where groundwater is at or near the surface a
substantial part of the year.



         c.   On slopes of twenty percent (20%) or more.



         d.   Of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet on
slopes of twelve (12%) - twenty (20%) percent.



         e.   Of more than two thousand (2,000) square feet on
slopes of 12 percent (12%) or less.



      2.   A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be required
before constructing, or commencing work on any artificial water, canal ditch,
lagoon, pond, lake or similar waterway which is within five hundred (500)
feet of the high water mark of a navigable body of water or where the purpose
is ultimate connection conservation practices such as terraces, diversions
and grassed waterways which are used for sediment retardation.



      3.   In the event any lake, pond, stream, flowage,
watercourse, or wetland shall be under the jurisdiction of any state, county,
or federal agency, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator an
appropriate permit or approval from such agency as a condition of securing a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance.



      4.   In granting a Certificate of Zoning Compliance for
filling, grading, or lagooning the Zoning Administrator may attach the
following conditions in addition to those specified elsewhere in this
ordinance:



         a.   The smallest amount of bare ground be exposed for
the shortest time feasible.



         b.   Temporary ground cover such as mulch be used and
permanent cover such as sod be planted.



         c.   Diversions, silting basins, terraces and other
methods to trap sediment be used.



         d.   Dredging to a firm bottom before filling.



         e.   Dredging be conducted in such a manner as to avoid
creation of fish trap conditions.



         f.   Fill is stabilized according to accepted
engineering standards.



         g.   Fill will not restrict a floodway or destroy the
storage capacity of a flood plain.



         h.   Walls of a channel or artificial watercourse be
stabilized to prevent slumping.



         i.   Sides of channels or artificial watercourses be
constructed with side slopes of four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical or
flatter, unless vertical bulkheading is provided or side slope stabilization
is provided to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-126  Excavations.



   a.   The excavations from or deposits on the earth of rock, stone,
gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or constriction materials shall
not be construed to be a permitted use in any district established by this
ordinance unless and until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall first
have been secured therefor, except for the following defined extractions and
deposits.



      1.   Excavations for the foundation or basement of any
building or for a swimming pool for which a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
and a building permit have been issued, or deposits on the earth of any
building or construction materials to be used in a structure for which such
zoning permit and building permit have been issued.



      2.   Grading of any parcel of land for a permitted use where
no bank is left standing and exposed of more than ten (10) feet in vertical
height and when less than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of earth is
removed from the premises.



      3.   Grading in a subdivision which has been approved by the
Plan Commission in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance and amendments
thereto.



      4.   Excavations by any public agency or public utility,
including the Town of Dyer, for the installation, operation, inspection,
repair or replacement of any of its facilities.



   b.   Any quarry existing and operational as such on the effective
date of this ordinance shall obtain a new use permit and conform with the
provisions of this ordinance within one (1) year of the adoption of this
ordinance.



   c.   Only the Plan Commission shall have the power to grant a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance, revocable and valid for specified periods
of time, to permit extractions from or deposits on the earth of rock, stone,
gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or construction materials, as set
forth herein above.



   d.   The Zoning Administrator shall make such inspections as he
deems necessary or as are required by the Plan Commission to ensure that all
work is in accordance with the Certificate of Zoning Compliance. All
inspection services shall be paid for by the applicant in the amount
established by ordinance. The following information shall be submitted in
electronic format with the application for a Certificate of Zoning Compliance
for excavation operations including borrow pits, topsoil removal, and storage
areas:



      1.   A map of existing conditions showing the lands proposed
to be included in the excavation area and the lands within one thousand
(1,000) feet on in all directions. This map shall show the boundaries of the
excavation area and existing conditions on the mapped lands including:



         a.   Existing contours (with a contour interval
appropriate to the site which accurately reflects the topographic condition);



         b.   Water bodies and drainage courses - depth of water
table below existing terrain;



         c.   Estimate of depth and extent of deposit;



         d.   The present use of adjoining lands (residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, agricultural, etc.);



         e.   The present zoning classification of subject and
adjoining lands and setback requirements;



         f.   All publicly owned lands;



         g.   Public rights-of-way road types,



      h.   Easements and railroad lines.



   2.   A plan of operational areas showing:



         a.   Area proposed for excavation;



         b.   Area proposed for setting ponds and wash water
outlets;



         c.   Areas proposed for processing facilities and
storage;



         d.   Area proposed for production facilities (if any)
for resources related industry;



         e.   Area proposed for excavation entrance, office
dispatcher headquarters, off-street parking, and equipment storage.



      3.   A plan of excavation showing:



         a.   Division of the area proposed for excavation into
one (1) or more excavation units which are to be excavated and rehabilitated
in sequences. Estimated dates for the rehabilitation of the excavation units
should be given;



         b.   Methods to be used to minimize the effect of
erosion by wind and water on the entire tract, such as the planting of ground
cover vegetation;



         c.   Methods of screening the area of operations from
view, such as planting screens or the use of earth mounds;



         d.   The access or haul road system.



      4.   A conceptual plan of development for the rehabilitation
and re-use of the entire excavation area following excavation showing:



         a.   A proposed plan for landscape rehabilitation
including grading, drainage, planting, and similar appropriate installations;



         b.   The proposed water area (if any) resulting from
excavation;



         c.   A proposed plan of functural re-use of the total
excavation area showing, diagrammatically, future locations of residential,
commercial, industrial, public, semi-public, and other land uses, if any, and
the principal elements of a future traffic circulation of system to service
the area. Sufficient characteristics of proposed development such as
population density ranges, types of commercial or industrial usage, and kinds
of public areas.



      5.   A bond with surety satisfactory to the Council in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per acre of area proposed to be
excavated which shall run to the Town Council to insure the satisfactory
completion of the landscape rehabilitation shown in the plan of development
following the excavation process.



         The excavation area will be used primarily for the
excavation of sand, gravel, stock, and other earth material and the
processing, storage, stockpiling, distribution, and sale thereof.



         The following uses may be permitted when they are
determined to be functionally beneficial to the excavation activity
appropriate to the location and environs and not detrimental to adjoining
lands:



         a.   Concrete batching plants;



         b.   Mixing plants for either portland cement or asphalt
concrete;



         c.   Concrete block, pipe, beam, slab, or panel plants.



Other excavation area requirements:



   1.   Slopes. No production from an open pit shall be permitted which
creates a finished slope steeper than one and one-half (1½) feet horizontal
to one (1) foot vertical for the excavation of sand and gravel, or which
creates a finished slope steeper than one (1) foot horizontal to one (1) foot
vertical for the excavation of products other than sand, except that in
locations where the soil or rock content is such that vertical cuts are
proven to be safe, a vertical cut up to eight (8) feet in depth from ground
level with a shelf no less than twelve (12) feet wide followed by a vertical
cut thereafter of any depth shall be allowed.



   2.   Fencing. Prior to the commencement of any operations in an
excavation area or part thereof located within five hundred (500) feet of a
developed residential area, public park, or other institution or public
highway, a fence shall be constructed enclosing the excavation area or part
within that prescribed distance. Shops, garages, warehouses, storage areas,
offices, dwelling units and other areas which have not been excavated and are
not used by the excavation area, need not be fenced. Said fence shall be of
woven wire, not capable of receiving a child's foot and be at least four (4)
feet in height, or a planting of shrubs capable of producing a tight,
practically impenetrable hedge (i.e., multi-flora rose). The bottom of the
fence shall conform to the ground surface so as to prevent any opening
between it and the ground surface exceeding four (4) inches. Gates of the
same height as the fence shall be installed at all points of vehicular or
pedestrian ingress and egress. Said gates shall be equipped with keyed locks
and shall be kept locked at all times when the excavation area operations are
shut down. Said fence, gates, and locks shall be maintained in good condition.



   3.   Hours of Operation.  Excavation and material processing
activities permitted in the excavation area shall be limited to the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. (in keeping with Section 6-59), except in the
following situations:



         a.   Where required by public authorities;



         b.   Where work requires a continuous flow of materials;



         c.   Where necessary due to public emergencies;



         d.   Where any necessary and reasonable repairs to
equipment are required.



   4.   Ingress, Egress and Traffic Safety.  Access roads to any
excavation area shall be limited to one (1), or at most two (2) points and
shall be constructed on a level with the pavement of any public street or
highway for a distance of not less than eighty (80) feet therefrom, and said
eighty (80) feet of road shall be improved with a dust proof all weather
surface. Adequate sight distance shall be maintained for traffic safety in
compliance with the standards and requirements of the local highway
authorities.



   5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for
all equipment and for cars of employees.



   6.   Screens. Screen planting consisting of a variety of trees,
shrubs, or both in the same planting area, or a combination of seeded earth
mounds and plant material screens shall be constructed and planted so as to
form dense screens to a height appropriate to block out objectional features
and maintained along the perimeter of any area being operated where said
perimeter abuts a public thoroughfare or a developed residential area.



   7.   Drainage. Upon the completion of operations, the land shall be
left in a safe condition so that sufficient drainage shall be provided so as
to prevent water pockets or undue erosion, with all grading and drainage such
that both natural storm water leaves the entire property at the original,
natural drainage points and that the area drainage to any one (1) such point
is not increased.



   8.   Excavations made to water producing depths and proposed as
water areas in the plan of development must comply  with section 905.0 of
the Book of Standards.



   9.   The rehabilitation of the excavation shall be in conformance
with the plan of development submitted with the application.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-127  Private Swimming Pools.



   a.   A private swimming pool, as regulated herein, shall be any
pool, or open tank, not located within a completely enclosed building and
containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point
greater than one and one half (1½) feet. No such swimming pool shall be
allowed in any residence or rural development district except as an accessory
use and unless it complies with the following conditions and requirements.



      1.   The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it
is located.



      2.   It may not be located closer than ten percent (10%) of
the lot width as measured at the front building line to any property line of
the property in which it is located and under no circumstances may be located
within a required side yard.



      3.   The swimming pool or the entire property on which it is
located, shall be so walled or fenced (minimum height of five (5) feet and a
maximum height of six (6) feet) as to prevent uncontrolled access to the pool
by children from the street or from adjacent properties and shall provide a
drainage system which will dispose of the water without runoff onto adjacent
properties.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-128  Temporary Tract Offices.



   a.   Temporary tract office in any district shall be located on the
property to which it is appurtenant and shall be limited to a twelve (12)
month period at the expiration of which time the applicant may request a
further extension of time. Otherwise the tract office shall be removed at the
expense of the owner, subject to the following limitations:



      1.   The applicant shall secure a Certificate of Zoning
Compliance from the Zoning Administrator which shall be valid for a period of
time not to exceed one (1) year.



      2.   The Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be renewed
annually.



      3.   The property on which the temporary tract office is
located must be an active construction site.



      4.   The applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with Section
7-60 for each original issuance and renewal.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-129  Filling Stations.



   Construction of filling stations shall comply with state and federal
regulations.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-130  Schedule of Zoning Districts Adopted.



   District regulations shall be as follows in the Schedule of Zoning
Districts and in Section 10-131 of this ordinance, entitled “Supplementary
District Regulations”.



   a.   Zoning Districts. The following Zoning Districts are
established:



      1.   Residential Districts:



         a.   RD Rural Development District.



         b.   R-1 Residential Single-Family (Low Density).



         c.   R-2 Residential Single-Family (Medium Density).



         d.   R-3 Residential Duplex.



         e.   R-4 Residential Multi-Family District.



         f.   R-5M Mobile Home District.



      2.   Commercial Districts:



         a.   B-1 Convenience Commercial District.



         b.   B-2 General Commercial District.



         c.   B-3 Highway Commercial District.



      3.   Light Industrial District (I).



      4.   Residential/Business (R/B).



      5.   Planned Unit Development (PUD).



      6.   Special Use District (SUD).



   b.   General Description of Zoning Districts.



      1.   Residential Districts.



         a.   RD - Rural Development. This district provides a
holding zone for areas that may be required for future urban development.
These areas will be rezoned in accordance with the use designation appearing
on the master plan map where logical extension of utilities and facilities
can be insured. This district will also provide for a continuation of the
development of large-lot rural subdivisions served by on-site water supply
and sewage disposal systems.



         b.   R-1 Residential, Single-Family, Low-Density. This
district provides for existing and developing larger lot developments for
families wishing a lower density, more open living environment.



         c.   R-2 Residential, Single-Family, Medium Density.
This district accommodates single- family development on smaller lots to
provide for a variety in single-family residential living conditions.



         d.   R-3  Residential Duplex. This district provides
for modern medium density development.



         e.   R-4 Residential, Multi-Family. This district
provides for areas for high-density, multi- family development, exclusive of
areas developed as Planned Unit Developments.



         f.   R-5M Residential, Mobile Home District. This
district provides for the development of mobile home districts.



      2.   Commercial Districts.



         a.   B-1 Convenience Commercial. This district provides
for minor shopping areas at the edges of residential neighborhoods to provide
for the day-to-day needs for goods and services. These uses should not be of
the type or magnitude to compete directly with the uses found in the B-2
District or B-3 District. Appropriate areas should be zoned for B-1 uses only
after the new residential neighborhoods proposed on the master plan becomes
substantially developed.



         b.   B-2 General Commercial. This district provides for
the development of a central commercial center to accommodate the principal
business and shopping functions in the municipality.



         c.   B-3 Highway Commercial. This district provides
appropriate areas for highway-oriented commercial uses and those requiring
large lots for off-street parking and outdoor display or storage of
merchandise.



      3.   I Light Industrial. This district reserves lands in
appropriate locations for development of light industry.



      4.   R/B Residential Business.  This district allows for the
development of land as a combination of single family residential and
commercial use on lots of one (1) acre or more.



      5.   PUD - Planned Unit Development. This district provides
for flexibility in future community needs, in keeping abreast of new building
methods, to provide for the planning of groups of dwellings, to secure the
benefit of solar orientation, climate control, and additional privacy, and to
provide for variety in dwelling types to meet changing needs of future
residences; for commercial buildings and groups thereof to secure greater
convenience to the public through improved methods of merchandising,
transportation, office management, and distribution of services necessary to
the public welfare; for industrial buildings and groups thereof to secure
greater efficiency in production through improved methods of manufacturing,
transportation, office management, and distribution of products necessary to
the public welfare.  The PUD may necessitate the variation in the use and
area requirements of this ordinance which are designed primarily to apply to
the traditional pattern of lot development and building arrangement generally
prevailing within the Town.



      6.   SUD Special Use District.  A zoning district in which
the development of lots shall be according to a plan, and in which
development and/or improvements may not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
structure, density, lot coverage or required open space to the regulations
otherwise required by the building, subdivision and zoning ordinances.



   c.   Schedule of District Regulations. It shall be unlawful to erect
or alter any building unless the following minimum lot, yard areas and bulk
controls are provided and maintained in connection with such building.



 

District Yd.
 
Min. Area (sq. ft.)
 
Max. Bldg. Hgt.  (ft.)
 
Min. Lot Depth
 
Min. Lot Width (ft.)
 
Min. Front. Yd. Setback (ft.)1
 
Min. Rear Yd. Setback (ft.)
 
Min. Side Yd. Setback (per side)2


Interior (ft.)
 
Corner (ft.)




RD
 
87,120
 
35
 
200
 
240
 
401, 12
 
3510
 
50
 
60


R-1
 
15,0003
 
35
 
150
 
100
 
401, 12
 
304, 10
 
15
 
40


R-2
 
12,0003
 
35
 
150
 
80
 
301, 12
 
304, 10
 
08
 
30


R-3
 
16,5003, 7
 
35
 
150
 
110
 
3012
 
3010
 
08
 
30


R-45
 
20,0003 ,7
 
40
 
150
 
120
 
301, 12
 
204, 10
 
10
 
30


R-5M
 
12,000
 
20
 
150
 
80
 
3012
 
3010
 
15
 
30


B-1
 
15,000
 
30
 
NA
 
90
 
306
 
206
 
206
 
306


B-2
 
15,000
 
40
 
NA
 
90
 
306
 
206
 
076
 
306


B-3
 
21,780
 
40
 
NA
 
90
 
456
 
206
 
206
 
456


I
 
21,780
 
40
 
NA
 
90
 
208
 
208
 
10
 
208


RB
 
43,560
 
40
 
150
 
200
 
40
 
35
 
20
 
40


PUD9
 
80%
 
12
 
80%
 
80%
 
80%
 
80%
 
11
 
11


SUD13
 
Varies
 
Varies
 
NA
 
Varies
 
Varies
 
Varies
 
Varies
 
Varies




 



   1   Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different
from those required, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average
setback of such structures, but in no case shall the front yard setback be
less than twenty (20) feet.



   2   Buildings over two (2) stories in height shall require five (5)
feet of additional side yard on each side for each additional story in
addition to the required minimum side yard.



   3   A one-family dwelling may be erected on a lot having less than
the minimum required area and width provided the lot existed by virtue of a
recorded plat or deed at the time of passage of this ordinance; however, in
no event shall a one-family dwelling be erected on a lot less than four
thousand (4,000) square feet in area or less than forty (40) feet in width.
Such a lot shall be in separate ownership from abutting lands. If abutting
land and the substandard lot are owned by the same owner, the substandard lot
shall not be sold or used without full compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance.



   4   See Section 10-120v.



   5   Multi-family dwellings must also comply with the land use
intensity standards as found in Section 10-131e.



   6   May be used for parking development.



   7   For single-family uses the lot and area requirements of the R-2
District shall apply.



   8   Must be landscaped, no vehicle parking.



   9   Five (5) acres single family; two (2) acres multi-family; five
(5) acres non-residential; see Section 10-131m for further details.



   10   A rear yard deck shall be permitted to extend into the required
rear yard setback fifty percent (50%) of the required rear yard depth,
provided however that any portion of said deck that extends into the required
rear yard setback shall not be allowed to be, or become, enclosed or roofed
in any manner.



   11   Maximum building height shall be the same as that of the most
comparable district in terms of zoning and use.



   12   A front yard deck shall be permitted to extend into the
required front yard setback up to seven and one-half (7.5) feet or a distance
not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the required front yard setback,
whichever is less, provided however that any portion of said deck that
extends into the front yard setback area shall not be allowed to be or become
enclosed or roofed in any manner. Further, any front yard decks constructed
in accordance with this footnote shall not be used to determine the average
front yard setback of adjacent structures referred to in Section 10-130(c)
footnote 1. Front yard decks that contain access ramps for purposes of
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and/or other handicap
access reasons are exempt from the provisions of this section.



   13   Refer to Chapter 10, Article 4, Division II for development
standards in designated Special Use Districts.



   d.   Miscellaneous Regulations.



      1.   Visibility at Intersections in Residential District. On a
corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected, placed,
planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision
between a height of two and one-half (2½) and ten (10) feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lots and a line joining points along said street
lines thirty (30) feet from the point of intersection.



      2.   Fences and Walls. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this ordinance, fences and walls shall not be permitted in any required front
yard, or along the edge of any front yard, except by special permit issued by
the Zoning Administrator. Prior to issuing any such front yard fence permit,
the Zoning Administrator shall find that the proposed fence or wall is for
decorative purposes only, will not obstruct clear vision, and will not be
constructed and situated in such a way as to create a safety hazard. (Also
see Section 10-175)



      3.   Accessory Buildings in Residential Zoning Districts.



         a.   This section applies only to residential zoning
districts.



         b.   No accessory building shall be erected in any
required front or side yard, and no separate accessory building shall be
erected within five (5) feet of any other building or prior to erection of
principal building.  Further, storage sheds shall be limited to one hundred
sixty-eight (168) square feet in area and twelve (12) feet in height. 
Additionally, there shall be no more than one (1) type of accessory building
per lot; except, provided, however, where the lot is in excess of forty
thousand (40,000) square feet, an additional accessory building of each type
may be allowed.  The additional storage shed shall also be limited to one
hundred sixty- eight (168) square feet and twelve (12) feet in height except
that storage sheds can be combined as one (1) building so long as the total
square footage does not exceed three hundred thirty-six (336) square feet.



      4.   Exceptions to Height Regulations. The height limitations
contained in the Schedule of District Regulations do not apply to spires,
belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy.



      5.   Structures to Have Access. Every building hereafter
erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public or private street,
and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street
parking.



      6.   Parking, Storage, or Use of Major Recreational Equipment
and, Commercial Equipment and Vehicles Used for Commercial Purposes. 



         a.   Definitions.



            1.   Commercial Equipment.   Any motor vehicle or
accessory equipment which meets any of the following conditions:



               a.   Any trailer that is not specifically
designed to tow or haul a recreational vehicle such as a boat, snowmobile, or
jet ski.



               b.   Any vehicle having more than six (6)
wheels.



               c.   Any vehicle having a declared weight of
nine thousand (9,000) pounds or more.



               d.   Any vehicle equipped with a hoisting
device, or dump body;



            2.   Commercial Purposes. Operation for
professional or business purposes.



            3.   Front Yard.  That portion of a yard between
the front property line of a parcel of real estate or a lot and a front of a
building located on said parcel of real estate or lot as measured from side
lot line to side lot line.



            4.   Major Recreational Equipment. Boats, boat
trailers, travel trailers, or pick-up campers designed to be mounted on
automotive vehicles, and tent trailers, including motor homes that are self-
propelled.



            5.   Minimum Side Yard.  That area identified in
the various districts in Section 10-130c., Schedule of District Regulations
which lies between the side lot line and a building located on a parcel of
real estate or lot as measured from the front of the building to the rear of
the building.



            6.   Rear Yard.  That portion of a yard between
the rear property line of a parcel of real estate or a lot and the rear of a
building located on said parcel of real estate or lot as measured from side
lot line to side lot line.



         b.   No major recreational equipment shall be parked or
stored in any minimum side yard.  Major recreational equipment may be parked
only in a rear yard or a front yard or in a side yard that is other than a
minimum side yard, on an asphalt or concrete surface or masonry surface
comprised of paving bricks.  If the major recreational equipment is parked
to the rear of the building on a parcel of real estate or lot, it must comply
with the  side yard setback restriction in its zoning district insofar as
the setback from side and rear property lines are concerned.  Major
recreational equipment shall not be allowed to extend over any sidewalk or to
be parked on any street or right-of-way except that such equipment shall be
allowed to be parked on any street or right-of-way for up to forty-eight (48)
hours during loading or unloading of such equipment subject to any general
parking restrictions on streets or rights-of-way for up to forty-eight (48)
hours during loading or unloading of such equipment subject to any general
parking restrictions on streets or rights-of-way in the community.



         c.   Major recreational equipment shall not be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on any
residential lot or in any location not approved for such use.



         d.   It shall be unlawful to park, use or store
commercial equipment in any residential zone other than during the course of
a construction, repair or maintenance project unless the equipment is parked
within an enclosed structure or is parked temporarily for a period of not
more than forty-eight (48) hours for incidental purposes.  When such
equipment is parked temporarily for incidental purposes, it shall be parked
on an asphalt, or concrete surface or masonry surface comprised of paving
bricks.  This regulation (Section 10-130d.6.d.) shall not apply to
residential lots in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.



         e.   There shall be a maximum of three (3) vehicles not
meeting the definition of commercial equipment used for commercial purposes
per household.



      7.   Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles.  Automotive
vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall
not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property other than in
completely enclosed buildings.



      8.   Metal and Post Building Construction.  All commercial,
industrial and other non-single or duplex family home principal use buildings
within 350 feet of U.S. 30 (Joliet St.), Sheffield Avenue (Hart St.), 81st
Avenue, and Calumet Avenue shall be constructed as follows:



         A.   Primary Building Materials:



            1.   A primary building material shall be defined
as the material used on a facade of a building. The facade of a building
shall be defined as the portion of any exterior elevation that begins at
grade, the top of a foundation wall or at the base of the facade and extends
to the top of the parapet, wall, or eaves and for the entire width of the
building elevation. More than one (1) primary building material may be used
on any one (1) facade. A parapet shall be declared to be part of the building
facade and shall be defined as that portion of a wall that extends above the
roof line of the building.



            2.   Primary exterior materials shall be
sustainable materials, including brick, wood clapboard, fiber cement board,
stone, cultured stone, glass and/or other materials similar in appearance and
durability with the approval of the Dyer Plan Commission during the site plan
review and approval process.  Brick, stone, cultured stone or decorative
masonry units shall not be painted unless approved.



            3.   EIFS shall not be permitted as a primary
exterior building material nor shall it be considered as a masonry product.



         B.   Secondary and Accent Materials:



            1.   In addition to approved primary wall
materials, tinted, textured or glazed decorative concrete masonry units,
shingles, EIFS, stucco, parging and other materials may be used on facades as
an accent or secondary material only, with the approval of the Dyer Plan
Commission during the site plan review and approval process. Further, such
accent material shall not comprise more than twenty percent (20%) of any
building facade.



         C.   Prohibited Materials:  Unfinished concrete block
is prohibited in all applications.



            1.   Glass block except as a specific and
definable architectural element is prohibited on any facade abutting a
street. Glass block may not he used in lieu of windows or to replace windows.



            2.    Aluminum and vinyl siding products are
prohibited on any facade.



            3.   Aluminum or vinyl soffits, fascias or trim
are prohibited.



         D.   Material Configuration:



            1.   Where two (2) or more approved wall materials
are used on any facade, they shall be combined horizontally on that facade.
The heavier material shall be located along the base.



         E.   Roof Materials:



            1.   Pitched roofs should be clad in wood
shingles, standing seam metal, slate, dimensional asphalt shingles or similar
material.



            2.   Flat roofs shall be any material approved for
a flat roof application.



         F.   Foundation Construction and Materials:



            1.   All foundations shall be constructed with a
continuous footing and foundation wall to a depth as required by state and
local code.



            2.   Concrete pads and concrete grade beams may be
used where soils prohibit the use of a continuous footing.



            3.   Exposed foundation walls (except those under
porches) shall be finished with brick, stone, or cultured stone. The
crawlspace of porches shall be enclosed with brick, stone, cultured stone, or
wood lattice, or any combination thereof.



         Additionally all exposed roof on such principal use
buildings shall be asphalt shingles or a metal roof which metal roof shall be
architecturally approved by the Plan Commission during the site plan review
and approval process.



         When a building is a secondary use and is located within
three hundred fifty (350) feet of above- named streets, said building shall
be faced with brick or other products as defined above on the elevations
which are facing said streets, and the exposed roof shall be asphalt shingles
or a metal roof approved by the Plan Commission in the manner described above.



      9.   Site plan review shall be required in all commercial
zoning and Special Use Districts in accordance with I.C., 36-7-4-1400 - 1406,
inclusive, as outlined hereafter:



         a.   At any time a property owner seeks to apply for
approval to begin new construction or to modify an existing structure such
that it results in either an increase or decrease of total square footage of
the structure of twenty-five percent (25%) or more in a geographic area zoned
or to be zoned as B-1, B-2, B-3, I, SUD, or R/B, the property
owner/petitioner shall prepare a preliminary development plan for submission
to the Plan Commission.



         b.   To initiate the procedure for review and approval
of a preliminary development plan, the property owner/petitioner shall submit
the proposed plan to the Zoning Administrator. The initial submission shall:



            1.   Be made on forms available at the office of
the Zoning Administrator and be submitted with the fee as set forth in
Section 10-119.



            2.   Be accompanied by ten (10) copies of the
proposed preliminary development plan.



            3.   Be accompanied by documentation indicating
proof of an ownership interest in the subject property, such as but not
limited to, a deed, purchase contract, or a power of attorney, for review by
the Commission's attorney.



         c.   The procedure for review and approval of the
preliminary development plan shall be as follows:



            1.   Petitioner shall attend a staff meeting as
scheduled by the Zoning Administrator. Such staff meeting shall be at least
ten (10) days prior to the regularly scheduled Plan Commission Study Session
at which the project is to be discussed. Petitioner shall submit a proposed
preliminary development plan (10 copies) to the Zoning Administrator at least
ten (10) days prior to the staff meeting. Subsequent to the staff meeting,
petitioner shall attend a Plan Commission Study Session, as scheduled by the
Zoning Administrator. At that study session, the petitioner shall provide
sufficient individual copies of their proposed plan for all members of the
Plan Commission, and a copy in a compatible electronic format for viewing.
The petitioner will briefly describe their plan and receive feedback from the
Commission and staff.



            2.   Petitioner shall appear before the Plan
Commission at a public meeting to describe and present the preliminary
concepts, uses and intent of the proposed preliminary development plan. After
confirming that all items of the initial submission are in order, the Plan
Commission shall place the proposal on the agenda of their next public
meeting and refer the petitioner to the Site Plan Review Committee. The Site
Plan Review Committee shall be a committee of the Plan Commission and shall
be composed of a member of the Plan Commission, the Town Engineer, the Zoning
Administrator and a Site Plan Review Consultant appointed by the Plan
Commission. In addition, the Plan Commission may utilize and hire any
additional engineers or consultants, as needed, in order to assist the Site
Plan Review Committee in the performance of their duties. After review, the
Site Plan Committee shall take one (1) of the following actions:



               (a)   Recommendation to Plan Commission for
approval;



               (b)   Recommendation to Plan Commission for
denial;



               (c)   Recommendation to submit additional
information for review; or



               (d)   Recommendation to Plan Commission for
approval with modifications.



The petitioner may appeal a decision of the Site Plan Review Committee to the
Plan Commission.



            3.   Following review by the Site Plan Review
Committee, petitioner shall appear at a regular or special Plan Commission
meeting to describe and present the final concepts, uses and intent of the
proposed plan for consideration. After review, the Plan Commission shall take
one (1) of the following actions:



               (a)   Approval;



               (b)   Denial;



               (c)   Carry over for further consideration
at the next regularly scheduled meeting;



               (d)   Request the petitioner to submit
additional information for review either by the Plan Commission or the Site
Plan Review Committee; or



               (e)   Approval with modifications.



         d.   All remedies available to the Plan Commission shall
be the same as those contained in Section 10-102 of the Dyer Subdivision
Control Ordinance. The review fee shall be that as set forth in Section
10-119 for Site Plan Review.



         e.   The preliminary development plan shall include both
a map and written text and drawings in an electronic form containing the
following information. The drawing format must be in either the current or
previous version of the AutoDesk AutoCAD software. The submittal shall be
provided to the Town in a standard form of magnetic or optical media that is
readable by the Town information systems. Alternate drawing formats or means
of submittal may be accepted upon prior approval from the Town.



            1.   Elevation and perspective drawing or model of
proposed structures.



            2.   A development schedule indicating:



               (a)   The approximate date for beginning
construction.



               (b)   If staged, the approximate date for
beginning construction of each stage.



               (c)   Agreements, provisions or covenants
which govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the development
and common space.



               (d)   Plans and diagrams as required to
fully explain the development proposal.



            3.   Petitioner shall designate each lot's
intensity of use on the plan.



            4.   A detailed, written review of the following
factors relevant to the development:



               (a)   Availability and coordination of
water, sanitary sewers, storm water drainage, and other utilities.



               (b)   Management of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in a manner that creates conditions favorable to health, safety,
convenience, and the harmonious development of the community.



               (c)   Building setback lines.



               (d)   Building coverage.



               (e)   Building separation.



               (f)   Parking.



               (g)   Landscaping.



               (h)   Height, scale, materials and style of
improvements.



               (i)   Signage.



               (j)   Outdoor lighting.



               (k)   Noise.



            5.   The development factors specified in number
4(a) above, concerning the availability and coordination of water, sanitary
sewers, storm water drainage and other utilities shall be in full compliance
with the Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Dyer Book of Standards, as may
be amended from time to time.



            6.   The development factors specified in number
4(b) above, concerning the management of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
shall ensure the following:



               (a)   That the design and location of
proposed street and highway access points minimize safety hazards and
congestion.



               (b)   That the capacity of adjacent streets
and highways is sufficient to safely and efficiently accept traffic that will
be generated by the new development.



               (c)   That the entrances, streets, and
internal traffic circulation facilities in the development plan are
compatible with existing and planned streets and adjacent developments.



            7.   Except in a Special Use District, the
development factors specified in number 4(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), and
(i) concerning building setback lines, building coverage, building
separation, parking, landscaping, height and materials, and signage shall be
in full compliance with the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance,
as may be amended from time to time. Additionally, with regard to 4(h), knox
boxes shall be required to be installed on businesses that are not occupied
twenty-four (24) hours a day.



            8.   Except in a Special Use District, the
development factors specified in number 4(j) above concerning outdoor
lighting shall ensure that lighting shall be reflected inward and shall be
shielded to the extent that no light ascertainable to a standard light meter
held one (1) foot above the ground at the property line shall exceed five (5)
foot candles.



            9.   The development factors specified in number
4(k) concerning noise shall ensure that the development complies with Section
6-59(e).



            10.   When reviewing a site plan located in any
Special Use District, the developmental factors in number 4(c) through (j)
shall be governed by developmental standards established by ordinance for
that specific Special Use District.



            11.   The plan documentation and supporting
information that must be supplied shall include the following:



               (a)   The location and character of the
following:



                  i.   Existing and proposed primary
structures and accessory structures.



                  ii.   Utilities.



                  iii.   Signage.



                  iv.   Landscaping.



               (b)   The nature and intensity of uses in
the development.



               (c)   The condition and size of public
thoroughfares and parking, vehicle, and pedestrian facilities.



               (d)   The location and capacity of drainage
facilities and sewer systems serving the development.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-131  Supplementary District Regulations.



   a.   RD District: Rural Development.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   Single-family dwelling.



         b.   Churches or similar places of worship, parish
house, convent.



         c.   Elementary schools, high schools, and institutions
for higher education, not conducted for profit.



         d.   Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal
recreations used.



         e.   Public libraries and museums.



         f.   Golf courses and country clubs, including such
commercial activities as dining rooms, bars, pro shops, etc., except that any
building so used shall be not less than two hundred (200) feet from any
adjoining property.



         g.   Customary agricultural operations, provided that no
continuing and unreasonable odor or dust producing substance or use shall be
permitted within three hundred (300) feet of any property line.



         h.   Customary home occupations, provided that there
shall be no external evidence of such occupations, except an announcement or
professional sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, provided that no
such sign shall be illuminated.



         i.   Customary accessory uses and buildings including
private garages, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and
do not include any activity commonly conducted for gain. Any accessory
building shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.



      2.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifteen percent (15%) of the
area of lot.



      3.   Building Size. No one-story dwelling shall be erected
having a ground floor liveable area of less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet and no two-story dwelling shall be erected having a
ground floor area of less that one thousand (1,000) square feet. 



   b.   R-1 District: Single-Family Residential District.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   Single-family dwelling.



         b.   Churches or similar places of worship, parish
house, convent.



         c.   Elementary schools, high schools, and institutions
for higher education.



         d.   Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal
recreations used.



         e.   Public libraries and museums.



         f.   Golf courses and country clubs including such
commercial activities as dining rooms, bars, pro shops, and the like, except
that any building so used shall be not less than two hundred (200) feet from
any adjoining property.



         g.   Customary home occupations, provided that there
shall be no external evidence of such occupations, except an announcement or
professional sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, provided that no
such sign shall be illuminated.



         h.   Customary accessory uses and buildings including
private garages, provided such uses are incidental to the principal use and
do not include any activity commonly conducted for gain. Any accessory
building shall be located on the same lot with the principal building.



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the
area of lot.



      4.   Building Size. No one-story dwelling shall be erected
having a ground floor liveable area of less than one thousand four hundred
(1,400) square feet and no two-story dwelling shall be erected having a
ground floor liveable area of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.



      5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for not less than
two (2) vehicles shall be provided in either garages or hard surface
driveways.



   c.   R-2 District: Single-Family Residential District.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



      All uses permitted in the R-1 District, subject to the
regulations set forth therein, except those regulations relating to lot size,
side yard requirements, front and rear yard requirements.



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the
area of the lot.



      4.   Building Size. No one-story dwelling shall be erected
having a ground floor liveable area of less than one thousand one hundred
(1,100) square feet and no two-story dwelling shall be erected having a
ground floor liveable area of less than eight hundred (800) square feet.



      5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for not less than
two (2) vehicles shall be provided in either garages or hard surface
driveways. 



   d.   R-3 District: Residential Duplex.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   All uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.



         b.   Two-family dwellings.



      2.   Utility Requirements.  Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the area
of the lot.  Each unit in this zoning district shall be permitted to cover
up to forty percent (40%) of the portion of the lot that said unit occupies
however in no case shall the total lot coverage exceed forty percent (40%).



      4.   Building Size. No building shall be erected for
two-family purposes having a ground floor liveable area of less than nine
hundred (900) square feet per family.



      5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for not less than
two (2) vehicles shall be provided in either garages or hard surface
driveways. 



      6.   The lot shall be divided according to the number of units
for platting purposes in an effort to assure proper assignment of key
numbers. 



   e.   R-4 District: Multiple-Family Residence District.



      1.   Uses permitted.



         a.   All uses permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts.



         b.   Two-family and multiple-family dwellings.



         c.   Nursing and convalescent homes but excluding
institutions for the insane, feeble minded, drug, or alcohol related
patients, however, that such occupancy shall be by special use permit only.



         d.   Hospital or sanitarium for the treatment of human
ailments, however, that such occupancy shall be by special use permit only.



         e.   Clubs and lodges, except in such clubs or lodges,
the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business
or primarily for gain. In conjunction with such club or lodge a dining room
may be operated provided it is incidental to the activities of said club or
lodge and is conducted for the benefit of the members thereof only, and
further provided no sign is displayed advertising such activity.



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Required Lot Area. No dwelling shall be established on a
lot having an area less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided,
however, that each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of not
less than the following:



         a.   Each unit shall have a minimum of four thousand
(4,000) square feet of green space on the lot or in the development.



            For purposes of this ordinance, the term bedroom,
shall include nursery, den, guest room, maid's room, and other rooms that are
readily converted to bedrooms.



      4.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the area
of the lot.



      5.   Building Size. No building shall be erected for
multiple-family purposes having a ground floor liveable area of less than
nine hundred (900) square feet and no dwelling unit shall contain less
liveable floor area than the following:



         a.   Efficiency - nine hundred (900) square feet.



         b.   One-bedroom - nine hundred (900) square feet.



         c.   Each unit in excess of two (2) bedrooms shall add a
minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per bedroom.



      6.   Required Court Dimensions.



         a.   Outer Courts. An outer court is an open space
enclosed wholly or partially by two (2) or more buildings. The width of any
outer court shall be not less than two-thirds () the height of any opposing
wall forming said court, but not less than ten (10) feet, and the depth shall
not be greater than one and one half (1½) times the width.



         b.   An inner court is an open space circumscribed by a
single building.



            i.   The least dimensions of any inner court shall
be not less than two-thirds () the full height of the walls enclosing such
court, but not less than thirty (30) feet.



            ii.   An open and unobstructed passageway shall,
be provided at the grade level of each inner court. Such passageway shall
have a cross section area and sufficient headroom to permit the passage of
fire fighting personnel and equipment (not including motor vehicles and large
apparatus) and shall be continuous from the inner court to a yard or an
unobstructed open area between buildings.



      7.   Distance Between Buildings on Same Plot. No principal
building shall be closer to any other principal building than the average of
the heights of said buildings, but not less than twenty (20) feet.



      8.   Off-Street Parking. A minimum of two (2) vehicles spaces
for each dwelling unit shall be provided on paved parking areas or in private
garages, which shall be assigned to each dwelling unit.



      9.   Lots shall be divided according to the number of units
for platting purposes in an effort to assure proper assignment of key numbers.



   f.   R-5M District: Mobile Home District.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   Mobile homes.



         b.   Churches or similar places of worship, parish
house, convent.



         c.   Elementary schools, middle schools, high schools,
and institutions for higher education.



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. All buildings including
accessory buildings shall not cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the
area of lot.



      4.   Building Size. No dwelling shall have a ground floor
liveable area less than six hundred (600)



square feet.



      5.   Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking for at least two
(2) vehicles shall be provided on paved driveways.



      6.   The Dyer Plan Commission may also include the imposition
of conditions of use which the Commission deems essential to insure that the
location of an R-5M District is consistent with the spirit, purpose and
intent of this ordinance and will not substantially and permanently injure
the appropriate use of neighboring property, and will substantially serve the
public convenience and welfare.



   g.   B-1 District: Convenience District.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         Apparel stores



         Art and school supplies stores



         Bakeries



         Barber shops



         Beauty shops



         Candy, dairy and ice cream stores



         Churches



         Drug stores



         Dry goods



         Electric and telephone substations by special exception



         Fire stations



         Food stores, including grocery and convenience stores



         Gift shops



         Jewelry stores including watch repairs



         Laundries and dry cleaners automatic self service coin
operated



         Meat markets including the processing and sale of meat and
meat products when conducted



           as part of the retail business



         Municipal facilities and public utilities



         Parks and playgrounds



         Police stations



         Schools (public and private)



         Shoe and hat repair stores



         Stores and shops normally identified as convenience outlets



         Accessory buildings and accessory uses



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Building Height Unit. No building shall be erected to a
height in excess of thirty (30) feet.



      4.   Square Footage Limitation. No single store, shop, office,
or facility may exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.



      5.   Off-Street Parking. See Section 10-132.



      6.   Off-Street Loading. See Section 10-132.



      7.   In any commercial zoning district where a commercial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to  property zoned for
residential use, and in any industrial zoning district where an industrial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
commercial or residential use, an opaque landscape screen, an opaque fence or
screening having a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be provided by the
commercial or industrial development along the lot lines of the adjacent
property. Additionally, there shall be a minimum of a fifteen (15) foot
greenspace between the commercial and residential zoning districts to be
provided by the commercial developer. For the purposes of this section
adjacent property shall mean both adjoining property and property separated
by an alley.  For further requirements, see Section 10-147.7 regarding
bufferyard landscaping requirements.



   h.   B-2 District: General Commercial District.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         All uses permitted in B-1.



         Animal hospitals



         Antique shops



         Art galleries



         Banks



         Bicycle stores, sales, rentals and repairs



         Billiards by special exception



         Blue printing and photocopying establishments



         Book and stationery stores



         Bowling by special exception



         Camera and photography supply stores



         Car washes and auto laundries



         Carpet, linoleum and tile stores



         Caskets and casket supplies



         Cat and dog hospitals not including kennels



         Catalog sales stores



         Catering establishments



         Cemeteries



         China and glassware stores



         Clothing and costume rental shops



         Coin and philatelic stores



         Communication towers, microwave towers, telephone exchanges
including equipment buildings 



         Contractor's and construction offices



         Custom dressmaking and millinery shops



         Dance academy



         Drive-in restaurants



         Electric household appliance, television and radio stores
including repairs



         Employment agency



         Florist shop and conservatories



         Furniture stores



         Furrier shops including storage



         Garden supply and seed stores



         Gymnasiums



         Haberdashery stores



         Hardware stores



         Health centers



         Health food stores



         Hobby stores



         Interior decorating shops



         Job printing shops



         Laboratories - research and testing, including medical and
dental



         Launderettes and dry cleaning establishments using not more
than two (2) clothes cleaning units neither of which shall have a rated
capacity of more than forty (40) pounds using fluid which is non-explosive
and non-flammable



         Leather goods and luggage stores



         Libraries



         Loan offices



         Locksmith shops



         Medical and dental clinics



         Musical instrument stores including repairs



         Office supply stores



         Offices, professional and otherwise, office buildings



         Optician shops



         Orthopedic and medical appliance stores not including
manufacturing of such appliances



         Package liquor stores and taverns by special exception



         Paint and wallpaper stores



         Pawn shops



         Pet stores



         Photograph printing shops



         Photography studios



         Physical culture and health spas, privately owned and
operated, such centers may include gymnastics, reducing salons, karate and
judo studios and the like



         Picture framing stores



         Planned unit development, business



         Post office



         Public museum



         Radio and television broadcasting



         Recreational buildings and community centers



         Restaurants when no entertainment or dancing is provided



         Satellite dish sales establishments



         Schools including music, dance and business



         Sewing machine stores, household machines only



         Shoe and hat repair



         Shoe stores



         Sporting goods stores



         Tailor shops



         Tanning salons



         Taxidermist shop



         Tobacco shops



         Typewriter, adding machine and home computer sales and
service



         Video dating establishments with adequate soundproofing



         Video rental sales/services stores



         Wearing apparel shops



         Accessory buildings and accessory uses



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Building Height Limit.  Forty (40) feet.



      4.   Off-Street Parking.  See Section 10-132.



      5.   Off-Street Loading.  See Section 10-132.



      6.   In any commercial zoning district where a commercial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
residential use, and in any industrial zoning district where an industrial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
commercial or residential use, an opaque landscape screen, an opaque fence or
screening having a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be provided by the
commercial or industrial development along contiguous lot lines of the
adjacent property. Additionally, there shall be a minimum of a fifteen (15)
foot greenspace between commercial and residential zoning districts to be
provided by the commercial developer. For purposes of this section adjacent
property shall mean both adjoining property and property separated by an
alley.  For further requirements, see Section 10-147.7 regarding bufferyard
landscaping requirements.



   i.   B-3 District: Highway Commercial.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         All uses permitted in B-2.



         Those special exception uses allowed in the B-2 District.



         Ambulance services



         Amusement parks



         Automobile accessory stores



         Automobile filling stations



         Automobile service centers



         Boat and motor sales including servicing and repairs



         Building materials sales, w/accessory enclosed (fenced)
storage



         Business establishments with entertainment



         Clubs and lodges, private, fraternal or religious



         Commercial laundry



         Contractor's and construction office excluding the storage
of vehicles and large equipment over



           five thousand (5,000) pounds



         Dog kennels



         Dry cleaning plants



         Extermination shops



         Frozen food locker, exclusive of slaughtering



         Greenhouse



         Hospitals (special exception?)



         Hotel



         Linen, towel, diaper and other similar services



         Live bait stores



         Lumberyards



         Monument sales



         Motel



         Motor vehicle salesroom or lot by special exception



         Night club which shall be defined as a place of
entertainment open at night usually serving food and liquor, having a floor
show and providing music and space for dancing



         Nurseries



         Nursing homes



         Parking lots for motor vehicles



         Personal storage buildings



         Public garage by special exception



         Recording studios with adequate soundproofing



         Restaurants when dancing and entertainment are provided



         Roofing materials sales



         Taverns where live entertainment is not provided



         Theaters (special exception?)



         Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices



         Undertaking establishments and funeral homes



         Upholstery shop



         Accessory buildings and accessory uses



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Building Height Limit.  Forty (40) feet.



      4.   Off-Street Parking.  See Section 10-132.



      5.   Off-Street Loading.  See Section 10-132.



      6.   In any commercial zoning district where a commercial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
residential use, and in any industrial zoning district where an industrial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
commercial or residential use, an opaque landscape screen, an opaque fence or
screening having a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be provided by the
commercial or industrial development along the lot lines of the adjacent
property. Additionally, there shall be a minimum of a fifteen(15) foot green
space between commercial and residential zoning districts to be provided by
the commercial development.  For the purposes of this section, adjacent
property shall mean both adjoining property and property separated by an
alley. For further requirements, see Section 10-147.7 regarding bufferyard
landscaping requirements.



   j.   I District: Industrial District.



      1.   In any commercial zoning district where a commercial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
residential use, and in any industrial zoning district where an industrial
building is to be located on a lot which is adjacent to property zoned for
commercial or residential use, an opaque landscape screen, an opaque fence or
screening having a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be provided by the
commercial or industrial development along the lot lines of the adjacent
property. Additionally, there shall be a minimum of a fifteen (15) foot green
space between industrial and commercial or residential zoning districts to be
provided by the industrial development. For the purposes o f this section,
adjacent property shall mean both adjoining property and property separated
by an alley. For further requirements, see Section 10-147.7 regarding
bufferyard landscaping requirements.



      2.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   The following uses, provided, where they are
established within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence zone boundary
line, they shall be conducted wholly within a building, except for the
off-street loading or delivery vehicles incidental thereto.



            i.   Wholesaling establishments.



            ii.   Creameries and bottling plants.



            iii.   The manufacture, compounding, processing,
packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food
products except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the
rendering or refining of fats and oils.



            iv.   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or
treatment of articles, or merchandise from the following prepared materials;
bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt fiber, fur, glass,
hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or
stones, shell textiles, steel, tobacco, wood, yarns, and paint not employing
a boiling process.



            v.   The manufacture of pottery or figurines or
other similar ceramic products.



            vi.   The manufacture or maintenance of electric
or neon signs, billiards, commercial advertising structures, light sheet
metal products, including heating or ventilating ducts or equipment,
cornices, eaves and the like.



            vii.   The manufacture of musical instruments,
clocks, watches, toys, novelties, and rubber or metal stamps.



            viii.   Automobile assembling, painting,
upholstering, rebuilding, reconditioning, truck repairing, or overhaul, tire
retreading or recapping, battery manufacturing.



            ix.   Assembly of electrical appliances,
electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs, including the
manufacture of small parts only, such as coils, condensers, transformers,
crystal holders.



            x.   Blacksmith shop, manufacture of machine
tools, manufacture of machinery including agricultural electrical machinery
or equipment, office or store machines, equipment or supplies and the like,
machine shop excluding punch presses over one hundred (100) tons rated
capacity and drop hammers.



            xi.   Foundry casting lightweight non-ferrous
metal not causing noxious fumes or odor.



            xii.   Laboratory, experimental, photo motion
picture film or testing.



            xiii.   Retail auto Dealerships with no physical
inventory on the premises. This use is limited to wholesale dealers holding a
valid Town of Dyer business license for the calendar years 2014 and 2015 as
of the date of this ordinance.



         b.   The following uses, provided, where they are within
one hundred fifty (150) feet of a residence zone boundary line, they shall be
conducted wholly within a building or within an area enclosed on all sides
with a solid wall, compact evergreen screen or uniformly painted board fence,
not less than six (6) feet in height, provided, however, that no such use
shall provide for the manufacture, storage, or sale of any material
classified as explosive by the Interstate Commerce Commission, Department of
Transportation, or National Fire Protection Association.



            i.   Building material sales yard, including the
sale of lumber, rock, sand and gravel as an incidental part of the main
business.



            ii.   Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant
or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors.



            iii.   Draying, freighting, or trucking yard or
terminal.



            iv.   Grain, feed, or fuel yard and storage.



            v.   Public utility service yard or electrical
receiving or transforming station.



            vi.   Plastic manufacture.



         c.   The following special exceptions, if their location
is first approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



            i.   Bleaching or dyeing process.



            ii.   Boiler works.



            iii.   Brick, tile, terra cotta, or cinder block
manufacture.



            iv.   Chemical manufacture.



            v.   Concrete or cement products manufacture.



            vi.   Gas storage.



            vii.   Glass manufacture.



            viii.   Feed mill.



            ix.   Furniture manufacture.



            x.   Paper of pulp manufacture.



            xi.   Planning mill.



            xii.   Sand or gravel-distribution or storage.



            xiii.   Stone cutting.



            xiv.   Any other manufacture or industrial
operation whose location is determined by the Board to be in keeping with the
intent and spirit of this ordinance.



            xv.   Sexually oriented businesses - see Section
10-168.



            xvi.   Tattoo parlor.  An establishment whose
primary activity consists of applying any form of tattoo or body art to
customers for a fee.



      2.   Utility Requirements. Public sewer and water are
required. All utilities, including electric and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks, unless specifically waived, shall
be provided and same shall meet Town specifications as set forth in the
Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Percentage of Lot Coverage. No more than sixty five (65%)
percent of the lot may be covered with principal and accessory buildings.



      4.   Off-street Parking.  See Section 10-132.



      5.   Off-street Loading.  See Section 10-132.



      6.   Building Height Limit: Forty (40 feet).



   k.   In all RD, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5M Zoning Districts, the
following uses, if permitted in said Zoning Districts under Subsections a.,
b., c., d., e. and f. above, shall be permitted by special exception only:



      Cemeteries



      Churches



      Community centers



      Group homes



      Hospitals



      Libraries and museums



      Nursing homes



      Schools



      Golf courses and country clubs



   l.    Residential/Business.



      1.   Uses permitted.



         a.   Single family residences in combination with a
commercial or light industrial use.



      2.   Utility Requirements.  Public sewer and water was
required. All utilities including electric, cable and telephone, shall be
underground. Public streets and sidewalks shall be provided and same shall
meet Town specifications as set forth in the Town's Book of Standards.



      3.   Building Height Limit.  Forty (40) feet.



      4.   Lot coverage.  No more than fifty percent (50%) of a lot
may be covered with buildings.



   m.   Planned Unit Development.



      1.   Purpose and Conditions.



         The Planned Unit Development (hereinafter referred to as
“PUD”) provides for a variety of dwelling types to meet changing needs
for future residents, and commercial and industrial buildings in order to
secure greater convenience to the public through improved methods of
merchandising and manufacturing, transportation, office management and
distribution of services or products necessary to the public welfare. Because
use and area requirements of this ordinance are primarily designed to apply
to the traditional pattern of lot development and building arrangement
generally prevailing within the Town, as well as building regulations
pertaining to building size, yards, etc., the Town Council may establish a
PUD by amending this ordinance and the accompanying Zoning Map, in accordance
with the following procedure.



      2.   Objectives.



         The following objectives may be obtained through the use of
a Planned Unit Development District:



         a.   To permit a maximum choice in the types of
environment available to the public by allowing a development that would not
be possible under the strict application of other sections of this ordinance;



         b.   To promote a creative approach to the use of land
and related physical facilities that results in better design and development
with the inclusion of aesthetic amenities;



         c.   To combine and coordinate architectural styles,
building forms and building relationships with a possible mixing of different
urban uses in an innovative design;



         d.   To encourage a pattern of development to preserve
natural vegetation, topographic and geologic features and environmentally
appropriate features;



         e.   To provide for the prevention and/or control of
soil erosion, surface flooding and the preservation of sub-surface water;



         f.   To create a method for the permanent preservation
of common open space for the continued use and enjoyment of the residents of
the development and the public at large, if appropriate;



         g.   To provide for more usable and suitably located
recreation facilities, schools and other public and private facilities;



         h.   To promote more efficient use of the land resulting
in more economic networks of utilities, streets and other facilities;



         i.   To encourage a method for the preservation of
architectural and historic landmarks;



         j.   To encourage a land use which promotes the public
health, safety, and welfare.



      3.   General Design Criteria.



         Approval of a Planned Unit Development is contingent on
satisfaction of the following general design criteria and the Plan Commission
shall find each criterion to have been met prior to granting final approval:



         a.   That the tract to be developed is at least five (5)
acres in the case of planned unit residential development of exclusively
single-family dwelling units; at least two (2) acres in the case of planned
unit residential development containing multi-family dwelling units; and at
least five (5) acres for non-residential planned unit developments.



         b.   That the height of the proposed structures conforms
to the maximum height set forth in the district regulations for the district
that is most comparable to the proposed development in terms of zoning and
use, as well as the surrounding district and uses.



         c.   That the overall density of the residential
projects (defined as the number of living units per acre) may exceed the
district regulations for the district in which it is to be developed.



         d.   That the streets to be provided will assure a
traffic circulation pattern which minimizes through traffic, allows adequate
space for turning and parking and provides ample space for the turning and
effective use of snow plows, garbage and fire trucks, loading and unloading
and other pick-ups and deliveries without blocking traffic.



         e.   That the design of open spaces and housing in
residential projects will provide both convenient ingress and egress and
privacy.



         f.   That no structure will be more than two hundred
(200) feet from a street, parking area, or other right-of-way on which a fire
truck may be operated.



         g.   That adequate lighting will be provided.



         h.   That the final plans include the planting of
adequate trees, shrubs and other landscaping where not already present.



         i.   That the design of the development is in harmony
with existing surroundings and will not be detrimental to the character of
the neighborhood.



         j.   That the applicant will bond himself and his
contractor(s) to provide the improvements.



         k.   That adequate deed restrictions will be provided,
running in favor of the municipality or an automatic homeowners association
and individual homeowners for the proper maintenance, care and preservation
of the exterior design, all common structures, facilities, utilities, access
and open spaces and recreational areas by the original and all subsequent
owners of property within the development.



         l.   That streets and rights-of-way shall meet the
following standards:



            i.   Private street rights-of-way and pavements
shall be constructed in conformity with the minimum street specifications
prescribed by the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



            ii.   Private streets shall be maintained by the
owners, or by the private organization, so that fire, police, health, school,
and/or sanitation vehicles and public utility vehicles have adequate access.
Adequate access includes an adequate turning area.



            iii.   Where public streets are required by the
Plan Commission, they shall be dedicated and constructed in conformity with
the minimum street specifications prescribed by the Subdivision Control
Ordinance.



      4.   Procedure. The procedure for obtaining a change in a
zoning district or undertaking development within a planned unit development
district shall be as follows:



         a.   Pre-application Conference. The applicant must
first attend a staff meeting with the Town's Zoning Administrator. The
applicant shall submit a brief, written description of the proposed project
to the Zoning Administrator explaining the intended character of the PUD, the
benefits accruing to the community as a result of the PUD and the rationale
behind the concept of the PUD, along with a sketch plan of the proposed
project. At least fifteen (15) copies of the sketch plan must be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator at least ten (10) days in advance of the staff
meeting. After the staff meeting, the applicant may appear at a Plan
Commission Study Session for Sketch Plan review; however, there must be at
least ten (10) days between the staff meeting and the applicant's appearance
at the Plan Commission Study Session. This period is for staff review and
recommendations.



      Fees shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule contained
in Section 10-119.



            i.   Sketch Plan. A drawing of the planned unit
development shall be prepared at a scale that provides for a clear
understanding of the intended development. The plan shall indicate the
overall land use pattern, general circulation system, open space and park
system and the major features of the development. The sketch plan does not
require a detailed site plan of the buildings, roads, walks, etc. The plan
should include:



               1.   Boundary lines or legal description.



               2.   Easements, general location and purpose.



               3.   Streets on or adjacent to the tract.



               4.   Proposed land use pattern.



               5.   Map date, name of development, name of
site planner, north point, scale, date of preparation and acreage of site.



            ii.   Site data. A written explanation of the
graphic elements of the plan including:



               1.   Description and quantity of land uses.



               2.   Description of residential units by
type.



               3.   Number of dwelling units.



               4.   Estimated population.



               5.   Description of the development
standards and design criteria.



            iii.   Objectives. A statement of planning
objectives to be achieved by the Planned Unit Development. This statement
shall include a description of the character of the proposed development and
the rationale of the developer's plan.



            iv.   Ownership. A statement of the present and
proposed ownership of all land within the project.



            v.   Environment. A preliminary statement
identifying existing natural and environmental resources and the method to
protect the physical amenities of the site, including information on:



               1.   Topography.



               2.   Flood plains and surface hydrology.



               3.   Vegetation and natural coverage.



               4.   Soils and subsurface conditions.



               5.   Geology.



               6.   Scenic vistas and views.



            vi.   Utilities. A preliminary engineering study
providing information about existing and proposed sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, water and other utilities necessary to adequately service the
development.



            vii.   Traffic. A preliminary traffic analysis
providing information on the existing road network and future improvements
deemed necessary to service the development. This item is subject to the
discretion of the Plan Commission.



            viii.   Schedule. A preliminary development
schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of various stages
of the development can be expected to begin and be completed.



         b.   Preliminary Development Hearing. A public hearing
shall be held upon written application of the developer to the Plan
Commission. The developer shall submit fifteen (15) copies of a development
plan to the Plan Commission at least sixty (60) days prior to the preliminary
hearing. The purpose of preliminary hearing is to obtain preliminary approval
and/or commitments from the Plan Commission that the plans, design and
program that the developer intends to build and follow are acceptable and
that the developer can obtain assurance that it can reasonably proceed with
final detailed architecture, engineering, surveying, and landscape
architecture in anticipation of final plan approval and subsequent
construction.



            i.   Preliminary Plan. The preliminary plan shall
show the overall plan for development, including grading, landscaping,
exterior design and location of buildings, lots, all common structures,
parking and open spaces, as follows:



               1.   Adequate provision shall be made for
safe and efficient pedestrian and vehicular circulation within the site.



               2.   The scale of the plan should be
appropriate to show the necessary detail with contours at a maximum of two
(2) foot intervals and indicating any unusual topographical features.



               3.   The location, dimensions, and
arrangements of all open spaces, yards, access ways, entrances, exits,
off-street parking facilities, loading and unloading zones, pedestrian ways,
width of roads, streets, and sidewalks, are adequate to provide for safe and
efficient ingress and egress to and from public streets and highways serving
the development.



               4.   Capacity of all areas to be used for
automobile access, parking, loading, and unloading.



               5.   Location, planned uses, dimensions,
gross floor area, building coverage, and approximate height of each building
or other structures.



               6.   Location and arrangement of all areas
devoted to planted lawns, trees, recreation, and similar purposes.



               7.   Provisions made for the location of
existing or proposed sewage disposal, water supply, storm water drainage,
parking lot lighting, and other utilities.



            ii.   Detailed Development Plan. A drawing of the
Planned Unit Development shall be prepared at a scale of not less than one
(1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall show such designations as
proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their proposed uses,
common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and
other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The
submission may be composed of one (1) or more sheets and drawings which must
include:



               1.   Boundary lines - bearing and distance.



               2.   Easements - location, width, and
purpose.



               3.   Streets on and adjacent to the tract -
street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations,
pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.



               4.   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract
- location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers, location
and size of water mains, location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and
telephone lines, and street lights.



               5.   Ground elevations on the tract - for
land that slopes less than one-half percent (½%), show one (1) foot contour;
for land that slopes more than one-half  percent (½%) , show two (2) foot
contour; also show spot elevations at all breaks in grades, along all
drainage channels or swales and at points of special significance.



               6.   Subsurface conditions on the tract -
(if required by Plan Commission) locations and results of tests to ascertain
subsurface soil, rock and ground water conditions, depth to ground water
unless test pits are dry at a depth of five (5) feet.



               7.   Other conditions on tract - water
courses, flood plains, margins, rock out-crop, wooded areas, isolated
preservable trees (one (1) foot or more in diameter), houses, barns,
accessory buildings and other significant features.



               8.   Other conditions on adjacent land,
approximate directions and gradient of ground slope, including any
embankments or retaining walls, character and location of major buildings,
pipelines, railroads, power lines, towers, and other nonresidential land uses
or adverse influences; owners of adjacent unplatted land - for adjacent
platted land refer to subdivision by platter name and show approximate
percent built-up, typical lot size, and dwelling type.



               9.   Zoning - show zoning districts on and
adjacent to the tract.



               10.   Proposed public improvements -
highways or other major improvements planned for future construction, on or
near tract.



               11.   Open space - all parcels of land
intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all
property owners with the purpose indicated.



               12.   Structures - general location,
purpose, and height, in feet, of each building other than single family
residences on individually platted lots.



               13.   Map date - name of development, name
of site planner, northpoint preparation, and acreage of site.



               14.   Miscellaneous - such additional
information as may be required by the Plan Commission.



            iii.   Additional Documents. In addition, the
applicant shall also provide the following, together with its preliminary
development plan:



               1.   A survey of the property, showing
existing features of the property, including contours, building structures,
trees over four (4) inches in trunk diameter, streets, utility rights-of-way
and existing land use.



               2.   Preliminary drawings for buildings to
be constructed in the current phase, including floor plans, exterior
elevations and sections.



               3.   Engineering feasibility studies of any
anticipated problems which might arise due to the proposed development as
required by the Plan Commission.



               4.   A vicinity map showing the capacity and
arrangement of utilities, streets, and thoroughfares.



               5.   Construction sequence and time schedule
for completion of each phase for buildings, parking spaces and landscaped
areas.



               6.   An explanation of the character of the
Planned Unit Development and the manner in which it has been planned to take
advantage of the flexibility of regulations and referencing the general
benefits that will accrue to the public as a result of Planned Unit
Development.



               7.   A statement of planning objectives to
be achieved by the Planned Unit Development. This statement should include
description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale
behind the assumption and choices of the developer.



               8.   A statement of present and proposed
ownership of all land within the project.



               9.   Proposed agreements, provisions, or
covenants which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of
the Planned Unit Development and any of its common open spaces.



               10.   Information about the density of
residential uses, including the number of dwelling units per acre, the number
of dwelling units by type, and the number of buildings by type.



               11.   Non-residential use - a statement
indicating the type and amount of ancillary and non-residential uses
including the amount of common open spaces.



               12.   Preliminary plans for plant materials,
earth sculpturing, berming and aesthetic features.



               13.   Facilities plans for roads, sanitary
sewer, water supply system, storm drainage, lighting program, and sidewalks.



               14.   Traffic analysis on the adequacy of
the local transportation and thoroughfare system to handle anticipated
traffic volume generated by Planned Unit Development. Such analysis should
also include the adequacy of the internal vehicular circulation pattern.



            iv.   Review. The Plan Commission shall review the
application and proposed plans with respect to whether or not the location,
plan and character of development is in harmony with the long range
development plan of the Town and its various elements. In the event that the
original application is denied, the applicant must resubmit an original
application to receive consideration. In the event the Plan Commission
approves an application or tentatively approves an application with
suggestions for revision, the applicant shall submit a final plan for final
approval within six (6) months. After six (6) months, the applicant must
resubmit an original application in order to be eligible for further
consideration.



            v.   Conditions. Prior to the granting of any
development plan, the Plan Commission may recommend and/or require such
conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout,
construction, maintenance, beautification, aesthetics, operation and other
elements of the planned unit development as deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest, improvement of the development, protection
of the adjacent area and to secure compliance with the standards specified
above.  In all cases in which development plans are granted, the Plan
Commission shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem
necessary as proof that the conditions required in connection therewith will
be complied with for the improvement of the development, protection of the
adjacent area and to secure compliance with the standards specified.



            vi.   Findings. The Plan Commission, after
determining that all the requirements of the zoning ordinance pertaining to
PUD districts have been met, shall recommend the preliminary approval,
approval with modifications, or disapproval of the development plan. The Plan
Commission shall enter its reasons for such action in its records. The Plan
Commission may recommend the establishment of a PUD district provided that it
finds the facts submitted with the development plan establish that:



               1.   The uses proposed will not be
detrimental to present and potential surrounding uses, but will have a
beneficial effect.



               2.   Any amendment to the requirements of
this section is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the
development plan.



               3.   Land surrounding the proposed
development either can be planned in coordination with the proposed
development or will be compatible in use.



               4.   The proposed change to a PUD district
is in conformance with the general intent of the comprehensive master plan.



               5.   Existing and proposed utility services
are suitable and adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic within the
proposed district and in the vicinity of the proposed district.



               6.   Existing and proposed utility services
are adequate for the proposed development, and all buildings are served by a
central sewage disposal system, public water supply, and public utilities.



               7.   Each phase of the proposed development,
as it is proposed to be completed, contains at least the minimum amount of
required parking spaces, landscape and utility areas necessary for creating
and sustaining a desirable and stable environment, and that each phase will
meet the foregoing conditions and intent of this ordinance at completion of
each phase.



               8.   The development will consist of a
harmonious grouping of buildings or other structures, adequate service,
parking, and open spaces, planned as a single and common operating and
maintenance unit, as applicable.



         c.   Final Development Plan. The final development plan
shall be in general conformance with the approved preliminary development
plan.



            i.   Final Detailed Plan. A final Planned Unit
Development Plan suitable for recording with the County Auditor's Office
shall be prepared. The purpose of the final plan is to designate with
particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots, as well as the
division of other land, not so classified, into common open areas and
building areas. The final plan shall include:



               1.   An accurate legal description of the
entire area under immediate development within the Planned Unit Development.



               2.   A planned unit development plan of all
lands which are a part of the final plan being submitted, and meeting all the
requirements for a final plan. If lands which are a part of the final plan
are to be subdivided, then a subdivision plan is also required.



               3.   An accurate legal description of each
separate unsubdivided use area including common open space.



               4.   Certificates, seals and signatures
required for dedication of lands, and recording the document.



               5.   Tabulation on separate unsubdivided use
area, including land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units, and
dwelling units per acre.



            ii.   Common Open Space Documents. All common open
space shall be either conveyed to municipal or public corporations, conveyed
to a not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of
benefiting the owners and residents of the Planned Unit Development, or
retained by the developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved
by the Town Attorney, verifying that the common open area will be permanently
preserved as open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or
like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a
legally enforceable lien for the maintenance and improvement of common open
space.



            iii.   Public Facilities. All public facilities
and improvements made necessary as a result of the Planned Unit Development
shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plan or a
bond shall be posted by the developer to guarantee construction of the
required improvements. The bond shall be payable to the Town of Dyer and
shall be sufficient to cover the total cost of the improvements plus ten
percent (10%).  Detailed construction plans shall be submitted for all
public facilities to be built.



            iv.   Construction Plans. Detailed plans shall be
submitted for the design, construction, and installation of site amenities
including buildings, landscaping, lakes and other site improvements.



            v.   Construction Schedule. A final construction
schedule shall be submitted for that portion of the Planned Unit Development
for which approval is being requested.



            vi.   Guarantee Deposit. A deposit shall be made
to the Town of Dyer in the form of cash, letter of credit of indefinite or
renewable term, or maintenance bond approved by the Plan Commission, in a
form acceptable to the Town Attorney equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the
estimated cost of public facility installation. This deposit shall be a
guarantee of satisfactory performance of the facilities constructed within
the Planned Unit Development and shall be held by the Town for a period of
two (2) years from the date of acceptance of the facilities by the Town.
After such two (2) years, the deposit shall be refunded if no defects have
developed. If defects have developed, within the two (2) year period, then
the balance of such deposit shall be refunded after reimbursement to the Town
for amounts expended in correcting defective facilities.



            vii.   Delinquent Taxes. A certificate shall be
furnished from the appropriate county official that no delinquent taxes exist
and that any and all special assessments constituting a lien on the whole or
any part of the title have been paid.



            viii.   Covenants. Final agreements, provisions,
or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of
the Planned Unit Development shall be recorded at the same time as the final
Planned Unit Development Plan.



         d.   Recording of Final Plat. The final plat shall be
recorded in accordance with the requirements of Lake County, Indiana.



         e.   Modifications. The Planned Unit Development project
shall be developed only in accordance with the approved and recorded final
plan and all supporting data. The recorded final plan and supporting data,
together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the applicants,
their successors, grantees, and assigns and shall limit and control the use
of premises and location of structures in the Planned Unit Development set
forth therein. Changes to the recorded Planned Unit Development shall be made
in accordance with the following procedure:



            i.   Major Changes. Changes which alter the
concept or intent of the Planned Unit Development, including changes in
density, changes in the height of buildings, reduction of proposed open
space, changes in total bedroom counts, changes in the development schedule,
changes in the road standards, or changes in the final governing agreements,
provisions or covenants, or other changes, may be approved only by submission
and reconsideration of a new preliminary Planned Unit Development Plan and
supporting data and following the preliminary procedure.



            ii.   Minor Changes. The Plan Commission may, in
accordance with procedure established in their rules, approve minor changes
in the Planned Unit Development which do not change the concept or intent of
the development. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as a major
change, at the discretion of the Plan Commission.



         f.   Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of
any Planned Unit Development District, the Plan Commission may recommend such
conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, design, location,
lay-out, height, density, construction, aesthetics operation or other
elements of the Planned Unit Development as deemed necessary for the
protection of the adjacent area, and to secure compliance with the standards
specified in this ordinance.



   n.   Special Use District.  See section 10-155.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2015-12, 6-15-15)



Sec. 10-132  Off-Street Parking Lots and Loading Areas.



   a.   General Requirements.



      1.   Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall
be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the property
on which the building it is intended to serve is located, measured from the
nearest point of the property on which the building it is intended to serve
is located to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot.



      2.   No parking lot shall be constructed or reconstructed
unless and until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance is issued. Applications
for a certificate shall be submitted with two (2) copies of plans for the
development and construction of the parking lot.



      3.   Adequate ingress to the parking lot shall be provided and
all parking spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering
lanes. Provision of adequate ingress and egress shall receive review and
approval of the Municipal Engineer or such other officers as may be
designated by the Plan Commission.



      4.   All open off-street automobile parking areas and all
off-street loading areas, except one (1) and two (2) family residential and
mobile home residential areas, either created or redesigned and rebuilt
subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance shall be improved with an eight
(8) inch stone base, a two (2) inch paved surface, as a minimum, marked with
appropriate stripes and lines to indicate parking stalls and circulation ways.



      5.   All open off-street automobile parking and drives being
used for one (1) to four (4) family dwellings either created or redesigned
and rebuilt subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance shall be improved
with paved concrete, asphalt paving, or paving brick.



      6.   All open off-street parking in B-1, B-2, B-3 and I zoning
districts shall have not less than a ten (10) foot landscaped (green space)
buffer between said parking areas and any public right-of-way and not less
than a fifteen (15) foot landscaped (green space) buffer between said parking
and any adjoining residential property. Driveways shall not be allowed to
encroach into the required fifteen (15) foot landscaped (green space) buffer.



      7.   Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular and pedestrian
connections.



      8.   Shared parking arrangements shall be encouraged. In the
event that two (2) or more businesses elect to share parking lots in an
effort to meet these parking requirements and reduce impervious surfaces in
the community the following standards shall apply.



         A.   Each business shall provide at least seventy-five
percent (75% ) of its required parking spaces on its own lot.



         B.   Upon providing proof of a written agreement to
share parking spaces on adjacent parking lots or parking lots within three
hundred (300) feet of the property of a given building in keeping with
Section 10-132 a. 1., each business may be credited with one-half (½) of the
parking spaces on the adjacent lot in an effort to meet its total parking
spaces requirement.



   b.   Off-Street Parking Requirements.  The following table of
parking requirements for various uses shall be applied to all new
developments. In the event a use is not listed on the following table, the
Zoning Administrator shall apply a use from the table which he/she shall deem
to be closest.  Allocation of said parking areas shall be indicated on the
plans required for obtaining a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Each parking
space shall be required to be a minimum of one hundred sixty-two (162) square
feet (9' x 18'), which square footage shall not include the access lane.



   USES                        PARKING REQUIREMENTS



Single-Family Residential            2 spaces per dwelling unit.



Elementary and Middle or Jr. High Schools   1 space per employee, plus
auditorium, gym, and stadium requirements, if any.



Senior High School                  1 space per employee,
plus 1 space per 5 students, plus auditorium, gym, and stadium requirements,
if any.



Libraries                        1 space per 500
square feet of gross floor space.



Auditoriums (School)               1 space per 3 seats.



School Gyms, Stadiums, Etc.            1 space per 3 seats.



Nursing and Convalescent Homes         1 space per 3 beds.



Hospitals                        1 space per 2 beds,
plus 1 space per employee on largest shift, plus 1 space per doctor on staff.



Private Clubs                     1 space per lodging
room plus spaces equal to 50% of capacity in persons.



Non-Commercial Community Center      Parking spaces equal to 30% of
capacity in persons.



Restaurants and Taverns               Spaces equal to 50% of
capacity in persons plus 1 space per employee on largest shift.



   USES                        PARKING REQUIREMENTS



Restaurants with Drive-Thru Service       Spaces equal to 50% of
capacity in persons.



Churches and Places of Public Assembly   1 space per 4 seats.



Motels and Hotels                  1 space per dwelling
unit plus spaces equal to 50% of capacity in persons of meeting rooms plus
spaces equal to 50% of capacity in persons for any restaurant plus 1 space
per employee on largest shift.



Multi-Family Residential               2 spaces per dwelling
unit plus 1 space for each bedroom in excess of 2.



Service Stations                     1 space per
employee plus 1 space for manager plus 2 spaces for each service bay.



Bowling Alleys                     4 spaces per alley



Pool Halls, Dance Halls, Pools, Skating Rinks, Etc.          Parking
spaces equal to 50% of capacity in persons.



Auto Sales                        1 space per 1,000
square feet.



Indoor Theater                     1 space per 3 seats.



Funeral Parlors                     50% of capacity.



Animal Hospitals and Kennels            1 space per employee plus
1 space per exam room.



Cartage and Express Facilities            1 space per vehicle
operated plus 1 space per employee.



Contractor or Construction Office         1 space per employee.



General Commercial District            1 space per 200 square
feet of gross floor area.



Highway Commercial District            1 space per 200 square
feet of gross floor area.



Convenience Commercial District         1 space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area.



Industrial District                  1 space per 1,000
square feet.



   c.   Loading Requirements. In any Commercial or Industrial District,
sufficient space for the loading or unloading of vehicles shall be provided
on the lot in connection with any commercial or industrial use so that the
public street shall at all times be free and unobstructed to the passage of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Such space shall be provided as follows:



   Gross Floor Area            Loading and unloading (square
feet) space required in terms of square feet of gross floor area



   0 - 2,000                     None



   2,001-15,000                  1 space



   15,001 and above               2 spaces



   d.   All spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet x fifty (50) feet,
or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least
fourteen (14) feet high.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-133  Administration and Enforcement - Building Permits and
Certificates of Zoning Compliance.



   a.   Administration and Enforcement. A Building Commissioner and a
Zoning Administrator, both of which shall be designated by the Town Council
of the Town, shall administer and enforce this ordinance. Each may be
provided with the assistance of such other person as the Council may direct.



      If the administrative officials shall find that any of the
provisions of this ordinance are being violated, they either shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Either shall
order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures;
removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions,
alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.



   b.   Building Permits Required. No building or other structure shall
be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit
therefor, issued by the Building Commissioner. No building permit shall be
issued by the Building Commissioner except in conformity with the provisions
of this ordinance, unless he receives written order from the Board of Zoning
Appeals in the form of an administrative review, special exception, or
variance as provided by this ordinance.



   c.   Application for Building Permit. No permit for erection,
alteration, moving, or repair of any structure or installation of any parking
facility, shall be issued until an application has been made for a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance and the issuance of a Temporary Certificate
of Zoning Compliance as hereinafter set forth. No building permit except
those issued for parking facilities, residential accessory buildings and for
additions to existing residential single family structures, swimming pools,
fences, and signs shall be issued except on a subdivided lot. All
applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a Temporary
Certificate of Zoning Compliance, plans in triplicate drawn to scale, showing
the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes
and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the
location and dimensions of the proposed building, alteration, or addition.
The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be
required by the Building Commissioner, including existing or proposed
building, alteration, or addition, existing or proposed uses of the building
and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the
building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such
other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide
for the enforcement of, this ordinance.



      One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by
the Building Commissioner, after he or she shall have marked such copy either
approved or disapproved and attested to same by his or her signature on such
copy. The original of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the
Building Commissioner.



   d.   Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered, or
Non-Conforming Uses.  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use
or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter
created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged
in its use or structure until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall have
been issued therefor by the Zoning Administrator stating that the proposed
use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance.
Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, the Zoning
Administrator, through the office of the Building Commissioner, shall ensure
compliance with the Sewer Use Ordinance of the Town of Dyer. The Clerk-
Treasurer of the Town of Dyer is prohibited from issuing an Occupancy Permit,
or authorizing the use of or connection to the Town's water utility or sewer
utility without the submission of a temporary or final Certificate of Zoning
Compliance.



      A Final Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance only upon completion of the
work.



      A Temporary Certificate of Zoning Compliance may be issued by the
Zoning Administrator for a period not exceed twelve (12) months during
construction, alteration, or partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such
conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and
public.



      The Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain a record of all Certificates
of Zoning Compliance, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any
person.



      Failure to obtain a Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be a
violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 10-142.



   e.   Expiration of Improvement Location Permit. If the work
described in any improvement location permit has not begun within ninety (90)
days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and it shall
be canceled by the Building Commissioner/Building Inspector. Written notice
thereof shall be given to the persons affected, including the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.



      If the work described in any improvement location permit with a
construction value of less than six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00),
as approved by the Building Commissioner/Building Inspector, has not been
substantially completed within one (1) year of the date of issuance thereof,
said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Building
Commissioner/Building Inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to
the persons affected, including the Town Clerk-Treasurer, together with
notice to the permit holder that further work as described in the
expired/canceled permit shall not proceed unless a new improvement location
permit has been obtained.  The cost of the new improvement location permit
shall be predicated upon the cost to complete the work described in the new
improvement location permit application in the same manner as the original
improvement location permit cost was determined.



      In the event that the work described in an improvement location
permit exceeds six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00) of construction
cost, as approved by the Building Commissioner/Building Inspector, said
improvement location permit shall be valid for a period of two (2) years from
the date of issuance.  The date of issuance shall be defined as the date on
which the improvement location permit becomes available for pick- up at the
Clerk-Treasurer’s Office in the Dyer Town Hall.



   f.   Construction and Use to be as Provided in Applications, Plans,
Permits, and Certificates of Zoning Compliance.  Building permits or
Certificates of Zoning Compliance issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Building Commissioner and Zoning Administrator
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance, and punishable as
provided by Section 10-142 hereof.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-134  Board of Zoning Appeals - Establishment and Procedure.



   A Board of Zoning Appeals is established, which shall consist of five
(5) members, two (2) of whom must be members of the Plan Commission, to be
appointed by the Town Council, each for a term of four (4) years. Members of
the Board of Zoning Appeals may be removed from office by the Town Council
for cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled by resolution of the Town Council for the unexpired term of the member
affected.



   a.   Proceedings of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall adopt the rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in
keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the
call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public.



      The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public
record and be immediately filed in the office of the Board.



   b.   Hearings; Appeals; Notice. Appeals to the Board of Zoning
Appeals concerning the interpretation or administration of this ordinance, as
amended from time to time, may be taken by any person aggrieved by an order
of the Plan Commission, Building Commissioner, or Zoning Administrator, or by
any officer of the governing body of the Town affected by any decision of the
administrative officials. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable
time, not to exceed thirty (30) days or such lesser period as may be provided
by the rules of the Board, by filing with the administrative official and
with the Board of Zoning Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. The administrative official shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.



      The Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the
parties in interest as set forth in Section 10-135b.2. hereafter, and decide
the same within a reasonable time.



      At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The public hearing shall be held at the place and time specified. A
party seeking to appear by agent or attorney at any hearing as provided
herein shall submit to the body before whom the hearing is to be held, prior
to the hearing, a letter of authorization or properly executed power of
attorney authorizing the agent or attorney to appear at the hearing on behalf
of the party.



   c.   Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official
from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals after
the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a
court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-135  The Board of Zoning Appeals - Powers and Duties.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:



   a.   Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance.



   b.   Special Exceptions - Conditions Governing Applications -
Procedures. To hear, and make recommendations to the Town Council on, such
special exceptions as the Board of Zoning Appeals is specifically authorized
to hear by the terms of this ordinance and in compliance with state law; to
decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special
exception should be granted; and to make recommendations to the Town Council
on special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate
under this ordinance. A special exception shall not be considered by the
Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until:



      1.   A written application for a special exception is
submitted indicating the section of this ordinance, as amended from time to
time, under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on
which it is requested.



      2.   Notice shall be given by publication in accordance with
the requirements of I.C., § 5-3-1, et seq. Additional notice of such
hearings shall be given to all interested parties. The Board of  Zoning
Appeals shall, by rule, determine the following:



         (1)   Who are interested parties;



         (2)   How notice is to be given to them; and



         (3)   Who is required to give the notice.



      3.   The public hearing shall be held at the place and time
specified. A party seeking to appear by agent or attorney at any hearing as
provided herein shall submit to the body before whom the hearing is to be
held, prior to the hearing, a letter of authorization or properly executed
power of attorney authorizing the agent or attorney to appear at the hearing
on behalf of the party.



      4.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a finding that it
is empowered under the section of this ordinance described in the application
to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special
exception will not adversely affect the public health, safety, welfare or
morals of the Town.



      5.   Before any special exception shall issue, the Board shall
make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing
individual special exceptions and that satisfactory provision and arrangement
has been made concerning the following where applicable:



         a.   Ingress and egress to property and proposed
structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire
or catastrophe.



         b.   Off-street parking and loading areas where
required, with particular attention to the items in a. above and the
economic, noise, glare, or odor effects of the special exception on adjoining
properties and properties generally in the district.



         c.   Refuse and service areas, with particular reference
to the items in a. and b. above.



         d.   Utilities, with reference to locations
availability, and compatibility.



         e.   Screening and buffering with reference to type,
dimension, and character.



         f.   Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with
reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and
harmony with properties in the district.



         g.   Required yards and other open spaces.



         h.   General compatibility with adjacent properties and
other property in the district.



   c.   Variances – Conditions Governing Applications –
Procedures.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances of
development standards or use from the terms of this ordinance as will not be
contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not
be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until:



      1.   A written application for a development standards or use
variance is submitted indicating the section of this ordinance, as amended
from time to time, under which the variance is sought and stating the grounds
on which it is requested. The written application for a development standards
variance shall demonstrate:



         a.   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community.



         b.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner.



         c.    The strict application of the terms of the zoning
ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property.



      2.    The written application for a use variance shall
demonstrate:



         a.   The approval will not be injurious to the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community.



         b.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner.



         c.   The need for the variance arises from some
condition peculiar to the property involved.



         d.   The strict application of the terms of the zoning
ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property
for which the variance is sought.



         e.   The approval does not interfere substantially with
the comprehensive plan of the Town of Dyer adopted under I.C., 36-7-4-500, as
amended from time to time.



      3.   No non-conforming use of neighboring lands structures, or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted or non-conforming use of
lands, strictures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered for
the issuance of a variance.



      4.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing
to consider an application for development standards or use variance. 
Notice of public hearing shall be given as in Section 10-135b.2..



      5.   The public hearing shall be held at the place and time
specified. A party seeking to appear by agent or attorney at any hearing as
provided herein shall submit to the body before whom the hearing is to be
held, prior to the hearing, a letter of authorization or properly executed
power of attorney authorizing the agent or attorney to appear at the hearing
on behalf of the party.



      6.   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make written findings
using the criteria as set forth in Sections 10-135(c)1. and 2.



      7.   In granting any variance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
ordinance, as amended from time to time. Violation of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under
Section 10-142, as amended from time to time.



      8.   Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals
grant a variance to allow any use expressly or by implication prohibited by
the terms of this ordinance in said district.



   d.   Board has Powers of Administrative Official on Appeals –
Reversing Decision of Administrative Official.  In exercising the above
mentioned powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may, so long as such action is
in conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as
ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative
official from who the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three (3)
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the administrative official, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under
this ordinance, or to effect any variation in the application of this
ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-136  Appeals From the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   Any person or persons, or any board or bureau of the Town aggrieved by
any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may seek review by a court of
record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of
Indiana.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-137  Duties of Administrative Official, Board of Zoning Appeals, and
Courts on Matters of Appeal.



   It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation
and enforcement shall be first presented to the administrative official, and
that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals only on
appeal from the decision of the administrative official, and that recourse
from the decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be to the courts as
provided by law.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-138  Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses.



   The Town Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and
expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of
zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance.
The schedule of fees shall be posted in the Office of the Administrative
Official, and may be altered or amended only by the Town Council.



   Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-139  Amendments.



   The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this
ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or
repealed, provided however that no such action may be taken until after a
public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens
shall have an opportunity to be heard.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-140  Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or
covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall
govern. (Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-141  Complaints Regarding Violations.



   Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating
fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the administrative
official. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate,
and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-142  Penalties for Violation.



   Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grant of variances or special exceptions)
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



   The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part
thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.



   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-143  Severability Clause.



   Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-144  Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances - Effective Date.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this zoning
ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance, are hereby
repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect.



   This Ordinance shall become effective on passage.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-145 Reserved for Future Use.



Sec. 10-146  Sign Regulations.



Sec. 10-146.1  General Provisions.



   This is an ordinance regulating the construction, erection and
placement of signs in the Town of Dyer, Lake County, Indiana.



   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, repair (other than ordinary and necessary maintenance), alter or
relocate, within the Town of Dyer, (except for a simple name change) any
permanent sign (except for nameplate and occupant signs as hereinafter
allowed) or any temporary sign greater than twelve (12) square feet, and
temporary commercial signs as identified in Section 10-146.6 (g - l) and (n -
p) and (s), or advertising structure as defined in this ordinance, without
first obtaining a building permit and making payment of the fee required by
ordinance.  All illuminated signs shall, in addition, be subject to the
provisions of the Electrical Code of the Town and the permit fees required
thereunder.



      Additions to existing signs shall require that the applicant
provide a picture of the existing sign as well as a picture of the proposed
addition to the existing sign.



   2.   Application for building permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the Building Department, and shall contain or have attached
thereto the following information:



      a.   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
their relationship to the property;



      b.   Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon
which the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;



      c.   Two (2) permanent prints or ink drawings of the plans and
specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or
in the ground and showing the position of the sign or other advertising
structure in relation to nearby buildings, structures and lot lines;



      d.   When deemed necessary by the Building Inspector, because
of wind loads, live and or dead loads, calculations prepared by a registered
professional engineer in the State of Indiana indicating that the sign and
supports are adequate shall be submitted;



      e.   Name of person, firm, corporation, or association
erecting structures;



      f.   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure,
or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected;



      g.   Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign;



      h.   Insurance policy or bond (on contractor) as required by
ordinance;



      i.   Such other information as the Building Inspector shall
require to show compliance with this section and all other laws and
ordinances of the Town.



   3.   The applicant for a permit for erection of a sign or other
advertising structure in which electrical wiring and/or connections are to be
used shall be submitted to the Electrical Inspector.  The Electrical
Inspector shall determine if the wiring and/or connections comply with the
Electrical Code of the Town.



   4.   It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator and/or the
Building Inspector, upon the filing of an application for a building permit,
to examine such plans, specifications, other data and/or the premises upon
which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure is in
compliance with all the requirements of this section and all other laws and
ordinances of the Town, then issue the building permit.  If the work
authorized under a building permit has not been completed within six (6)
months after the date of issuance, said permit shall become null and void.



   5.   If the Zoning Administrator or designee shall find that any
sign or other advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure,
or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, or is no longer
advertising a bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises
where the sign is located, he shall give written notice to the permittee
thereof.  If the permittee fails to remove or alter the structure so as to
comply with the standards herein set forth within three (3) days after such
notice, such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to
comply by the Zoning Administrator or designee at the expense of the
permittee.  The Zoning Administrator shall refuse to issue a permit to any
permittee or owner who refuses to pay costs so assessed.  The Zoning
Administrator or designee may cause any sign or other advertising structure
which is an immediate peril to person or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.



   6.   Every sign or other advertising structure hereafter erected
shall have printed in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters not less than
one (1) inch high, the date of erection and the permit number.



   7.   The owner of any sign as defined by this ordinance and
regulated by this section shall properly maintain all parts and supports of
said sign.



   8.   All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed
and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than twenty (20)
pounds per square foot of area.



   9.   All size limitations listed elsewhere in this section shall be
for net surface area per display surface unless otherwise indicated.  The
gross area for all signs plus the supporting structures shall in no case
exceed two hundred percent (200%) of the net surface area permitted.



   10.   No sign shall be placed in such a manner that it would block
or obscure the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle stopped at a stop
sign, traffic light, or entrance to a public street for a distance of two
hundred (200) feet in any direction in which there is oncoming traffic.



   11.   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or
public walkway.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.2  Prohibited Signs.



   The following signs are expressly prohibited for erection,
construction, maintenance, repair, alteration, location, or relocation,
within the Town of Dyer except as exempt under Section 10-146.8.



   1.   Flashing signs - signs which flash in excess of six (6) times
per minute except for electronic text messaging centers.



   2.   Moving signs - signs which move or rotate more than one (1)
revolution per minute.



   3.   Signs displaying lewd, illegal, or immoral matter as defined in
Ordinance 92-9, The Dyer Nuisance Ordinance. (See Section 6-64)



   4.   Any sign advertising a business, product, or service, not
available on the premises where the sign is located except as permitted in
section 10-146.3 Off Premises signs.



   5.   Signs identifying past services performed on a building or to
premises, e.g., “Roof by ...”.



   6.   Signs on fences, utility poles, street lights or trees.



   7.   Signs in public rights-of-way except in the case where a
dividing “island” exists between two (2) sections of streets as long as
the ability to see oncoming traffic is not restricted by said sign.  Also,
except for traffic signs erected by a governmental unit such as a stop sign,
a speed limit sign, railroad crossing, etc.



   8.   Signs which are confusingly similar or resemble or in any way
imitate any official marker erected by the Town, state, or other governmental
unit or agency, or which by reason of position, shape, or color would confuse
or conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal, or
railroad device.



   9.   Signs on any property without the consent of the party having
the right of present possession.



   10.   Signs extending over or placed upon a public sidewalk, alley,
or right-of-way except as permitted in Section 10-146.12.



   11.   All signs not specifically allowed by the provisions of this
section.



   12.   Billboards except as allowed by special exception by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.



If the Board of Zoning Appeals grants said special exception it shall find
that a billboard shall not be permitted within three hundred (300) feet  of
a residential district, street intersection, or railroad crossing.  There
shall be a minimum of eight hundred (800) feet  between billboards on the
same side of a street or highway, and shall not be closer than twenty (20)
feet to a dedicated right-of-way.  A billboard shall not be permitted within
two hundred (200) feet of an existing building.  In the event a building is
constructed within two hundred (200) feet of a billboard during the term of
the billboard permit, the billboard shall be removed within twelve (12)
months of the date of issuance of an occupancy permit relevant to the
building so constructed.  Billboards shall only be permitted in B-3 and I
zoning districts. A billboard permit must comply with the above restrictions
and once issued, shall be subject to annual renewal upon payment of the
permit fee and review by the Zoning Administrator.



   13.   Roof signs-except as allowed by special exception by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.3  Off Premises Signs.



   Off premises signs are signs which indicate only the location and
direction to a business.  Such signs must be located within one-half (½)
mile of the business.  Further, such signs shall be limited to thirty-two
(32) square feet.  (This section replaces the previous section which was
Billboards.)



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.4  Restrictions.



   In addition to all other provisions and restrictions of this section,
the following signs shall conform as follows:



   1.   Freestanding signs.



      a.   Location - Height and Area Limitations.  It shall be
unlawful to erect any freestanding sign in the total height of which is
greater than twenty (20) feet above the level of the street upon which the
sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level if such ground level is below
the street level. A freestanding sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in display area per side.



      b.   Placement.  A freestanding sign shall not be nearer than
two (2) feet to any building or structure, or nearer than twenty (20) feet to
any other free standing sign and must be set back at least five (5) feet from
any public right-of-way.



      c.   Display Surface.  A freestanding sign having more than
one (1) display surface shall be limited to a net area of one hundred (100)
square feet on any display plane; provided however, if the internal angle
between the two (2) planes is more than ninety degrees (90°), the adjoining
planes shall be considered as one (1) plane.  The total of all display
surfaces shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet.



      d.   Erection, Bracing, Anchorage, and Supports.  A
freestanding sign shall be securely built, constructed and erected upon posts
and standards sunk at least three and one-half (3½) feet below the natural
surface of the ground and shall be adequately braced to prevent overturning.



      e.   Structures, Etc.,To Be Treated With An Appropriate Wood
Preservative.  All posts, anchors, and bracing of wood which rest upon or
enter into the ground shall be treated to protect them from moisture by
creosoting or other appropriate method of protection.



      f.   Illuminated Signs.  All illuminated freestanding signs
shall also conform to the provisions below in paragraphs 3 and 4 as well as
to the provisions in the Exterior Lighting Regulations Ordinance.



   2.   Wall Mounted Signs.  A wall mounted sign shall be safely and
securely attached to the building wall.  In no case shall any wall mounted
sign be secured with wire, strips of wood, or nails.  A wall mounted sign
shall be limited to two (2) square feet in area for each one (1) linear foot
of frontage of the structure on which it is to be placed for
buildings/businesses located up to fifty (50) feet from the public
right-of-way and three (3) square feet in area for each one (1) linear foot
of frontage of the structure on which it is to be placed for
buildings/businesses located more than fifty (50) feet from the public
right-of-way.  An illuminated wall mounted sign shall also conform to the
provisions in paragraphs 3 and 4.



   3.   Internally Illuminated Signs.



      a.   In no case shall the medium of illumination be visible.



      b.   In no case shall the lighting intensity exceed the limit
of thirty (30) footcandles measured with a standard light meter perpendicular
to the face of the sign at a distance equal to the narrower dimension of the
sign, whether it be the height or the width.



   4.   Externally Illuminated Signs.



      a.   The average level of illumination on the vertical surface
of the sign shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles, and the ratio of average to
minimum illumination shall not exceed 2:1. The average reading is determined
by taking readings at the four (4) corners or equivalent and the center of
the sign .



      b.   Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be located,
aimed, and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign facade and
shall not extend beyond the edges of the sign. Lighting fixtures shall not be
aimed toward adjacent streets, roads, or properties.



      c.   Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be of a type such
that the light source is not directly visible from adjacent streets roads, or
properties.



      d.   Fixtures used to illuminate signs stall be top-mounted
and directed below the horizontal.



      e.   The light reflectance shall be measured with a standard
light meter held one (1) foot perpendicular from the surface of the
sign.   



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.5  Signs in Residential Districts.



   1.   In residential districts signs shall be limited to a maximum of
fifty (50) feet in gross surface area.  Signs which measure twelve (12)
square feet or less in gross surface area shall not be required to obtain a
permit unless such sign is illuminated in which case it would be required to
obtain an electrical permit.  Temporary signs as defined in this ordinance,
and which measure twelve (12) square feet or less in gross surface area are
also exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit.  Signs used for the
purpose of advertising an allowed home operation shall be limited to one (1)
square foot in size.  All signs must be at least five (5) feet from any
property line and cannot overhang a public street, alley or sidewalk.  Signs
in residential zoning districts shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10)
feet in height.



   2.   The following signs are hereby expressly prohibited in
residential districts for erection, maintenance, construction, repair,
alteration, location or relocation:



      a.   Roof signs.



      b.   Signs advertising products or services for sale, use or
rent, except the subject real estate which is itself for sale or rent (see
Section 10-146.11(8) Temporary Signs), except as otherwise allowed.



      c.   Pennants - except in connection with a yard/garage sale
and only for the duration of the sale.



      d.   Streamers - except in connection with a yard/garage sale
and only for the duration of the sale.



      e.   Signs with neon lights.



      f.   Signs with interchangeable letters unless such changeable
board is enclosed behind a lockable transparent door.



      g.   Prohibited signs as defined in section 10-146.2.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.6  Signs in B-2, B-3 and I Districts.



   In B-2, B-3, and I districts, the following regulations shall apply:



   1.   General Provisions.  Permanent signs which measure twelve (12)
square feet or less in gross surface area shall not be required to obtain a
permit unless such sign is illuminated in which case it would be required to
obtain an electrical permit.  Temporary signs as defined below, and which
measure twelve (12) square feet or less in gross surface area are also exempt
from the requirement to obtain a permit.



      a.   All signs shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet
from any public right-of-way.



      b.   All signs permitted in residential districts shall be
permitted in these areas.



      c.   Each business shall be permitted to have a specified
amount of signage based upon the linear front footage of the building, or
portion of the building, occupied by the business, and based upon its setback
distance from its front property line.  Said signage may be located on one
(1) or more sides of the building in which the business is located as long as
the total square footage of the signage does not exceed two (2) square feet
in area for each front foot of the structure, or portion of the structure, in
which the use is conducted for businesses set back up to fifty (50) feet from
any public right-of-way and three (3) square feet for each front foot of the
structure, or portion of the structure, in which the use is conducted for
businesses set back in excess of fifty (50) feet from any public right-of-way.



      d.   An allowable sign shall be either wall mounted or
freestanding, but shall not be a combination unless permitted under section
10-146.6 2. of this ordinance.  The total net area of a freestanding sign
shall not exceed that allowed for the frontage sign and in no case shall
exceed one hundred (100) square feet.  No business shall erect more than one
(1) freestanding sign except, however, wherever a building has a rear or side
parking lot or lots, or adjoins a public street, a second freestanding sign
shall be permitted for only one (1) side or rear (in addition to the allowed
front freestanding sign) provided that the sum total of square feet for the
additional sign does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowed area of
the front freestanding sign.  Shopping centers and planned unit
development-commercial buildings may be allowed one (1) freestanding sign for
each six (6) tenants or fractions thereof.  Further, in the event that more
than one (1) freestanding sign is permitted by virtue of this section, there
shall be a minimum distance between such signs of thirty three percent (33%)
of the linear frontage of the building(s) which they serve.



      e.   In cases where the building has a side or rear parking
lot which faces or adjoins a residential district, a sign may be located on
such side or rear of the building and shall be developed to the same
standards as are required in paragraph d. above provided, however, that said
sign if illuminated, shall be indirectly lighted in such a manner as not to
be disturbing to the adjoining residential district.



      f.   A non-illuminated or illuminated sign bearing the name
and/or the type of business of the principal tenant or tenants occupying
space in the building that does not have space with an exterior wall provided
shall be permitted.  However, that sign shall be located at the principal
entrance to the building where such occupied space is located and the total
area of such signs devoted to each occupant shall not exceed two hundred
(200) square inches, and the total area of such sign shall not exceed eight
(8) square feet.



      g.   Two (2) business signs painted on the windows and or
doors of each business bearing the name, street number and or type of
business of the principal occupant; provided, however, that there shall be
not more than one (1) such sign on each window or door, and said sign shall
not exceed six (6) square feet in area and the total area of all signs shall
not exceed nine (9) square feet.



      h.   A business sign painted on the valance of an awning
bearing only the name of the principal occupant and or the street number of
such businesses; provided, however, that a sign shall not exceed a total of
two (2) square feet for each linear foot of frontage of the structure or
portion of the structure in which the use is conducted for buildings set back
up to fifty (50) feet from any public right-of-way of three (3) square feet
for each linear foot of frontage of the structure or portion of the structure
in which the use is conducted for buildings set back more than fifty (50)
feet from any public right-of-way.



      i.   A sign required by law to be exhibited by the occupant of
the premises; provided, however, that the said sign shall not exceed six (6)
square feet in gross surface area.



      j.   A sign serving the public convenience, such as a
“notary public,” “public telephone,” “public restroom,” or words
or directions of similar import provided, however, that such signs shall not
exceed seventy two (72) square inches in total gross surface area and only
one (1) sign of each type shall be displayed at the building.



      k.   Window/door signs shall not be placed in such a manner
that they would impair the ability to see inside a building from either a
street or a parking lot (for safety reasons) and shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the total exterior window space.



      l.   Streamers and pennants shall be allowed so long as they
are properly maintained.



      m.   In the case of drive-in or drive-through merchandising
businesses, two (2) informational (menu, price, etc.) signs shall be allowed,
not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in gross area for each sign.



      n.   Temporary non-electrical signs announcing or advertising
any educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, religious, drive, movement
or event shall be allowed for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days
preceding the event.  The location of such signs shall be erected or placed
in such a way as not to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or vision of
persons using the public roadways within the Town of Dyer.  The sign shall
be removed within three (3) days following the event advertised.



      o.   A non-illuminated temporary sign pertaining to the sale
or lease of the premises upon which it is placed and not exceeding thirty-two
(32) square feet in gross surface area, provided that said sign shall be
removed within seven (7) days after the consummation of the sale or lease of
the premises or the termination of the agent's authority.



      p.   A non-illuminated temporary sign bearing only the street
number of a new or remodeled structure and the name or names of the general
contractor, subcontractor, owner and tenant, during construction work on the
premises upon which they are placed, not exceeding thirty two (32) square
feet in total gross area of all such signs, provided that said sign or signs
shall be removed within seven (7) days after substantial completion of the
construction work and in no event shall be exhibited for more than
twenty-four (24) months.



      q.   Banners.



         1.   A business may be allowed to erect one (1) banner
at a time, for a maximum period of two (2) calendar months for each
message.  Said banner shall be allowed to be up to thirty-two (32) square
feet on any size building and further shall be allowed to be as large as two
(2) square feet in area per one (1) linear foot of the wall of the building
on which the banner is posted; said banner shall also be attached to an
existing building and shall not cover an exterior window.  A banner must be
rated to withstand sixty (60) pounds of wind pressure per square foot.  A
permit must be obtained prior to the posting of a banner.  If a business is
located on a corner lot, it may be allowed to erect an additional banner on
one (1) side of the building in addition to a banner erected on the principal
frontage of the building.



         2.   Upon the issuance of a permit for a banner, the
banner will be deemed to have remained posted for its fully allocated
period.  In other words, if a banner is posted for less than the time period
specified on the permit application, the difference cannot be added to a
future posting of a banner.



         3.   An annual banner permit fee shall be permitted
under the following conditions:



            (a)   Banner cannot cover an exterior window;



            (b)   Message must be changed no less frequently
than every sixty (60) days;



            (c)   Banner must be attached to the building or
unit that it serves;



            (d)   Banner cannot be placed on an accessory
structure;



            (e)   Annual banner permits shall be prorated from
the first day of the month in which they are issued; or



            (f)   See Town Code Section 7-63 for permit fee.



      r.   Portable signs which advertise temporary sales promotions
or special events shall be permitted as follows:



         1.   An existing business may use a portable sign up to
two (2) times per calendar year not to exceed fifteen (15) days per posting
except that at the permittee's discretion, the postings may be for individual
time periods or consecutive time periods.



         2.   Portable signs are limited to thirty-two (32)
square feet in area.



         3.   Portable signs require a permit and may not be
closer than four hundred (400) feet to another portable sign.



      s.   Sandwich boards.



         1.   Cannot be placed on public right-of-way;



         2.   Are limited to eight (8) square feet on size;



         3.   Can only be displayed during regular business hours;



         4.   Are limited to one per frontage and one per
building/unit;



         5.   Must be within ten (10) feet of the building/unit
it serves.



   2.   The following regulations shall apply to businesses in
buildings which are set back more than fifty (50) feet from a public street.



      a.   In addition to those signs permitted in section
10-146.6(1), a shopping center whose building or buildings are all set back
more than fifty (50) feet from the nearest public street shall be permitted
one (1) freestanding sign not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in
gross surface area per display area, for each six (6) tenants or fraction
thereof, in the shopping center.  Further, in the event that more than one
(1) freestanding sign is permitted by virtue of this section, there shall be
a minimum distance between such signs of thirty-three percent (33%) of the
linear frontage of the building(s) which they serve.  Such sign shall not
project within or be closer than five (5) feet to any property line.  The
sign permitted by this section shall be additional to the sign authorized by
section 10-146.6(1) only if the sign constructed pursuant to section
10-146.6(1) is a wall mounted sign.



      b.   In addition to those signs allowed in section
10-146.6(1), any business except gasoline service stations and public
garages, in a building set back more than fifty (50) feet from the nearest
public street and not part of a shopping center, shall be permitted one (1)
freestanding sign not exceeding two (2) square feet in area for each linear
foot of frontage of the structure or portion of the structure in which the
use is conducted, but in no case exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in
gross surface area.  Such sign shall not project within or be closer than
five (5) feet to any property line.  This section shall not be construed to
allow more than one (1) freestanding sign.  The sign permitted by this
section shall be additional to the sign authorized by Section 10-146.6(1)
only if the sign constructed pursuant to section 10-146.6(1) is a wall
mounted sign.



      c.   A business or businesses with attached parking lot may
erect free standing traffic directional signs, each not to exceed four (4)
square feet of gross surface area and not to be higher than three (3) feet
from the ground. Such signs may be illuminated.  Such signs shall bear no
advertising matter other than logos or business names.



   3.   Gasoline Service Stations and Public Garages.  In addition to
the signs allowed elsewhere in this section, gasoline service stations and
public garages may display the following special signs which are deemed
customary and necessary to their respective businesses.



      a   A direction sign or lettering displayed over individual
entrance doors or bays consisting only of the words “washing,”
“lubrication,” “repairs,” “mechanic on duty” or other words of
similar import; provided, however, that there shall not be more than one (1)
sign over each entrance or bay, the letters thereof shall not exceed six (6)
inches in height and the total gross area of each such sign shall not exceed
three (3) square feet.



      b.   Customary lettering other than insignia which is a part
of a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of gasoline sold, type
of service available, lead warning sign, a price indicator and any other sign
required by law, all of which shall not exceed a total gross area of three
(3) square feet on each side of the pump.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.7  Signs in B-1 Business Districts.



   The sign regulations in B-1 districts shall be the same as those for
B-3 districts, except as follows:



   If the B-1 district is immediately adjacent to a residential zoning
district then any illuminated signs shall be indirectly lighted and shall not
be disturbing to the adjacent or adjoining residential district.



(Ord. No. 2007-33,12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.8  Exemptions.



   The provisions and regulations of this proposed sign ordinance shall
not apply to the following:



   1.   Cornerstones or names of buildings inscribed in stone or bronze
as part of the building or structure provided they are no larger than ten
(10) square feet for each display surface.



   2.   Signs erected by a governmental unit.



   3.   All signs within buildings.



   4.   Flags of the Town, the State of Indiana, or the United States
of America, including such flags as POW/MIA.



   5.   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter other than logos or business
names and limited to a maximum of four (4) square feet in size.



   6.   Banners mounted on street light poles by the Town or an agent
of the Town.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.9  Enforcement.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or fails to comply with
this section or any plan thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).  Every day any violation of this
section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.10  Sign Permit Fees.



   See Schedule of fees and permits. (See Section 7-63 of this Code)



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.11  Definitions.



For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   1.   Portable Sign.  Any device designed to inform or attract
attention of persons not on the  premises  on which the device is located,
which device can be easily transported or carried from place to place and
which is not attached to the real estate on which it is located in a
permanent manner.



   2.   Sandwich Sign.  A device limited in size to eight (8) square
feet which is place in front of a building advertising such things as daily
specials and can be posted only during the hours of operation of the business
and which must not be placed on a public right-of-way.  Such device may be
and frequently is, in the shape of an A frame.



   3.   Sign. Any device designated to inform or attract attention of
persons not on the premises on withc the sign is located, provided however
that the following shall not be included in the application of the
regulations herein:



      a.   Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and
bearing only property numbers post box numbers, names of occupants of
premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial
connotations.



      b.   Legal notices; identification, information, or
directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies.



      c.   Integral decorative or architectural features of
buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights.



      d.   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on
private property, but bearing no advertising matter other than logos and
business names and limited to a maximum of four (4) square feet in size.



   4.   Signs - Number and Surface Area.  For the purpose of
determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single
display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and
composed to form a unit.  Where matter is displayed in a random manner
without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable
doubt about the relationship of elements each element shall be considered to
be a single sign.  The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including
the entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular
geometric forms comprising of all of the display area of the sign and
including all of the elements of the matter displayed.  Frames and
structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in
computation of surface area.



   5.   Signs - Off Site.   Signs other than on-site signs.



   6.   Signs - On-Site.   A sign relating in its subject matter to
the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations,
services, or activities on the premises.



   7.   Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, mobile homes,
walls, fences, billboards, signs, and poster panels.



   8.   Temporary signs.  Signs advertising or identifying an
infrequent, irregular or non-continuous event, sale or occasion.  Such signs
are limited in duration to thirty (30) days posting and are subject to all
other regulations of this ordinance concerning setbacks from property
lines.  Temporary signs which are less than twelve (12) square feet in gross
surface area shall not be illuminated and shall not be required to obtain a
permit.  Among others, political and for sale/rent signs shall be considered
to be temporary signs.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-146.12  Signs in Special Use Districts.



   The sign regulations in the Special Use District (SUD) shall be the
same as those for B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts, except that:



   1.   Buildings located in the Special Use District shall be
permitted to have both a free standing sign as well as wall mounted signage
regardless of their setbacks from their respective property lines.  Free
standing signs shall be allowed to be two (2) square feet in size for each
linear foot of frontage of the building that it serves up to a maximum of one
hundred (100) square feet.  Wall mounted signage is limited to two (2)
square feet for each linear foot of frontage of the building it serves or the
unit within the building that it serves.



   2.   Signs in this district shall be allowed to extend over a public
sidewalk as long as a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet exists
between the bottom of the sign and the public sidewalk.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)   



Sec. 10-147  Landscaping Requirements.



Sec. 10-147.1  Purpose.



   Thepurpose of this landscaping ordinance, which includes Appendices A
through D, adopted by reference, is to underscore the essential role that
landscape materials play in the responsible development of real property. 
The minimum landscape standards contained herein are intended to benefit the
public welfare through improved aesthetics, preservation of greenspace,
improved and/or maintained air quality, and reduction of storm water runoff,
glare and heat build-up.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.2  Applicability.



   The minimum landscape standards contained herein shall apply to all
public and private Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, Institutional and
Industrial developments in the Town, except that previously-approved
developments need not comply unless new site development approval is being
sought. However, in developments located within a designated Special Use
District (SUD), in the event that these landscaping requirements conflict
with the SUD's developmental standards for landscaping, the SUD developmental
standards shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.3  Planting Standards.



   Under no circumstances shall any artificial plant be installed and/or
counted as part of the plantings required by this ordinance. All plant
materials required by this ordinance shall be living and shall meet the
additional requirements contained in this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.4  Conflicts in Standards.



   In any case, except within a designated Special Use District (SUD), in
which conflicts exist between the landscaping requirements of this ordinance
and the landscaping requirements of any other applicable Town Code Sections,
the stricter standard shall apply.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.5  General Requirements.



   All plant materials required by this ordinance shall be free of
disease, insects and/or damage and shall be correctly labeled indicating
genus, species and cultivar at the time of the final inspection by Town staff
or designee. The planting patterns of plant material shall be staggered and
mixed in order to avoid long, monotonous and repetitive edges, especially
along roadways.



   For the purposes of this section, one (1) tree equals five (5) shrubs.
A developer may substitute up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total trees
required under this section with shrubs, at a ratio of five (5) shrubs for
every one (1) tree substituted. Conversely, a developer may substitute up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total shrubs required under this section
with trees, at a ratio of one (1) tree for every five (5) shrubs substituted.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-05)



Sec. 10-147.6  Screening Requirements.



   a.   Ground mounted heating and cooling units and above ground fuel
tanks must be screened from view from public streets and/or adjacent
properties.



   b.   All trash dumpsters, trash pads, loading areas, loading docks,
building service areas and outside storage areas shall be screened from view
from land in a residential zone and must be screened from view if visible
from a public street. Such screening may be achieved by using a minimum six
(6) foot high opaque fence, wall, berm or evergreen screen.



   c.   Vision clearance triangles must be kept clear of landscape
materials greater than two (2) feet in height.



   d.   All trees and shrubs must be planted a minimum of five (5) feet
behind the right-of-way line.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.7  Bufferyard Landscaping Requirements.



   The requirements of this ordinance shall be applicable to bufferyards
required elsewhere in the Town Code, as well as parking lots.



   a.   Bufferyards that are intended to physically separate and
visually screen adjacent land uses that are not fully compatible must be a
solid, opaque screen of at least six (6) feet in height.  Plants used
exclusively for screening must  be at least six (6) feet in height at time
of planting, must provide a solid screen, and must provide said solid screen
year round.



   b.   Bufferyards that separate compatible uses are required to have
a minimum of one (1) deciduous tree and five (5) shrubs for every five
hundred (500) square feet of adjacency.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.8  Landscape Plan Required; Content.



   Where required, a landscape plan shall conform to the following
requirements:



   a.   A landscape plan is required for each lot within a proposed
development It is recommended that the landscape plan be prepared by a
landscape architect, nurseryman, or other professional experienced in
landscape design and the installation and care of plant materials.



   b.   All landscape plans submitted for approval as a component of a
required site plan shall show the entire zoning lot to scale, on twenty-four
(24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheets and shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, parking lots and drives, roadways and right-of-way, sidewalks,
bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas,
freestanding electrical equipment, recreation facilities, utility lines and
easements.  Freestanding structural features, and other landscape
improvements, such as earth berms, walls fences, screens, sculptures,
fountains, street furniture, lights, and courts or paved areas;



      (2)   The name and address of the owner, developer, and plan
preparer, the date the plan was prepared, scale, and north arrow;



      (3)   The location, quantity, size, and name, both botanical
and common, of all proposed planting materials;



      (4)   The locations, size, and common name of existing trees
and individual shrubs, areas of dense trees or shrubs, and other natural
features, indicating which are to be preserved and which are to be removed;



      (5)   The approximate location and generic identification of
existing structures and plant materials within the yard of adjoining
properties;



      (6)   Existing and proposed grading of the site, including
proposed berming, indicating contours at not more than two (2)-foot intervals;



      (7)   Specifications of the type and boundaries of all
proposed vegetative ground cover;



      (8)   Design of fences and other significant accessory
structures;



      (9)   The location of barriers to be placed at or beyond the
drip line of any trees to be preserved, and the type of material to be used
for the barrier;



      (10)   Planting and installation details as necessary to
ensure conformance with all required standards;



      (11)   Details indicating specific grading measures or other
protective devices where trees are to be preserved in areas of cut and fill;
and



      (12)   A tabulation clearly displaying the relevant
statistical information necessary for the Plan Commission to evaluate
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.



   c.   Any existing vegetation not of the species and type included in
Appendix D, adopted by reference, that is retained, and that otherwise meets
the species and location requirements of this ordinance, may be counted one
and one-half (1.5) times towards fulfilling the minimum landscaping
requirements, subject to the approval of the Plan Commission or its
designee.  No construction activity of any kind shall take place within the
area defined by the drip-line of any vegetation that is to be retained and
counted as fulfilling these requirements.  Any retained existing vegetation
shall be replaced with a species and type outlined in Appendices A, B, or C
of this ordinance, adopted by reference, in the event that said retained
vegetation ceases to be living.



   d.   All new trees required to be planted by this ordinance shall be
measured as follows:



      (1)   All deciduous and ornamental trees shall be at least two
and one-half (2½) inches in diameter at the time of planting, measured at
six (6) inches above the rootball.



      (2)   All evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet
in height at the time of planting, measured from the top of the rootball.



      (3)   All shrubs shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in
height at the time of planting, measured from the top of the rootball.



   e.   Earth mounds and berms shall be physical barriers that block or
screen the view similar to a hedge, fence or wall. Mounds shall be
constructed with proper and adequate plant material to prevent erosion. A
difference in elevation between areas requiring screening does not constitute
an existing earth mound and shall not be considered as fulfilling any
screening requirement. Where mounds are to be mowed, the maximum permitted
slope is 3:1 (run:rise).



   f.   Grass shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent
lawns in northern Indiana.  In swales or other areas subject to erosion,
solid sod, an erosion reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.9  Design Standards.



   All proposed landscape materials should complement the form of the
existing trees and plantings.  Light, water, soil conditions, and on-going
maintenance requirements should be considered in selecting plant materials.



   a.   Vehicle Overhang.  Parked vehicles may hang over the
landscaped area up to two and one-half (2½) feet. In no instance shall this
overhang be counted as part of the required parking space area.



   b.   Groundcover. All areas not landscaped with hedges, walls or
trees shall be provided with grass or other acceptable vegetative ground
cover.  In no case shall any required landscaping area be covered with rock,
mulch or other non-living material.  In no instance shall this provision be
interpreted as prohibiting the placement of mulch around plantings.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.10  Maintenance Requirements.



   Trees, vegetation, irrigation systems, fences, walls and other
landscape elements are considered elements of a project in the same manner as
parking and other site details.  The owner of the property shall be
responsible for the continuous proper maintenance of all landscaping
materials, and shall keep them free from refuse and debris and in good repair
at all times.  The owner of the property shall either remove all debris
prior to mowing of the landscaped area(s) or shall bag as the mowing activity
occurs so as not to discharge debris onto neighboring properties.



   a.   Replacement of Landscaping Materials.  All unhealthy or dead
plant material shall be replaced by the next planting season.  Other
required landscape material that becomes defective shall be replaced or
repaired within three (3) months of the occurrence of the defect.



   b.   Trimming Plant Material.  Landscape materials are intended to
grow, spread and mature over time. Landscaping materials used to fulfill
requirements of this ordinance may not be pruned or otherwise treated so as
to reduce overall height or level of opacity below the minimum requirements.
Pruning, limbing-up, topping, and other inhibiting measures including removal
may only be practiced to insure the public safety, to maintain a neat and
attractive appearance, and to preserve the relative health of the material
involved.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.11  Property Interior Requirements.



   Landscaping shall be required on each lot based on the use of that lot
as defined in the Site Interior Planting Requirements table. (See below).



   a.   Mixed Use Properties.  Where a lot is occupied by a
combination of the land uses listed in the Site Interior Plantings
Requirements table, only the plantings consistent with the requirements for
the land use that would result in the most landscaping is required.



   b.   Tree Locations.  All required trees may be located in clusters
or dispersed throughout the yard.



   c.   Yard Calculations.  For the purposes of this ordinance, the
yard shall mean all areas of the property not covered with structures,
parking areas or other hard surfaces.  Additionally, detention/retention
ponds shall be computed at fifty percent (50%) of their actual size for
purposes of determining the yard area that either comprises. Other areas
required to be landscaped by this ordinance and required bufferyards shall
not be included in the calculation of yard area.



 

SITE INTERIOR PLANTING REQUIREMENTS TABLE


For this land use type:
 
1 deciduous, evergreen or ornamental tree shall be required for every...


Multi-family residential
 
500 square feet of yard area


Commercial
 
500 square feet of yard area


Institutional
 
500 square feet of yard area


Industrial
 
500 square feet of yard area



 



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.12  Parking Lot Perimeter Requirements.



   All parking lots, including parking spaces, interior drives, and
loading/unloading areas, shall be separated from all Thoroughfare Plan
recommended street rights-of-way by a landscaping area that is a minimum of
ten (10) feet in width.  The landscape area shall be planted with either of
the following options or a combination of both:



   a.   Trees and Shrubs.  A minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided
for every five hundred (500) square feet of landscaped area.  The trees may
be a combination of deciduous, evergreen and or ornamental trees.  In
addition, a minimum of one (1) shrub shall be provided for every one hundred
(100) square feet of landscaped area.



   b.   Landscape Berm. A landscaped berm that is a minimum of three
(3) feet in height shall be provided along the length of the landscaped
area.  A minimum of one (1) shrub shall be provided for every five (5)
linear feet of berm.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.13  Parking Lot Interior Requirements.



   To help reduce excessive heat buildup and emissions from large areas of
hard surfacing, landscape area must be provided within parking lots.



   a.   Landscaped Areas Required.  Landscape areas with a surface
area equal to five percent (5%) of the area of the paved surface (including
all parking spaces, interior drives, loading docks, drop-off/pick-up lanes,
and access drives beyond the right-of-way) shall be provided in all parking
lots.



   b.   Landscaped Area Standards.  The required landscape areas shall
meet the following minimum requirements:



      1.   All required landscaped areas shall consist of curbed
islands or peninsulas that are surrounded on at least two (2) sides by
pavement. Landscaping on the perimeter of the parking lot shall not be
counted toward meeting this requirement.



      2.   Landscape areas must be located on a lot line that is
immediately adjacent to another commercial lot while at the same time leaving
space for vehicular and pedestrian access between adjacent commercial lots.



      3.   A minimum of one (1) deciduous tree shall be provided for
every five hundred (500) square feet of total landscaped area required in
this section.



      4.   A landscaped area shall be provided at the end of every
twenty (20) parking spaces or one hundred (100) linear feet, whichever is
less.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-147.14  Appendix A through D.



   Appendix A through D is incorporated herein by reference.  It is on
file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection
during regular business hours.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148  Exterior Light Requirements.



Sec. 10-148.1  Purpose.



   The purpose of this Exterior Lighting Regulations Ordinance is to
underscore the essential role that exterior lighting plays in the responsible
development, use and maintenance of real property. The Exterior Lighting
Regulations set forth and established herein are intended to benefit the
public welfare through improved aesthetics and increased public safety by
reduction of glare, visual clutter, lighting trespass and urban sky glow.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.2  Applicability.



   The Exterior Lighting Regulations set forth and established herein
shall apply to all commercial, industrial and institutional properties in the
Town, except that previously-approved development properties need not comply.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.3  Definitions.



   Unless the meaning and/or context clearly indicate otherwise, the
following definitions shall apply for purposes of this ordinance.



   1.   Fixture.  The assembly that holds the lamp (bulb) in a
lighting system.  Fixture shall include the elements designed to give light
output control, such as a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the
ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.



   2.   Flood Light. A luminaire or bulb which projects light in a
specific direction in a wide beam one hundred (100) degrees or more.



   3.   Full-cutoff or fco.   A light fixture which cuts off all
upward transmission of light.



   4.   Fully-shielded.  A fixture with housing or attachment thereto
which prevents a line of sight to the bulb when viewed from another property
and which prevents a line of sight to any part of the light source at or
above a horizontal plane running through the lowest portion of the fixture.



   5.   Glare.  The reflection of harsh, bright light; and the
physical effect resulting from high luminances or insufficiently shielded
light sources in the field of view.



   6.   Horizontal/Vertical Footcandles.   The amount of light
striking a horizontal or vertical plane.



   7.   IESNA.  The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.



   8.   Light Source.  The bulb and lens, diffuser, or reflective
enclosure.



   9.   Light Trespass.   Light projected onto a property from a
fixture not located on that property.



   10.   Lumens.  The measure of brightness of the illumination
exiting a bulb.



   11.   Spotlight.   A luminaire or bulb which projects light in a
specific direction in a narrow beam, forty-five (45) degrees or less.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.4  Regulations.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install,
erect or maintain any floodlight, searchlight, security light, or other form
or type of light source within the municipal corporate limits of the Town of
Dyer in such a manner that the light rays from such floodlight, searchlight,
security light or other form or type of light source fail to conform with the
terms and conditions of this ordinance. Further, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to install, erect, or maintain any floodlight,
searchlight, security light or other form or type of light source within the
municipal corporate limits of the Town of Dyer in such a manner that the
light therefrom may distract the attention of any motor vehicle driver from
the operation of a motor vehicle in a safe and prudent manner.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.5  Light Trespass.



   The maximum illumination from any artificial lighting source other than
street lights, at any distance up to, and including, five (5) feet inside an
adjoining residential parcel or public right-of-way, shall not exceed 0.05
horizontal footcandles and 0.05 vertical footcandles.  The maximum
illumination from any artificial lighting source other than street lights, at
any distance up to, and including, five (5) feet inside an adjoining
commercial or industrial parcel or on a public roadway, shall not exceed 0.1
horizontal footcandles or 0.1 vertical footcandles.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.6  General Lighting Design Requirements.



   a.   The bulbs in outdoor light fixtures emitting from between six
hundred (600) to twelve hundred (1,200) lumens shall be frosted glass or
shall be covered by frosted glass or another similar translucent cover.  An
outdoor fixture emitting more than twelve hundred (1,200) lumens shall be a
full cutoff fixture.



   b.   A spotlight or floodlight emitting less than eighteen hundred
(1,800) lumens need not be full cutoff or covered by a translucent cover if:



      (1)   Its center beam is aimed at a point not beyond any
property lines upon which the light is situated,



      (2)   If it is pointed at no higher than forty five degree
below horizontal,



      (3)   Is motion detector activated, and



      (4)   The light cycles off after five (5) minutes or less.



   c.   The use of search lights, laser lighting, or lights that pulse,
flash, rotate or simulate motion for advertising or promotions is
prohibited.  This shall not apply to such lights that are used in approved
and permitted signage. Emergency lighting and traffic control lighting is
exempt from this prohibition.  Tower lighting shall not be permitted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  Lighting required by
the FAA shall be of the lowest allowed intensity permitted and shall be red
unless specifically forbidden under FAA requirements.



   d.   At the close of business, all outdoor lighting shall be reduced
by shutting off half of the lighting sources.  Lighting from the top
downward as opposed to upward lighting, shall be encouraged.



   e.   Buildings and Other Vertical Structures.



      1.   Lighting fixtures designed to illuminate a building or
vertical surface shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is
directed only onto said surface.  Lighting fixtures shall not be directed
toward adjacent streets or roads.



      2.   Outside lighting fixtures shall be directed below the
horizontal rather than above the horizontal unless there is a method employed
which prevents light from such a fixture from projecting beyond the highest
point of any building on the property.



   f.   Landscaping.



      1.   When landscaping is to be illuminated, the Plan
Commission, or its designee, shall first be presented with a landscape
lighting plan for review.  Approval will be considered for any landscape
lighting plan that:



         (1)   Presents the purpose and objective of the lighting,



         (2)   Shows the location of all lighting fixtures,



         (3)   Shows which items of landscaping each fixture is
to illuminate, and



         (4)   Demonstrates that the installation of the fixtures
will not generate excessive light levels, cause excessive glare, or direct
light beyond the landscaping into the night sky.



   g.   Parking Lot Lighting.  Parking lot lighting shall be designed
to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision and
comfort in parking areas, and to not cause excessive glare or direct
illumination onto adjacent properties or streets.  In addition:



      1.   All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be full
cut-off fixtures.



      2.   Mounting heights of lighting fixtures shall not exceed
thirty (30) feet as measured from the grade at the base of th pole to the
glass pane of the full cutoff lighting fixture.



      3.   The minimum illumination level during business hours
shall be no less than 0.4 footcandles. The ratio of maximum to minimum
illumination shall not exceed 15:1.



   h.   Lighting of Exterior Display/Sales Areas.  Lighting levels on
exterior display/sales areas shall be adequate to facilitate the activities
taking place in such locations.  Lighting of such areas shall not be used to
attract attention to the business.  Only signs permitted by applicable
provisions of the Town Code are to be used for that purpose. An applicant
shall designate areas to be considered display/sales areas and areas to be
used as parking or passive vehicle storage areas, which designations shall be
approved by the Plan Commission, or its designee.  In addition:



      1.   Areas designated as parking or passive vehicle storage
areas shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for parking
areas detailed in subsection g. of this section.



      2.   Areas designated as exterior display/sales areas shall be
illuminated so that the average horizontal illuminance at grade level is no
more than 5.0 footcandles.  The average horizontal illuminance at grade
level relative to this section shall be computed for only that area
designated as exterior display/sales area.



      3.   Light fixtures shall be full cut-off fixtures and be
located, mounted, aimed, and shielded so that direct light is not cast onto
adjacent streets or properties.



      4.   Fixtures shall be mounted no more than thirty (30) feet
above grade.



   i.   Lighting of Walkways/Bikeways and Parks.  Where special
lighting is to be provided for walkways, bikeways, or parks, the following
requirements shall apply:



      1.   The walkway, pathway, or ground area shall be illuminated
to a level of no less than 0.4 and not greater than an average of 4
footcandles across the site.



      2.   Lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct light
downward, and light sources shall have an initial output of no more than one
thousand (1,000) lumens.



   j.   Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons and
Canopies.  Lighting levels on gasoline station/convenience store aprons and
under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the activities taking place in
such locations.  Lighting of such areas shall not be used to attract
attention to the business.  Only signs permitted by applicable provisions of
the Town Code are to be used for that purpose.



      1.   Areas on the apron away from the gasoline pump islands
used for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated in accordance with
the requirements for parking areas set forth in subsection g. of this
section.  If no gasoline pumps are provided, the entire apron shall be
treated as a parking area for purposes of this ordinance and regulations.



      2.   Areas around the pump islands and under canopies shall be
illuminated so that the average illumination level of not greater than 22.0
footcandles.



      3.   Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so
that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface of the
canopy and/ or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the canopy so that
light is restrained to no more than eighty-five degrees (85º) beyond the
vertical plane.



      4.   Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the
canopy, and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated.



      5.   Existing gasoline stations will be required to conform to
the provisions of this ordinance and these regulations when any remodeling or
revamping of the station occurs.



   k.   Lighting of Outdoor Facilities.  It is recognized that outdoor
nighttime facilities and activities (concerts, athletic contests, and the
like) have unique lighting requirements and that illumination levels vary,
depending on the nature of the activity.  The regulations of this ordinance,
are intended to permit adequate lighting for such events, while minimizing
sky glow, reducing energy consumption and reducing glare and unwanted
illumination of surrounding streets and properties.  A lighting design plan
shall address the lighting requirements of the various adjacent areas and
affected properties, and how the requirements of this ordinance for the
specific outdoor nighttime facility and/or activity will be met.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.7  Site Plans.



   All outdoor lighting installations must receive approval of the Plan
Commission, or its designee.  An applicant shall submit to the Town
sufficient information, in the form of an overall exterior lighting plan, to
enable the Town to determine that the applicable regulations of this
ordinance, will be satisfied.  The lighting plan shall include at least the
following items:



   a.   A site plan, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equaling no more
than twenty (20) feet, showing buildings, landscaping, parking areas, and all
proposed exterior lighting fixtures with readings space ten (10) feet apart
and showing readings at a point five (5) feet outside of all property lines;



   b.   Specifications for all proposed lighting fixtures including,
but not limited to, photometric data, designation as full cut-off fixtures,
and other descriptive information on the fixtures;



   c.   Proposed mounting height of all exterior lighting fixtures;



   d.   Analysis and illuminance level diagrams showing that the
proposed installation conforms to the lighting level standards in this
ordinance; and



   e.   Drawing of all relevant building elevations showing the
fixtures, the portions of the walls to be illuminated, the illuminance levels
of the walls, and the aiming points for any remote light fixtures.



   Lighting installations shall include timers, dimmers, or sensors to
reduce overall energy consumption and eliminate unneeded lighting.



   When an outdoor lighting installation is being modified, extended,
expanded, or added to, that outdoor lighting installation shall be subject to
the requirements of this ordinance and its regulations.  Expansions,
additions, or replacements to outdoor lighting installations shall be
designed to avoid harsh contrasts in color and/or lighting levels. 
Electrical service to outdoor lighting fixtures shall be underground unless
the fixtures are mounted directly on utility poles.



   Proposed lighting installations that are not covered by the specific
requirements and provisions of this ordinance will be approved only if the
Plan Commission, or its designee, determines that said installations are
designed to minimize glare, do not direct light beyond the boundaries of the
area being illuminated or onto adjacent properties or streets, and do not
result in excessive lighting levels.  In general, IESNA standards shall be
used to determine the appropriate lighting design.



   For the purpose of these regulations and this ordinance, the mounting
height of a lighting fixture shall be defined as the vertical distance from
the grade elevation of the surface being illuminated to the bottom of the
lighting fixture.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.8  Exemptions.



   The temporary use of lighting for public festivals, celebrations, and
the observance of holidays are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance,
except where the use creates a hazard or nuisance from excessive glare. 
However, consideration to light trespass requirements shall be demonstrated
prior to commencing the use of the temporary lighting.  Commercial
activities exempt under the provisions of the ordinance shall only be able to
use this exemption for one (1) occurrence per year.



   All other lighting existing or installed prior to the date of the
adoption of this ordinance which does not conform to the exterior lighting
regulations set forth and established herein shall be exempt with the
following conditions applying:



      1.   Lighting determined by the Town to create public hazard
may be ordered to be removed or altered at any time;



      2.   At the close of business all lighting shall be reduced to
a level not greater than those described in the Section 10-148.6g., Parking
Lot Lighting.



      3.   Upon installation of any new luminaire, this ordinance
shall apply to that luminaire.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.9  Street Lighting.



   Street lighting owned, operated, maintained or leased by the Town of
Dyer shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance, in the interest
of public safety.  However, it is understood and acknowledged that the Town
will make every effort to comply with the following exterior lighting
standards:



      1.   All new, repaired or replaced fixtures shall be full cut
off fixtures and the IESNA guidelines shall govern. However, the design for a
particular area may suggest the use of street light fixtures of a particular
period or architectural style as an alternative if the following items are
observed:



         (a)   The maximum initial lumens generated by each
fixture may not exceed two thousand (2,000) lumens.



         (b)   The mounting height of the alternative fixture may
not exceed fifteen (15) feet.



         (c)   Alternative lighting shall be approved in a public
hearing conducted by the Board of Zoning Appeals as part of a petition for
subdivision approval as a waiver from the requirements of the Book of
Standards which are an appendix to the Subdivision Control Ordinance and
which is held in accordance with the provisions of I.C., 5-3-1, et. seq. 
Public comment regarding the alternative lighting standard will be considered
at that time.



         (d)   Street lights shall be located in the public
right-of-way or on easement acquired for such a purpose.



         (e)   If the street has a sidewalk along one (1) side,
the street lights will generally be limited to the sidewalk side of the
street, unless the circumstances or safety considerations require otherwise.



   The Dyer Town Council will adopt a replacement program to annually
begin to replace street lighting fixtures (Cobra heads) that are not of the
full cut-off variety with full cut-off fixtures.  The Town Council shall
target annually a budgetary figure, as funds are available, to replace
fixtures during the normal course of maintenance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.10  Injunction.



   Any person or property owner who violates any provision of this
Exterior Lighting Regulations Ordinance, shall be subject to penalty and fine
of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense, such fine to inure to the
Town.  Each day of the existence of any violation shall be deemed a separate
offense.  Further, the Town Attorney is authorized to commence and prosecute
a proceeding for injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in
Lake County, Indiana, and the Town shall be entitled to recover its attorney
fees and costs.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-148.11  Immunity from Prosecution.



    The Town of Dyer, and its designees, employees, agents,
representatives, attorneys, elected and appointed officials, Metropolitan
Police Department and Volunteer Fire Department, and all other Town
departments and agencies, charged with enforcement of state and local laws
and code shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable,
good faith enforcement of this ordinance while acting within the scope of
authority conferred by the ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-149 through Section 10-154 Reserved for future use.



Division II. Special Use Districts.



Sec. 10-155  Definition of Special Use District (SUD).



   A zoning district in which the development of lots shall be according
to a plan, and in which development and/or improvements may not correspond in
lot size, bulk, type of structure, density, lot coverage or required open
space to the regulations otherwise required by the building, subdivision and
zoning ordinances.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-156  Applicability of Special Use District Regulations.



   The SUD classification shall be used only in areas in which special or
unusual development problems or needs for compatibility require that the Plan
Commission approve a development plan for consistency with general
development standards.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-157  Purpose for Special Use District Regulations.



   The SUD authorization serves to encourage unified development of a
geographic area. Deviation from specific site development standards is both
allowable and desirable as long as the general purposes for the standards are
achieved. The development should promote a harmonious variety or grouping of
uses and may utilize the economy of shared services and facilities. It is
further the purpose of authorized SUDs to utilize:



   a.   Advances in technology and design.



   b.   A comprehensive development equal to or better than resulting
from traditional lot-by-lot land use development, in which the design of the
overall area permits increased freedom in the placement and uses of buildings
and the location of open spaces, circulation facilities, off-street parking
areas and other facilities.



   c.   The potential of sites characterized by special features
including but not limited to geography, topography, size, shape, historic or
architectural significance, and location.



   d.   Compliance with state and federal regulations.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-158  Outline Development Plan.



   For any geographic area designated by the SUD classification on the
Official Zoning Map, which is also located within a designated Neighborhood
Development Program Area, the Dyer Redevelopment Commission shall prepare an
outline development plan. This plan shall include both maps and a written
statement as described in this section. The information shall include enough
of the area surrounding the SUD to demonstrate the relationship of the SUD
with adjoining uses, both existing and allowable.



   a.   The maps which are part of the outline plan may be in general
schematic form and shall contain the following information:



      1.   Existing topography.



      2.   Existing and proposed land uses and approximate location
of structures.



      3.   Character and density of structures.



      4.   Approximate location of streets and public ways.



      5.   Public uses.



      6.   Common open spaces and a description of the proposed use.



      7.   Access for emergency services.



   b.   The written statement which is part of the outline development
plan shall contain the following information:



      1.   A text describing the character of the proposed land use
and development, and the manner in which it implements the goals and
objectives of the Neighborhood Development Program Area.



      2.   A description of the public improvements, if any,
proposed for construction by the Town as a part of or enhancement to the
development. 



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-159  Application Process:  Preliminary Development Plan.



   a.   At the time a property owner desires to apply for approval to
modify an existing structure or land use, or to begin new construction within
any designated Special Use District, the petitioner shall prepare a
preliminary development plan for submission to the Plan Commission. Existing
structures shall not be subject to the following review process if the
modification to the structure involves replacing like materials with like
materials, i.e. replacing vinyl siding with new vinyl siding, or asphalt
shingles with new asphalt shingles. Maintenance of an existing structure such
as painting, window replacement, etc., shall not be subject to the following
procedure.



      1.   Petitioner shall appear before the Plan Commission to
describe and present the preliminary concepts, uses and intent of the
proposed plan. The Plan Commission shall submit the plan to the Site Plan
Review Committee for review and recommendation, pursuant to the requirements
outlined in Section 10-130(d)(9).



   b.   All remedies available to the Plan Commission shall be the same
as those contained in Section 10-102 of the Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
The review fee shall be that as set forth in Section 10-119 for SUD
Development Plan Review.



   c.   Should engineering review be required, fees for such review
shall be the same as those required in Section 10-119.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-160  Application Process:  Final Development Plan.



   a.   Within six (6) months of the Plan Commission's approval of the
preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan
Commission a final development plan containing in final form the information
required in the preliminary plan. The Plan Commission, however, may extend
for an additional six (6) months the time period for the filing of the final
development plan, when adequate need is shown. The final development plan may
be submitted with the preliminary development plan if the Plan Commission
deems it reasonable to allow such submittal. (See Section 10-159b.)



   b.   If the final development plan deviates in a material way from
the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall be required to submit a
revised preliminary development plan in the same manner as the original
application. 



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161  Special Use District - West U.S. 30 Corridor



Sec. 10-161.1  Application.



   This section applies only to the area zoned Special Use District (SUD)
- West U.S. 30 Corridor, as established by Ordinance Nos. 95-6 and 96-19 and
as amended by Ordinance No. 2003-26.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.2  Building Types and Uses.



   a.   Permitted Uses.  The following uses shall be permitted in the
SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor classification:



      1.   Permitted Open Space Uses.  Open space areas may be used
solely for parks, village greens, squares and natural areas. No enclosed
structures shall be built in an open space area until and unless approval is
given by the Dyer Plan Commission, at which time the owners of open space
areas may elect to erect such structures so long as the structure is intended
to further promote the use of the open space areas consistent with the intent
of this section. Other uses may be permitted which, upon application to the
Dyer Plan Commission, are deemed to be in accordance with the intent of the
SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor.



      2.   Permitted Civic Uses.  Civic uses areas are areas or
structures which are owned and or operated by a local, state or federal
government entity and may be used for one (1) or more of the following:



         (a)   Community center or local government building.



         (b)   Library.



         (c)   Post office.



         (d)   Municipal services.



         (e)   Other uses which, upon application to the Dyer
Plan Commission, are deemed to be in accordance with the intent of the SUD -
West U.S. 30 Corridor.



      3.   Permitted Type I Uses.  [Neighborhood District (ND] Type
I areas may be used for one (1) or more of the following:



         (a)   Residential dwelling units, including single
family and two family dwelling units and having a minimum six hundred (600)
square foot per unit.



         (b)   Retail sales and services, including card and
stationary, craft, frames, music, record, party supply, boutique, jewelry and
flower.



         (c)   Offices.



         (d)   Specialty food service seating less than one
hundred (100) patrons.



         (e)   Artist studios.



         (f)   Lodging, of more than six (6) guest rooms or
twelve (12) guests and limited to two (2) stories in height including ground
floor.



         (g)   Medical clinics, and health care facilities.



         (h)   Automobile parking lots.



         (i)   Public transit facilities.



         (j)   Any use permitted in civic use and open space use.



         (k)   Other uses which, upon application to the Dyer
Plan Commission, are determined to be in accordance with the intent of the
SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor.



      4.   Permitted Type II Uses.  [Central Business District
(CBD)] Type II Areas may be used for one (1) or more of the following:



         (a)   Residential dwelling units, including single
family and two family dwelling units and having a minimum six hundred (600)
square foot per unit, to other than street level.



         (b)   Retail sales and services, including card and
stationary, craft, frames, music, record, party supply, boutique, jewelry,
flower and video stores which must comply with parking requirements.



         (c)   Offices.



         (d)   Restaurants, specialty food service and private
food service.



         (e)   Day-care center.



         (f)   Artist studios.



         (g)   Lodging.



         (h)   Medical clinics, and health care facilities.



         (i)   Public transit facilities.



         (j)   Laundry or dry cleaning.



         (k)   Automobile parking lots.



         (l)   Any use permitted in civic use and open space use.



         (m)   Other uses not listed herein which, upon
application to the Dyer Plan Commission, are determined to be in accordance
with the intent of the SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor.



         (n)   Furniture repair, refinishing and stripping.



   b.   Special Exceptions.  The following uses may be permitted by
Special Exception in the SUD - West U.S. Corridor classification.  The
following uses may be permitted in Type II only as Special Exceptions, in the
SUD - West U.S. Corridor classification:



      (1)   Tavern/pub.



      (2)   Bank or other financial institution.



      (3)   Social club and health club.



      (4)   Grocery store.



      (5)   Churches.



      (6)   Centers for the advancement and presentation of
historical and cultural materials and events.



      (7)   Technology development or services.



      (8)   Schools which comply with parking requirements on site.



      (9)   Workshops.



      (10)   Other uses similar in all significant respects to a
permitted use.



      (11)   Drive-through facilities.



   c.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall not be permitted in
the SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor classification:



      (1)   Industrial uses.



      (2)   (Reserved).



      (3)   The sale of explosives in any amount.



      (4)   Automobile service station.



      (5)   The sale or dispensing of fuels used for vehicular use.



      (6)   Tattoo and sexually oriented businesses.



      (7)   Motorized vehicle repair services, other than as an
auxiliary use.



      (8)   Convention centers.



      (9)   Banquet facilities.



      (10)   Automotive or vehicular sales or related uses.



      (11)   Residential, other than as specified above.



      (12)   Chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution, as a
primary use.



      (13)   Any commercial use which is primarily directed to
patrons who are encouraged by the site layout, or buildings, to remain in
their automobile while receiving goods or services.



      (14)   Enameling, plating or painting except artist studios as
a primary use.



      (15)   Foundries, carting, express, moving or hauling terminal
or yard.



      (16)   Prisons, detention centers, or "half-way houses"
associated with prisons or penitentiaries.



      (17)   The manufacture, treatment or disposal of hazardous
waste materials.



      (18)   The manufacture, treatment or disposal of radioactive
waste.



      (19)   Agricultural uses, other than home gardens.



      (20)   Scrap yards.



      (21)   Mobile homes.



      (22)   Commercial sand, gravel or other mineral extraction.



      (23)   Outdoor commercial, except by vendor permit and
restricted to the sale of produce, food or prepared food.



      (24)   Outdoor storage.



      (25)   Kennels.



      (26)   Any use which produces any of the adverse impacts
defined as prohibited under the definition of Light Industry.



      (27)   Gasoline stations.



      (28)   The sale of the following:



         A.   Consumer fireworks and explosive compositions
except for:



            1.   Dipped sticks or wire sparklers. However,
total pyrotechnic composition may not exceed one hundred (100) grams per
item. Devices containing chlorate or perchlorate salts may not exceed five
(5) grams in total composition per item;



            2.   Cylindrical fountains;



            3.   Cone fountains;



            4.   Illuminating torches;



            5.   Wheels;



            6.   Ground spinners;



            7.   Flitter sparklers;



            8.   Snakes or glow worms;



            9.   Smoke devices;



            10.   Trick noisemakers, which include:



               a.   Party poppers;



               b.   Booby traps;



               c.   Snappers;



               d.   Trick matches;



               e.   Cigarette loads



               f.   Auto burglar alarms;



         B.   Firecrackers or salutes;



         C.   Fireworks except for items listed in A(1) through
A(10) above and model rockets, toy cap pistols, emergency signal flares,
matches, fixed ammunition for firearms, ammunition components intended for
use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons or small arms, shells, cartridges,
and primers for use in firearms, muzzle loading cannons or small arms;



         D.   M-80's, cherry bombs, silver salutes and any device
banned by the Federal Government;



         E.   Helicopters or aerial spinners;



         F.   Indoor pyrotechnics, special effects material;



         G.   Mines or shells;



         H.   Missile type rockets;



         I.   Roman candles;



         J.   Sky rockets.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2009-18, 11-18-09; Am. Ord. No.
2014-01, 1-9-14)



Sec. 10-161.3  Area Regulations.



   a.   Minimum Lot Area.  The minimum area for any use shall be two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.



   b.   Maximum Building Size.  No building or structure shall exceed
five thousand (5,000) gross square feet on a single story.



   c.   Building Height. Building height shall be not less than
fourteen (14) feet and not more than forty (40) feet.



   d.   Building Lines.



      1.   Front Yards.  For building Types I and II, the front
building line shall be less than twenty (20) feet from the curb edge of a
public street or between ten (10) and fifteen (15) feet from the property
line along Hwy. 30 on which the lot fronts. The front building line can vary
only from the front building line of adjacent lots by no greater than five
(5) feet with approval of the BZA. The front building line is a maximum
setback line rather than a minimum setback line. No fence may be located
forward of the actual building face.



      2.   Side Yards. There are no interior side yard setback
regulations. In other words, a building may be built out to the limits of the
lot on which it is built, however, in the case of a corner lot, the side yard
setback on the corner side shall be the same as that for a front yard setback.



      3.   Rear Yards. The rear building line shall be thirty-five
(35) feet or more from the rear property line when no ingress/egress service
road abuts the rear property line and five (5) feet or more when an
ingress/egress service road abuts the rear property line.



      4.   Exceptions. Side yard entrances and stairs are allowed if
entrance or stair and landings are an integral part of the building and
constructed of like materials and stair and landings are fully enclosed and
secured. At least one (1) entrance must face and abut the front yard in Type
II buildings.



   e.   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks must be installed and must be a minimum
of five (5) feet wide or as otherwise specified by the Town's Design Book of
Standards.



   f.   Landscaping.



      1.   Front yards.



         (a)   For building Type I, the front yard of each lot
shall be landscaped in such a manner as to provide significant living
greenery other than grass, including such items as trees, shrubs or flowers.
No parking shall be permitted in the front yard except when located on a
passenger vehicle ingress/egress drive.



         (b)   For building Type II, the front yard of each lot
shall be landscaped in such a manner as to provide significant living
greenery other than grass, including such items as trees, shrubs, bushes or
flowers except where the front building wall abuts a sidewalk which abuts a
street. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard at any time.



      2.   Rear Yards. A landscaped buffer, including significant
living greenery, of not less than ten (10) feet shall be maintained between
the rear property line and the remainder of the rear lot except when abutting
an ingress/egress service road. No parking shall be permitted in this buffer
area except when abutting an ingress/egress service road.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.4  Building Standards.



   The following building standards shall apply to each use type area
within SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor:



   a.   Public.  The construction of open colonnades on open space
areas which adjoin Type I and II buildings is permitted.



   b.   Sidewalk Sizes and Requirements. All sidewalk systems shall be
handicapped accessible. Sidewalks shall generally be parallel with the
streets they adjoin and may be either within the street right-of-way or
within an individual lot. The sidewalk's use and maintenance shall be ensured
by permanent easement.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.5  Parking.



   a.   General Parking Options:



      1.   Land area(s) for parking shall be reserved in accordance
with the following minimum parking requirements within the SUD - West U.S. 30
Corridor. The Dyer Plan Commission, in its discretion, may not require the
immediate construction of all of a parking area. The following requirements
do not necessarily apply if a Shared Parking option is elected. Parking
spaces shall be constructed in accordance with Section 10-132.



         (a)   Civic.  Minimum one (1) parking space per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross building square footage.



         (b)   Residential.



            (1)   Three-fourths (¾) parking spaces per
sleeping room for single family (minimum one (1) space required) all
fractions greater than one-half (½) equal one (1) space.



            (2)   One (1) parking space per sleeping room for
multi family and lodging.



         (c)   Restaurants, specialty and private food service,
social and health clubs. Minimum one (1) space per two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet of seating and/or counter area.



         (d)   All other uses. Minimum one (1) parking space per
one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, all fractions greater
than one-half (½) equal one (1) space.



      2.   On street Parking. Generally, continuous head-in or
parallel parking shall be provided along streets in Type II. Parallel parking
is permitted along all other streets except Hwy. 30 and where a Town
ordinance specifies otherwise.



      3.   Parking Space Allocation.  For other than shared
parking, parking spaces may be considered allocated to a particular lot, or
use, if those spaces are entirely on that lot or the use of the spaces has
been assured by assignment through easement or other legal guaranty. Street
side parking may be allocated to a particular lot when a particular
streetside space abuts a particular lot. Where streetside spaces abut more
than one (1) lot, a particular parking space may be allocated to a particular
lot only if more than sixty-six percent (66%) of the space abuts that lot or
the space use has been assured by assignment.



      4.   Location and Screening of Parking Lots.  Parking lots
and areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and are
prohibited from being located in front yards and on either corner of a corner
lot. All parking lots or areas shall be screened to help minimize their view
from the street.



         (a)   Parking lots or parking structures independent of
a primary use, shall not be located at street intersections.



         (b)   Parking lots shall be screened from the sidewalk
by walls, fences or solid landscaping six (6) feet in height. All screening
must be approved by the Plan Commission. Where parking lots associated with a
primary use are located at street intersections the screening requirement
shall comply with  Section 10-130(d)(1) in terms of its height.



         (c)   Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular and
pedestrian connections.



      5.   Parking Garage Requirements.  Parking garages or
structures built for the purpose of storing four (4) or more vehicles shall
be buffered at street level by a commercial use to mitigate potentially
detrimental affects to street quality that such structures might otherwise
cause. Parking structures at sidewalks shall be fronted by Type II building
uses. Automobile entry/exit shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width.



      6.   Ingress/Egress Service Roads. No parking is permitted on
ingress/egress service roads unless the ingress/egress service road is
constructed to additional width and approved by the Plan Commission for such
use.



      7.   Garages or carports are allowed only in Type I and shall
be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet behind the street facade of the
building.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.6  Utilities, Accessory Structures and Garbage.



   Utilities, equipment, accessory structures and the storage of garbage
shall not be located in the front yard and shall not be visible from adjacent
roadways for all building types.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.7  Non-Conforming Uses.



   a.   Existing non-conforming structures located within the SUD -
West U.S. 30 Corridor classification may be maintained as they existed at the
time of passage of this ordinance. Non-conforming uses may be maintained as
they existed at the time of passage of this ordinance. A non-conforming use
may be extended throughout the structure in which it existed at the time of
passage of this ordinance. A non-conforming use may not be extended to areas
of the structure which were not a part of the structure at the time of
passage of this ordinance. It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage
the use of property within the SUD - West U.S. 30 Corridor in a manner which
conforms to and enhances the outline development plan for the SUD - West U.S.
30 Corridor.



   b.   When any non-conforming use of a structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six (6) months, the structure shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the SUD - West U.S. 30
Corridor.



   c.   Additions to Type I, Residential use structures in place at the
time of passage of this ordinance do not need to comply with front and side
yard requirements of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-161.8  Amendment to Zoning Map.



   The official zoning map, incorporated by reference into the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be amended by designating the area described by the legal
description and map attached hereto as a Special Use District - West U.S. 30
Corridor and the same shall be incorporated by reference into the Zoning
Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-162  Special Use District - Calumet Avenue Corridor.



Sec. 10-162.1  Application.



   This section only applies to the area zoned Special Use District -
Calumet Avenue Corridor, as defined and outlined by the site map found in
Appendix A and the legal description found in Appendix B of Ordinance No.
2006-25, the contents of which shall be incorporated by reference as part of
this section.  This section is  amended by the addition of certain
definitions which are set forth in Appendix B to Ordinance No. 2009-18, the
contents of which shall be incorporated by reference as a part of this
section.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2009-18, 11-18-09)



Sec. 10-162.2  Developmental Standards.



   The developmental standards for this District, including but not
limited to, regulations as to the development, maintenance and use of
property within the District, shall be found in the "Calumet Avenue Corridor
Plan" ("Developmental Plan"), a document prepared by IN Architects and
Planners, Inc., containing eighty-four (84) pages of text, including the
cover, dated October 25, 2006, which is contained as Appendix C of Ordinance
No. 2006-25, the contents of which shall be incorporated by reference as part
of this section.  This section is amended by the addition of paragraph (25)
which is set forth in Appendix C to Ordinance No. 2009-18, the contents of
which shall be incorporated by reference as a part of this section.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07; Am. Ord. No. 2009-18, 11-18-09)



Sec. 10-162.3  Conflict.



   If the developmental standards for the District, as outlined and
contained in the Developmental Plan, are found to be in conflict with the
developmental standards found in any other section of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Town, the standards found in the Developmental Plan shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-162.4  Application Process/Site Plan Review.



   The application and site plan review process shall be governed by
Sections 10-159 and 10-130(d)(9) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town, as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-162.5  Amendment of Zoning Map.



   The official zoning map, incorporated by reference into the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be amended by designating the area described by the map
(Appendix A) and legal description (Appendix B) attached to Ordinance No.
2006-25 as a Special Use District - Calumet Avenue Corridor and the same
shall be incorporated by reference into the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-162.6  Public Hearing on Petition; Recommendation.



   a.   The Plan Commission shall, after notice as required by the Plan
Commission Rules, conduct a public hearing on any petition for a use in the
corridor which is not a stated permitted use;



   b.   The Plan Commission shall, after the public hearing, make a
recommendation on the petition to the Town Council. That recommendation shall
be a favorable recommendation, unfavorable recommendation, or no
recommendation;



   c.   The decision of the Plan Commission shall be certified to the
Town Council which shall vote on the petition within ninety (90) days after
certification to the Town Council. If the Town Council does not vote to deny
the petition within ninety (90) days, the petition is considered approved;



(Ord. No. 2018-02, 5-24-18)



Sec. 10-163  Building Standards.



   The following building standards shall apply to each use type area
within a SUD:



      1.   Public.  The construction of open colonnades on open
space areas which adjoin Type I and II buildings is permitted.



      2.   Sidewalk Sizes and Requirements.  All sidewalk systems
shall be handicapped accessible.  Sidewalks shall generally be parallel with
the streets they adjoin and may be either within the street right-of-way or
within an individual lot.  The sidewalk's use and maintenance shall be
ensured by permanent easement.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-164  Parking.



   a.   General Parking Options:



      1.   Land area(s) for parking shall be reserved in accordance
with the following minimum parking requirements within a SUD. The Dyer Plan
Commission, in its discretion, may not require the immediate construction of
all of a parking area.  The following requirements do not necessarily apply
if a Shared Parking option is elected. Parking spaces shall be constructed in
accordance with Section 10-132.



         (a)   Civic.  Minimum one (1) parking space per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross building square footage,



         (b)   Residential.



            (1)   Three fourths (¾) parking spaces per
sleeping room for single family (minimum one (1) space required) all
fractions greater than one half (½) equal one (1) space.



            (2)   One (1) parking space per sleeping room for
multi family and lodging.



         (c)   Restaurants, specialty and private food service,
social and health clubs.  Minimum one (1) space per two hundred and fifty
(250) square feet of seating and/or counter area.



         (d)   All other uses.  Minimum one (1) parking space
per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area, all fractions
greater than one half (½) equal one (1) space.



      2.   On street Parking. Generally, continuous head-in or
parallel parking shall be provided along streets in Type II. Parallel parking
is permitted along all other streets except Hwy. 30 and where a town
ordinance specifies otherwise.



      3.   Parking Space Allocation.  For other than shared
parking, parking spaces may be considered allocated to a particular lot, or
use, if those spaces are entirely on that lot or the use of the spaces has
been assured by assignment through easement or other legal guaranty.  Street
side parking may be allocated to a particular lot when a particular
streetside space abuts a particular lot.  Where streetside spaces abut more
than one (1) lot, a particular parking space may be allocated to a particular
lot only if more than sixty six percent (66%) of the space abuts that lot or
the space use has been assured by assignment.



      4.   Location and Screening of Parking Lots. Parking lots and
areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and are prohibited
from being located in front yards and on either corner of a corner lot.  All
parking lots or areas shall be screened to help minimize their view from the
street.



         (a)   Parking lots or parking structures independent of
a primary use, shall not be located at street intersections.



         (b)   Parking lots shall be screened from the sidewalk
by walls, fences or solid landscaping six (6) feet in height.  All screening
must be approved by the Plan Commission. Where parking lots associated with a
primary use are located at street intersections the screening requirement
shall comply with Section 10-130d.1. in terms of its height.



         (c)   Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular and
pedestrian connections.



      5.   Parking Garage Requirements.  Parking garages or
structures built for the purpose of storing four (4) or more vehicles shall
be buffered at street level by a commercial use to mitigate potentially
detrimental affects to street quality that such structures might otherwise
cause.  Parking structures at sidewalks shall be fronted by Type II building
uses.  Automobile entry/exit shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width.



      6.   Ingress/Egress Service Roads.  No parking is permitted
on ingress/egress service roads unless the ingress/egress service road is
constructed to additional width and approved by the Plan Commission for such
use.



      7.   Garages or carports are allowed only in Type I and shall
be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet behind the street facade of the
building.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-165  Utilities, Accessory Structures and Garbage.



   Utilities, equipment, accessory structures and the storage of garbage
shall not be located in the front yard and shall not be visible from adjacent
roadways for all building types.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-166  Non-Conforming Uses.



   a.   Existing non-conforming structures located within the SUD
classification may be maintained as they existed at the time of passage of
this ordinance.  Non-conforming uses may be maintained as they existed at
the time of passage of this ordinance.  A non-conforming use may be extended
throughout the structure in which it existed at the time of passage of this
ordinance.  A non-conforming use may not be extended to areas of the
structure which were not a part of the structure at the time of passage of
this ordinance.  It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage the use of
property within the SUD in a manner which conforms to and enhances the
outline development plan for the SUD.



   b.   When any non-conforming use of a structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six (6) months, the structure shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the SUD. 



   c.   Additions to Type I, Residential use structures in place at the
time of passage of this ordinance do not need to comply with front and side
yard requirements of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-167  Amendment to Zoning Map.



   The official zoning map, incorporated by reference into the Zoning
Ordinance, shall be amended by designating the area described by the legal
description and map attached hereto as a Special Use District and the same
shall be incorporated by reference into the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-167.1  Special Use District - Sheffield Avenue Corridor.



   a.   Application. This section only applies to the area zoned
Special Use District - Sheffield Avenue Corridor, as defined and outlined by
the site map found in Appendix A of Ordinance No. 2009-17 and the legal
description found in Appendix B of Ordinance No. 2009-17, the contents of
which are incorporated by reference as part of this section.



   b.   Developmental standards.  The developmental standards for this
District, including but not limited to, regulations as to the development,
maintenance and use of property within the District, shall be found in the
"Sheffield Avenue Corridor Plan" ("Developmental Plan"), containing
eighty-four (84) pages of text, including the cover, which is contained as
Appendix C of Ordinance No. 2009-17, the contents of which is incorporated by
reference as part of this section.



   c.   Conflict. If the developmental standards for the District as
outlined and contained in the Developmental Plan are found to be in conflict
with the developmental standards found in any section of the Zoning Ordinance
of the Town of Dyer, Indiana, the standards found in the Developmental Plan
shall prevail.



   d.   Application Process/Site Plan Review.  The application and
site plan review process shall be governed by Sections 10-159 and
10-130(d)(9) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Dyer, as amended from
time to time.



   e.   Amendment of Zoning Map.  The official zoning map,
incorporated by reference into the Zoning Ordinance, shall be amended by
designating the area described by the map (Appendix A of Ordinance 2009-17)
and legal description (Appendix B of Ordinance 2009-17) attached hereto as a
Special use District - Sheffield Avenue Corridor and the same shall be
incorporated by reference into the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2009-17, 11-18-09) 



Sec. 10-167.2  Public Hearing on Petition; Recommendation.



   a.   The Plan Commission shall, after notice as required by the Plan
Commission Rules, conduct a public hearing on any petition for a use in the
corridor which is not a stated permitted use;



   b.   The Plan Commission shall, after the public hearing, make a
recommendation on the petition to the Town Council. That recommendation shall
be a favorable recommendation, unfavorable recommendation, or no
recommendation;



   c.   The decision of the Plan Commission shall be certified to the
Town Council which shall vote on the petition within ninety (90) days after
certification to the Town Council. If the Town Council does not vote to deny
the petition within ninety (90) days, the petition is considered approved.



(Ord. No. 2018-02, 5-24-18)



Division III. Sexually Oriented Businesses.



Sec. 10-168.1  Policy.



   It is the purpose of this Division III (Sections 10-168.1 through
10-168.22) as amended from time to time, to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses from
occurring within the Town. The provisions of this division have neither the
purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of
any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this division to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials which are protected by
the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or the Indiana State
Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent or effect of this division to, in any way, condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.2  Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   (a)   Employee.  A person who works or performs in and/or for a
sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.



   (b)   Establishment. Means and includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such sexually
oriented business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, regardless of
whether it currently exists as a sexually oriented business, to any of the
sexually oriented businesses defined in this division;



      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this division to any other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.



   (c)   Knowledge or Knowledge of Such Nuisance.  Having knowledge of
the content and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct which
appears in the lewd matter.



   (d)   Lewd matter.  Any matter which:



      (1)   The average person finds, when applying contemporary
community standards and when considered as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest; and



      (2)   Depicts or describes patently offensive representations
simulated; or



         a.   Ultimate sexual acts, normal, perverted, or actual;
or



         b.   Masturbation, excretory functions, or the
exhibition of the genitals or genital area.



Nothing herein is intended to include or proscribe any matter which, when
considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used, possesses
serious literary, artistic or political scientific value.



   (e)   Matter.  A motion picture film or a publication, or both.



   (f)   Motion Picture Film.  Any:



      (1)   Film or plate negative; or



      (2)   Film or plate positive; or



      (3)   Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;



      (4)   Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in
negative or positive form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen;
or



      (5)   Video tape or any other medium used to electronically
reproduce images on a screen.



   (g)   Nudity or State of Nudity.



      (1)   The appearance of bare human buttocks, anus, male or
female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover
a human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.



   (h)   Operator.  Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian,
manager, operator or other person in charge of any permitted or licensed
premises.



   (i)   Permitted or Licensed Premises.   Any premises that requires
a license and/or permit for operation and that is classified as a sexually
oriented business.



   (j)   Permittee and/or Licensee.  A person in whose name a permit
and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as
well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit
and/or license.



   (k)   Person.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, organization, or other legal entity.



   (l)   Place.  Includes, but is not limited to, any building,
structure or place, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether
permanent or not, or the ground itself.



   (m)   Public Building.  Any building owned, leased or held by the
United States, the State of Indiana, the County of Lake, the Town of Dyer,
any special district, school district, or any other agency or political
subdivision of the State of Indiana or the United States, which building is
used for governmental purposes.



   (n)   Public Park or Recreation Area.  Public land which has been
designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to,
a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the Town which is under the
control, operation, or management of the Town park and recreation authorities.



   (o)   Publication.  Includes any books, magazine, article,
pamphlet, writing, painting, illustration, picture, sound recording, or
motion picture film which is offered for sale or exhibition in a
coin-operated machine.



   (p)   Regularly. The featuring of a continuous presentation of
sexual material including, but not limited to, films, movies, videos, and the
like, depicting specified sexual activities or displaying specified
anatomical areas as one of the very objectives of the commercial enterprise.



   (q)   Religious institution.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple
or other building, which is used primarily for religious worship and related
religious activities.



   (r)   Residential District or Residential Use.  A single family
dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, mobile home park or subdivision
as defined in the Town of Dyer Zoning Ordinance.



   (s)   Sale.  A passing of title or right of possession from a
seller to a buyer for valuable consideration and shall include, but is not
limited to, any lease, rental arrangement or other transaction wherein and
whereby any valuable consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of
possession of, lewd matter.



   (t)   School.  Any public or private educational facility
including, but not limited to, child day-care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate
schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges, colleges and universities. The term school includes the
school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another
purpose which are only incidentally used as a school.



   (u)   Semi-Nude or Semi-Nudity.  A state of dress in which clothing
covers no more than the genitals, anus, pubic region and areola of the female
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.



   (v)   Sexually Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, escort agency or nude model studio, each of which are more
particularly defined as follows:



      (1)   Adult Arcade.  An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one (1) or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image producing machines, for
viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Shop or Adult Video
Store. A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial
portion of its revenues, or devotes a significant or substantial portion of
its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or viewing, for any
form of consideration, of any one (1) or more of the following:



         a.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



         b.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



         c.   An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty
shop or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty shop or adult video store, so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale, rental or viewing, for any form
of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe
“specified anatomical areas" or “specified sexual activities.”



      (3)   Adult Cabaret.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, which regularly features:



         a.   Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity;



         b.   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or



         c.   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   Adult Motel. A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment which:



         a.   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material
by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any
off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio or television; and



         b.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time less than ten (10) hours or allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.



      (5)   Adult Motion Picture Theater.  A commercial
establishment where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
are regularly shown for any form of consideration.



      (6)   Adult Theater.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear nude, in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity, or live performances which are characterized by exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.



      (7)   Escort.  A person who, for any form of consideration,
agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.



      (8)   Escort Agency.  A person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



      (9)   Massage Parlor.  Any place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of
fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of, or in connection
with, specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such
treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her
specified anatomical areas. The definition of sexually oriented businesses
shall not include the practice of massage in or by any licensed hospital,
licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or any nurse or
technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, or by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional
or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program, or by
any person so licensed to perform such activities.



      (10)   Nude Model Studio.  Any place where a person who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas
for money or any form of consideration and is to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons.



      (11)   Sexual Encounter Establishment.  A business or
commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes
offers, for any form of consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons
may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or
activities when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   (w)   Specified Anatomical Areas.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; or



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   (x)   Specified Sexual Activities.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;



      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal
or tumescence; or



      (5)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with,
any of the activities set forth in subdivisions (a) through (d) of this
subsection.



   (y)   Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Business.  An
increase in the floor areas occupied by a sexually oriented business by more
than fifteen percent (15%), as the floor areas exist on the date Ordinance
No. 2002-14 takes effect.



   (z)   Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented
Business.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal devise, which transfers ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person
possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.3  Permit Required.



   (a)   No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, or cause to be
conducted, maintained, or operated, any sexually oriented business within the
corporate limits of the Town without first being licensed under this division.



   (b)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing,
suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or
existing sexually oriented businesses. The Town of Dyer Department of
Planning and Zoning, or its designee, is also responsible for ascertaining
whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being
requested complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in
effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of Ordinance
No. 2002-14 in the Town and the Town's Comprehensive Plan.



   (c)   The Town of Dyer Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible
for inspecting a proposed, permitted or non-permitted sexually oriented
business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable
statutes and ordinances.



   (d)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by
the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning. Any person desiring to
operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the Town an original and
two (2) copies of a sworn permit application on the standard application form
supplied by the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee.



   (e)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   In the event that an applicant is:



         a.   An individual, the individual shall state his/her
legal name, and all aliases, and shall submit satisfactory proof that he/she
is at least eighteen (18) years of age;



         b.   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;



         c.   A corporation or limited liability company, such
entity shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation or
organization, evidence that the entity is in good standing under the laws of
the State of Indiana, and the name and address of the individual registered
as agent for service of process.



      (2)   In the event that an applicant intends to operate the
sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant,
he/she must:



         a.   Include the sexually oriented business's name in
the application;



         b.   Submit the required Indiana registration documents
for said name.



      (3)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in
the application holds any other permits and/or licenses under this division
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city,
town, county, or state and, if so, the names and locations of such other
permitted businesses.



      (4)   The single classification of permit for which the
applicant is filing.



      (5)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, common street address, and
telephone number(s), if any.



      (6)   The applicant's business mailing address.



      (7)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.



      (8)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared
within thirty (30) days prior to application by a State of Indiana registered
land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
established existing uses regulated by this division within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the property to be certified, the property lines of any
established religious institution/ synagogue, school, or public park or
recreation area within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be
certified and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or
residential property within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property to be
certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing
or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.



      (9)   In the event that a person wishes to operate a sexually
oriented business which shall exhibit films, video cassettes or other video
reproductions on the premises which depict specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the
application requirements stated at Section 10-168.14.



   (f)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by
this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty
within thirty (30) days from the date of such change shall be a valid and
lawful basis for suspension of a permit.



   (g)   In the event that the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and
Zoning, or its designee, determines or learns at any time that the applicant
has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented
business, it shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the
applicant ten (10) days within which to properly complete the application.
(The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the
period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete
the application.)



   (h)   An applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this division, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with all applicable health, fire and building codes and laws, and
any other applicable federal or state laws.



   (i)   An applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable
application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) at the time of the
filing of an application under this section of this division, as amended from
time to time.



   (j)   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any
sexually oriented business deemed in this division, and as part of any
application for a permit under this section, an applicant shall obtain from
the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its designee, a
certification that the proposed location of such business complies with the
Town of Dyer Zoning Ordinance.



   (k)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or Town
permits and/or licenses shall not exempt him/her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit under this section of this
division.



   (l)   By applying for a permit under this division, an applicant
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this division and to
the exercise by the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, and all other Town agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the Town, of their respective
responsibilities under this division.



   (m)   An applicant shall be required to provide the Town with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to
Section 10-168.13. This shall be a continuing obligation of an applicant even
after a permit is granted or renewed.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.4  Investigation and Application.



   (a)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the Town,
and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the Town's Zoning
Administrator shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall
immediately thereafter transmit photocopies of the application to all Town
agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and
state and federal laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually
oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under applicable
law and as set forth in this division. Said investigation shall be completed
within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application by the Town's Zoning
Administrator. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or
agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or
disapproval of the application, date it, sign it and, in the event the
department or agency recommends disapproval of the application, the reasons
therefor.



   (b)   A department or agency shall recommend disapproval of an
application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be
in violation of any provision of any applicable statute, code, ordinance,
regulation or other law in effect in the Town. After indicating its
recommendation of approval or disapproval of an application, each department
or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the
Town's Zoning Administrator, who shall forward the application and any
accompanying materials to the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning
for consideration.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.5  Issuance of Permit.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, shall grant or deny an application for a permit within thirty (30)
days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of said thirty
(30) days, and unless an applicant requests and is granted a reasonable
extension of time, an applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the
business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the Town of Dyer
Department of Planning and Zoning, or its designee, notifies the applicant of
the denial of the application and states the reasons(s) for that denial.



   (b)   Grant of Application for Permit.



      (1)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or
its designee, shall grant the application unless one (1) or more of the
criteria set forth in subsection (c) below is present.



      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name
of the person, or persons, to whom the permit is granted, the permit's
expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit
shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business shall be subject to
prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to I.C., 35-45-4-1,
as amended from time to time. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it
can be read easily at any time.



   (c)   Denial of Application for Permit.



      (1)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or
its designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:



         a.   An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.



         b.   An applicant has failed to provide all of the
information required by this section or the permit application itself for the
issuance of the permit, or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form.



         c.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have been inspected by the appropriate and responsible Town
departments and/or agencies and have been found to be in violation of
applicable Town and/or state health, fire and building codes.



         d.   The application or permit fees required by this
division have not been paid.



         e.   An applicant of the proposed sexually oriented
business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the
provisions of this division or the Town of Dyer Zoning Ordinance.



         f.   The granting of the application would violate a
federal or state law, statute, ordinance, or court order.



         g.   An applicant knowingly has in his/her employ, an
employee who does not have a valid license as required in Section 10-168.13.



      (2)   In the event that the Town of Dyer Department of
Planning and Zoning, or its designee, denies the application, it shall notify
an applicant of the denial and state the reasons therefor.



      (3)   In the event that a person applies for a permit for a
particular location within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of
denial of a previous application for a permit at that location, and there has
not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be
expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reason(s) for
denial, the application shall be denied.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.6  Annual Permit Fee.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit shall be two
hundred dollars ($200.00).



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.7  Inspection.



   (a)   An applicant or permittee shall permit duly designated
representatives of the Town of Dyer and Lake County, Indiana, to enter and
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
insuring compliance with any and all applicable laws, statutes, codes,
ordinances, and the like, at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (b)   A person who refuses to permit such inspection of the premises
at any time that it is occupied or open for business, as described in
subsection (a) above, shall be in violation of this division.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.8  Expiration of Permit.



   (a)   Each permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of
issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section
10-168.03 (for applications for permit renewals, filing of the original
survey shall be sufficient). An application for renewal shall be made at
least thirty (30) days before the permit expiration date and, when made less
than thirty (30) days before the permit expiration date, the expiration of
the permit will not be affected.



   (b)   When the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or
its designee, denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a
permit under this division for a period of one (1) year from the date of
denial. If, subsequent to denial, the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and
Zoning, or its designee, determines that the basis for denial of the renewal
of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if
at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.9  Suspension of Permit.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days
if it determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this division; or



      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any
controlled substances while working in or on the premises of the sexually
oriented business; or



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of the premises of the
sexually oriented business as authorized by this division; or



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
premises of the sexually oriented business; or



      (5)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation,
whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing
said rules or laws. In the event of such state or federal statute, code,
ordinance or regulation violation, the Town of Dyer Department of Planning
and Zoning, or its designee, shall promptly notify the permittee of the
violation and shall allow the permittee a three (3) day period in which to
correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before
the expiration of the three (3) day period, the Town of Dyer Department
Planning and Zoning, or its designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and
shall notify the permittee of the suspension.



      (6)   Knowingly employed a person who does not have a valid
license as required in Section 10-168.13.



   (b)   The suspension of the permit shall remain in effect until the
violation of the applicable statute, code, ordinance or regulation has been
corrected.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.10  Revocation of Permit.



   (a)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in Section 10-168.9
occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12)
months.



   (b)   The Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, shall revoke a permit upon determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the
applicant's opportunity for obtaining a permit; or



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; or



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises; or



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's
permit was suspended; or



      (5)   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month
period, a person, or persons, committed an offense occurring in or on the
permitted premises, which offense constitutes a specified criminal act for
which a conviction has been obtained and the person, or persons, were
employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were
committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the revocation of the permit; or



      (6)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes
or fees related to a sexually oriented business; or



      (7)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or



      (8)   A permittee has operated, or is operating, more than one
(1) sexually oriented business under a single roof under the terms of a
single permit; or



      (9)   A permittee has engaged in or attempted to engage in a
transfer of permit, in violation of Section 10-168.12.



   (c)   When the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or
its designee, revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one (1)
year and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
permit for a period of one (1) year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Town of Dyer Department of
Planning and Zoning, or its designee, finds that the basis for revocation
under Section 10-168.10 has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a
permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date revocation
became effective. If the permit was revoked under Section 10-168.10, an
applicant may not be granted another permit until the specified number of
years required under Section 10-168.5 have elapsed.



(Ord. No. 2007-22, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.11  Judicial Review of Permit Denial, Suspension or Revocation.



   After denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
judicial review of the administrative action in Lake County, Indiana,
Superior or Circuit Court.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.12  Transfer of Permit.



   (a)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application for permit.



   (b)   A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another
person.



   (c)   A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another
location.



   (d)   Any attempt to transfer a permit, either directly or
indirectly, in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the
permit shall be deemed revoked.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.13  Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.



   (a)   Each individual who will be employed in a sexually oriented
business, as defined in Section 10-168.2(22), who engages in the services
rendered by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter
establishment, massage parlor (except for massage parlors licensed pursuant
to applicable provisions of the Dyer Town Code), or a live performer or
entertainer, shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business
employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). Said fee is to cover the reasonable administrative costs of
the licensing application process.



   (b)   Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented
business employee license, an applicant shall submit on a form to be provided
by the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its designee, the
following information:



      (1)   The applicant's name and any other names (including
"stage" names or aliases) used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, and date and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present business address and telephone number; and



      (5)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least
eighteen (18) years of age.



   (c)   After the application is completed and filed and the license
fee is paid, the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, shall issue a license unless it finds that one (1) or more of the
following findings is true:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license,
or in any report or record required to be filed with the Town of Dyer
Department of Planning and Zoning or any other department of the Town;



      (2)   The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;



      (3)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this division;



   (d)   Renewal of License.



      (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be
subject to annual renewal by the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and
Zoning, or its designee, upon the written application of the applicant and a
finding by the Town of Dyer Department of Planning and Zoning, or its
designee, that the applicant has not committed any act during the existence
of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial
permit application.



      (2)   The renewal fee for the license shall be the same as the
initial application fee.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.14  Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit
Films or Videos in Video Booths.



A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented
business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued to said business under this division, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty
(150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:



   (a)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, an
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations, the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the
premises wherein patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater
than eight (8) feet. The diagram shall also designate the place where the
permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north, or to some
designated street or object, and should be drawn to a designated scale with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimension of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6)
inches. The Town's Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, may waive the
filing of the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant
adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



   (b)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.



   (c)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the Town of Dyer Department
of Planning and Zoning, or its designee.



   (d)   It is the duty of the owner(s) and operator of the premises to
insure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated at each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



   (e)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment.
If the premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access, for any purpose, from at least one (1) of the manager's
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.



   (f)   It shall be the duty of the owner(s) and operator of the
premises, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present
on the premises, to insure that the view area specified in subsection (e)
above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials or persons at all times, and to insure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant
to subsection (a) above.



   (g)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at
any one (1) time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes," shall be allowed
in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing room from an adjoining
viewing room or restroom.



   (h)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access and shall provide an illumination of not less than two (2.0)
footcandles, as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the
owner(s) and operator of the premises, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present on the premises, to insure that the illumination
described herein is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the
premises.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.15  Prohibitions Regarding Minors and Sexually Oriented
Businesses.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person who operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued for said business under this division, to knowingly
or, with reasonable cause, permit, suffer or allow:



      (1)   Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age
to the business premises.



      (2)   A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work
at the business premises as an employee.



   (b)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at
all times during such sexually oriented business's regular business hours. It
shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed
that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) unless the
attendant asked for and was furnished:



      (1)   A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's
license; or



      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by
the State of Indiana reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of
age or older.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.16  Advertising and Lighting Regulations.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for
said business under this division, to do any of the following;



      (1)   Advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by
any applicable state statute or local ordinance;



      (2)   Display or otherwise exhibit the materials and/or
performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising or any
portion of the interior premises which is visible from outside the premises.
This prohibition shall not extend to advertising the existence or location of
such sexually oriented business.



      (3)   Allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented
business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, except to
the extent permitted by the provisions of this division.



      (4)   Erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually
oriented business other than as permitted by the Town of Dyer Zoning
Ordinance, as amended from time to time, and as follows:



         a.   Signage shall not contain photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations, in any manner, and may contain only
the legal name of the sexually oriented business.



         b.   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall
be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size,
and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a
primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.



      (5)   Allow the exterior portions of the establishment to be
painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall
not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met:



         a.   The establishment is a part of a commercial
multiunit center; and



         b.   The exterior portions of each individual unit in
the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the
sexually oriented business, are painted the same color as one (1) another, or
are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall
architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center.



   (b)   All off-street parking areas and premises entrances to the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one (1.0) footcandle of light on the parking
surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order
to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving
the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and
employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The
lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises
pursuant to Section 10-168.16.



   (c)   Nothing contained in this section of this division shall
relieve the operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with
the requirements of the Town of Dyer, commonly known as the Sexually Oriented
Business Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, or any
subsequently enacted Town ordinances or regulations.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.17  Hours of Operation.



   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be
operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this division, and allow such
business to remain open for business or to permit any employee to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m,
of any particular day.



   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while working as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued for said business under this division, to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
of any particular day.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.18  Nudity at Sexually Oriented Businesses Prohibited.



   No person shall allow public nudity in any sexually oriented business.
Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section
shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of Section
10-168.9.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.19  Regulations Pertaining to Live Entertainment.



   (a)   For purposes of this section, live entertainment is defined as
a person who appears nude, semi-nude, or a performance which is characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.



   (b)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) of a
sexually oriented business establishment, except upon a stage at least
eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor, which stage is separated
by a distance of at least ten feet (10) from the nearest area occupied by
patron(s). No patron shall be permitted within ten feet (10) of the stage
while the stage is occupied by a performer.



   (c)   The sexually oriented business shall provide separate dressing
room facilities for female and male performers that shall not be occupied or
used, in any way, by anyone other than performers.



   (d)   The sexually oriented business shall provide access for
performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely
separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically
feasible, the sexually oriented business shall provide a minimum four (4)
foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the
stage, which walk aisle shall be equipped with a railing, fence or other
barrier separating the patrons and the performers and which prevents any
physical contact between patrons and performers.



   (e)   No performer, either before, during, or after a performance,
shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical
contact with any performer either before, during or after a performance. This
subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the premises
of the sexually oriented business.



   (f)   Fixed rails at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be
maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons that
are required by this section of this division.



   (g)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
performer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall
place the gratuity in a container that is, at all times, located separately
from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact
between a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity
from any patron.



   (h)   No operator of a sexually oriented business shall cause or
allow a performer to engage in any entertainment such as a "couch" or a
"straddle" dance with a patron while in or on the premises. No performer
shall contract to or engage in a "couch" or "straddle" dance with a patron
while in or on the premises. For purposes of this subsection, "couch" or
"straddle" dance is defined as an employee of the sexually oriented business
intentionally touching or otherwise coming within ten feet (10) of any patron
while engaged in the display or exposure of any "specified anatomical area"
or any "specified sexual activity." For purposes of this subsection, employee
is defined as it is in Section 10-168.2(1).



   (i)   This section shall not apply to an employee of a sexually
oriented business who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or
bartender, comes within ten (10) feet of a patron. No employee shall engage
in any specified sexual activity or display or expose any specified
anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or
bartender.



   (j)   Compliance with this section.



      (1)   For purposes of this section, sexually oriented business
is defined as set forth in Section 10-168.2(22). No sexually oriented
business shall be considered to be in compliance with this section until the
Town's duly designated representative(s) have inspected and approved the
premises of the sexually oriented business. The Town shall have ten (10) days
from the date it receives written notice from the operator that the premises
are ready for inspection to determine if the premises are in compliance with
this section. Failure by the Town to determine compliance within ten (10)
days of the date it receives notice shall constitute a finding of compliance
under this section.



      (2)   An operator of a sexually oriented business that has
been providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business
permit shall have the time periods listed below within which to bring the
premises into compliance with this section. Failure to do so while continuing
to provide live entertainment shall cause the sexually oriented business's
permit to be suspended under Section 10-168.9. The permit shall remain
suspended until the premises are approved by the Town's duly designated
representative(s) as being in full compliance with this section.



      (3)   An operator of a sexually oriented business that has
been operating under a valid permit for another classification of sexually
oriented business, and who seeks to provide live entertainment at that
sexually oriented business, shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented
business permit for the operation of a sexually oriented business providing
live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided at that sexually
oriented business. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the
sexually oriented business is approved as being in full compliance with this
section and all other applicable requirements of this division.



      (4)   An applicant for a permit to operate a new sexually
oriented business who seeks to provide live entertainment shall apply for and
receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of a sexually
oriented business providing live entertainment before any live entertainment
is provided. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the sexually
oriented business is approved as being in full compliance with this section
and all other applicable requirements of this division.



      (5)   Compliance with subsection (b) must occur within sixty
(60) days from the date this section becomes effective.



      (6)   Compliance with subsection (c) must occur within ninety
(90) days from the date this Section becomes effective.



      (7)   Compliance with subsection (d) must occur within ninety
(90) days from the date this section becomes effective.



      (8)   Compliance with subsection (e) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



      (9)   Compliance with subsection (f) must occur within sixty
(60) days from the date this section becomes effective.



      (10)   Compliance with subsection (g) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



      (11)   Compliance with subsection (h) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



      (12)   Compliance with subsection (i) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.20  Exemptions.



   (a)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this
division that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so
in a modeling class operated:



      (1)   By a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university that maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure:



         a.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and



         b.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a
student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and



         c.   Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the
premises at any one (1) time.



   (b)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this
division that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued under this Division III exposed any
specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom,
or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible
only to employees.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.21  Prohibition of Distribution of Sexual Devices.



   (a)   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute for commercial
purposes, sell or offer for sale, any device, instrument or paraphernalia
designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



   (b)   Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia shall include, but
are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains,
bather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements
(excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of
sadomasochistic abuse.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-168.22  Penalties and Injunctive Relief.



   (a)   Any person who violates the provisions of this division, as
amended from time to time, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) for each violation. Each day of
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (b)   In addition to seeking penalties against any individual who
violates the provisions of this division, as amended from time to time, the
Town may commence any and all necessary and appropriate legal action in any
court of competent jurisdiction to prevent or remedy any violation or
non-compliance with this Division III. This shall include, but is not limited
to, seeking an equitable action for injunctive relief against any individuals
violating the provisions of this Division III or an action at law for
damages, as well as the recovery of attorney fees related to the same.



   (c)   Nothing herein shall prevent or restrict the Town from
prosecuting any violation of this Division III as an ordinance violation in
the Town Court and seeking all available remedies permitted thereby.



   (d)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall
be cumulative and independently available to the Town, and the Town shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the
full extent allowed by law.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-169 through Sec. 10-174 Reserved for Future Use.



Division IV.  Fences.



Sec. 10-175  Front Yard Fence Regulations.



   Fences shall not be permitted in any required front yard in any
residential district or along the edge of any front yard, unless the Zoning
Administrator shall find that the proposed fence is for decorative purposes
only such as a split rail fence with a total fence height not greater than
forty-eight (48) inches, a picket fence of not more than thirty-six (36)
inches in height, or a wrought iron fence also not more than thirty-six (36)
inches in height, and that said fence will not obstruct clear vision, and
will not be constructed and situated in such a way as to create a safety
hazard.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-176  Barbed Wire.



   a.   Barbed wire shall not be permitted on any fence in any manner
which is located within ten (10) feet of a residential district.



   b.   Also, where permissible, barbed wire added to the top of any
fence will be counted as applying toward the overall height of said fence.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-177  Residential Fences.



   Residential fences shall be limited to a maximum of six (6) feet in
height.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-178  Fences in Commercial Districts.



   Fences in commercial districts shall be limited to a maximum height of
eight (8) feet.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-179  Fences in Industrial Districts.



   Fences in industrial districts shall be limited to a maximum of ten
(10) feet in height.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-180  Front Yard Requirements in Commercial and Industrial Districts.



   Commercial and industrial zoning districts shall be allowed to
construct fences in required front yards so long as clear vision can be
maintained.



(Ord. No. 2007-33, 12-27-07)



Sec. 10-181 through Sec. 10-189 Reserved for Future Use.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 11
COMPARATIVE TABLES



   This Chapter is designed as a research tool to assist the reader in
accessing information in the 1995 Dyer Town Code.



   The first table references Resolutions adopted by the Town Council to
new Sections of the 1995 Dyer Town Code.



   The second table references Ordinances passed by the Town Council to
new Sections of the 1995 Dyer Town Code.



TABLE 1–RESOLUTIONS



 

Resolution Number
 
Date of Adoption
 
New 1995 Code Section(s)




Res. No. 683
 
12-28-67
 
Sec. 2-190


Res. No. 770
 
10-13-70
 
Sec. 5-45


Res. No. 78-54, § 1-5
 
11-14-78
 
Sec. 2-151


Res. No. 82-8, § 1
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 2-9


Res. No. 82-8, § 3
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 2-97


Res. No. 82-8, § 4
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 2-10


Res. No. 84-4
 
02-14-84
 
Sec. 2-115


Res. No. 85-7, § 1
 
08-13-85
 
Sec. 2-172


Res. No. 85-7, § 2
 
08-13-85
 
Sec. 2-173


Res. No. 85-7, § 3
 
08-13-85
 
Sec. 2-174


Res. No. 85-7, § 4
 
08-13-85
 
Sec. 2-175


Res. No. 5
 
06-12-90
 
Sec. 9-200


Res. No. 91-9
 
04-09-91
 
Sec. 9-34


Res. No. 91-17
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-18


Res. No. 91-22, § 1
 
12-10-91
 
Sec. 2-145


Res. No. 91-22, § 2
 
12-10-91
 
Sec. 2-146


Res. No. 92-2
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-150


Res. No. 92-5, § 2
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-140


Res. No. 92-5, § 3
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-141


Res. No. 92-15
 
04-14-92
 
Sec. 2-182


Res. No. 92-36
 
11-10-92
 
Sec. 2-141


Res. No. 93-2
 
02-08-93
 
Sec. 2-120


Res. No. 93-10
 
05-11-93
 
Sec. 2-121


Res. No. 93-11
 
05-11-93
 
Sec. 2-58


Res. No. 93-14
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 9-158


Res. No. 93-20, § I
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-158


Res. No. 93-20, § II
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-159


Res. No. 93-20, § III
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-160


Res. No. 93-20, § IV
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-161


Res. No. 93-20, § V
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-162


Res. No. 93-20, § VI
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-163


Res. No. 93-20, § VII
 
08-10-93
 
Sec. 2-164


Res. No. 93-23
 
09-14-93
 
Sec. 5-7


Res. No. 93-26, § I-IV
 
10-12-93
 
Sec. 4-121


Res. No. 94-2, § 1
 
01-11-94
 
Sec. 2-117


Res. No. 94-2, § 2
 
01-11-94
 
Sec. 2-117


Res. No. 94-2, § 3
 
01-11-94
 
Sec. 2-117


Res. No. 94-1
 
04-12-94
 
Sec. 2-178


Res. No. 95-1
 
01-01-95
 
Sec. 2-121


Res. No. 95-47
 
12-21-95
 
Sec. 2-151


Res. No. 95-55
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 4-159


Res. No. 95-56
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 2-182


Res. No. 95-57
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 2-179


Res. No. 2007-02
 
1-17-07
 
Repeal Secs. 2-116, 2-118


Res. No. 2007-09
 
5-16-07
 
Sec. 2-125


Res. No. 2009-19
 
11-18-09
 
Sec. 2-116


Res. No. 2017-20
 
9-14-17
 
Sec. 10-75


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE 2 - ORDINANCES



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date of Passage
 
New 1995 Code Section(s)




Ord. No. 15, § 1
 
05-02-11
 
Sec. 8-188


Ord. No. 25, § 4
 
01-07-13
 
Sec. 6-118


Ord. No. 72, § 1
 
02-06-23
 
Sec. 6-124


Ord. No. 72, § 2
 
02-06-23
 
Sec. 6-125


Ord. No. 157
 
04-02-35
 
Sec. 4-120


Ord. No. 167, § 1
 
01-04-38
 
Sec. 8-189


Ord. No. 167, §2
 
01-04-38
 
Sec. 8-189


Ord. No. 367, § 1
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-176


Ord. No. 367, § 3
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-177


Ord. No. 367, § 4
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-179


Ord. No. 367, § 5
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-180


Ord. No. 367, § 6
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-181


Ord. No. 367, § 7
 
11-12-57
 
Sec. 8-182


Ord. No. 392, § 2
 
12-09-58
 
Sec. 6-117


Ord. No. 392, § 3
 
12-09-58
 
Sec. 6-119


Ord. No. 393, § 1
 
12-09-58
 
Sec. 6-116


Ord. No. 399, § 1
 
02-10-59
 
Sec. 6-110


Ord. No. 399, § 2
 
02-10-59
 
Sec. 6-111


Ord. No. 399, § 3
 
02-10-59
 
Sec. 6-112


Ord. No. 399, § 4
 
02-10-59
 
Sec. 6-113


Ord. No. 416, § 1
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-80


Ord. No. 416, § 2
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-81


Ord. No. 416, § 3
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-82


Ord. No. 416, § 4
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-83


Ord. No. 416, § 5
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-84


Ord. No. 416, § 6
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-85


Ord. No. 416, § 7
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-86


Ord. No. 416, § 8
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-87


Ord. No. 416, § 9
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-88


Ord. No. 416, § 10
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-89


Ord. No. 416, § 11
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-90


Ord. No. 416, § 12
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-91


Ord. No. 416, § 13
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-92


Ord. No. 416, § 14
 
12-08-59
 
Sec. 4-93


Ord. No. 522, § I, § 2
 
09-13-63
 
Sec. 2-4 (a)


Ord. No. 568, § 1(a)
 
11-10-64
 
Sec. 6-134


Ord. No. 568, § 2
 
11-10-64
 
Sec. 6-135


Ord. No. 568, § 3
 
11-10-64
 
Sec. 6-137


Ord. No. 568, § 10
 
11-10-64
 
Sec. 6-141


Ord. No. 568, § 11
 
11-10-64
 
Sec. 6-141


Ord. No. 656, § 9
 
05-09-67
 
Sec. 4-88


Ord. No. 687, § 1, § 2
 
  -  -68
 
Sec. 8-190


Ord. No. 740, § 1
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-25


Ord. No. 740, § 2
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-26


Ord. No. 740, § 3
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-27


Ord. No. 740, § 4
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-28


Ord. No. 740, § 5
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-29


Ord. No. 740, § 6
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-30


Ord. No. 740, § 7
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-31


Ord. No. 740, § 8
 
09-09-69
 
Sec. 4-32


Ord. No. 769, § 9
 
10-13-70
 
Sec. 4-88


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-104


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 1
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-105


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 2
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-106


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 3
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-107


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 4
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-108


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 5
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-109


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 6
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-110


Ord. No. 791, Title XIV, § 7
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-111


Ord. No. 791, Title XV
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-112


Ord. No. 791, Appendix
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-113


Ord. No. 791, Appendix
 
06-08-71
 
Sec. 10-114


Ord. No. 792
 
06-17-71
 
Sec. 2-90


Ord. No. 816, § 1
 
02-08-72
 
Sec. 2-183(a)


Ord. No. 816, § 2
 
02-08-72
 
Sec. 2-183(b)


Ord. No. 816, § 3
 
02-08-72
 
Sec. 2-183(c)


Ord. No. 816, § 4
 
02-08-72
 
Sec. 2-183(d)


Ord. No. 819, § 1
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-6


Ord. No. 819, § 2
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-7


Ord. No. 819, § 5
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-10


Ord. No. 819, § 6
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-11


Ord. No. 819, § 7
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-12


Ord. No. 819, § 8
 
05-09-72
 
Sec. 5-13


Ord. No. 823
 
06-13-72
 
Sec. 2-91


Ord. No. 900, § 2
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-130


Ord. No. 900, § 3
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-131


Ord. No. 900, § VII
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-132


Ord. No. 900, § VIII
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-133


Ord. No. 900, § IX
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-134


Ord. No. 900, § X
 
05-14-74
 
Sec. 2-135


Ord. No. 902, § 1-10
 
06-11-74
 
Sec. 6-136


Ord. No. 903, § 1-5
 
07-09-74
 
Sec. 8-10


Ord. No. 903, § 6, 7
 
07-09-74
 
Sec. 8-11


Ord. No. 903, § 8-11
 
07-09-74
 
Sec. 8-12


Ord. No. 903, § 15
 
07-09-74
 
Sec. 8-15


Ord. No. 908
 
08-13-74
 
Sec. 2-167


Ord. No. 981
 
12-29-75
 
Sec. 2-131


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 1
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-19


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 2
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-20


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 3
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-21


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 4
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-22


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 5
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-23


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 6
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-24


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 7
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-25


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 9
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-27


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 10
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-28


Ord. No. 993, Art. II, § 11
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-29


Ord. No. 993, Art. III, § 2
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-32


Ord. No. 993, Art. III, § 3
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-33


Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 1
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-34


Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 2
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-34


Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 3
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-34


Ord. No. 993, Art. IV, § 4
 
04-13-76
 
Sec. 5-35


Ord. No. 78-28
 
07-11-78
 
Sec. 2-189


Ord. No. 900, § VII
 
05-14-79
 
Sec. 2-132


Ord. No. 900, § VIII
 
05-14-79
 
Sec. 2-133


Ord. No. 900, § IX
 
05-14-79
 
Sec. 2-134


Ord. No. 900, § X
 
05-14-79
 
Sec. 2-135


Ord. No. 79-16
 
06-12-79
 
Sec. 8-201


Ord. No. 80-02, § 1
 
01-08-80
 
Sec. 2-5 (a)


Ord. No. 80-02, § 2
 
01-08-80
 
Sec. 2-5 (b)


Ord. No. 80-02, § 3
 
01-08-80
 
Sec. 2-5 (c)


Ord. No. 80-19, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-64


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-98


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-99


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-100


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-101


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-102


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-103


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-104


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-105


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-108


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-109


Ord. No. 80-20, § 1
 
04-08-80
 
Sec. 4-110


Ord. No. 80-68, § 2
 
12-09-81
 
Sec. 2-188


Ord. No. 80-71, § 2
 
12-23-80
 
Sec. 9-202


Ord. No. 80-71, § 3
 
12-23-80
 
Sec. 9-203


Ord. No. 80-71, § 4
 
12-23-80
 
Sec. 9-204


Ord. No. 81-2, § 1
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-125


Ord. No. 81-2, §2
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-126


Ord. No. 81-2, § 4[a]-[e]
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-128


Ord. No. 81-2, § 4[f]
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-128


Ord. No. 81-2, § 7
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-131


Ord. No. 81-2, § 8
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-132


Ord. No. 81-2, § 9
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-133


Ord. No. 81-2, § 10
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-134


Ord. No. 81-2, § 11
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-135


Ord. No. 81-2, § 12
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-136


Ord. No. 81-3, § 1
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-100


Ord. No. 81-3, § 2
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-101


Ord. No. 81-3, § 2[a]
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-101


Ord. No. 81-3, § 3[a]-[d]
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-102


Ord. No. 81-3, § 3[f]-[h]
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-102


Ord. No. 81-3, § 4
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-103


Ord. No. 81-3, § 5
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-104


Ord. No. 81-3, § 6
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-105


Ord. No. 81-3, § 7
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-106


Ord. No. 81-3, § 8
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-107


Ord. No. 81-3, § 9
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-108


Ord. No. 81-3, § 10
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-109


Ord. No. 81-3, § 11
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-110


Ord. No. 81-3, § 12
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-111


Ord. No. 81-3, § 13
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-112


Ord. No. 81-3, § 14
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-113


Ord. No. 81-3, § 15
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-114


Ord. No. 81-3, § 16
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-115


Ord. No. 81-3, § 17
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-116


Ord. No. 81-3, § 18
 
02-10-81
 
Sec. 9-117


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. I, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-20


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. II, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-21


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. II, § 2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-22


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. II, § 3
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-23


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. III, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-26


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IV, § 1(a)
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-29


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IV, § 1[b]
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-30


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-33


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-34


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-35


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-36


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-37


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. V, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-38


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-41


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-42


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-43


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-44


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-45


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-46


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-47


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-51


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-52


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 3
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-53


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 4
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-54


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 5
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-55


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 6
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-56


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 7
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-57


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 8
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-58


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, §2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-59


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 10
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-60


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, §11
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-61


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, §12
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-62


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VIII, §1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-65


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-68


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-69


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. IX, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-70


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. X, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-73


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. X, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-74


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. X, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-75


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-78


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-79


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-80


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XI, §
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-81


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. VII, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-89


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XIII, § 2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-90


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XIV, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-93


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XIV, § 2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-94


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, §1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-97


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, §2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-98


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, §3
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-99


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, §4
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-100


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XV, §5
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-101


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVI, §1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-115


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 1
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-120


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 2
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-121


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 3
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-122


Ord. No. 81-8, Art. XVII, § 4
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-123


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-130


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-131


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-132


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-133


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 5
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-134


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 6
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-135


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 7
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-136


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule 9
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-137


Ord. No. 81-8, Schedule
 
04-01-81
 
Sec. 8-141


Ord. No. 81-30, § 1-4
 
07-14-81
 
Sec. 9-72


Ord. No. 81-32, § 2
 
08-11-81
 
Sec. 4-10


Ord. No. 80-68, § 2
 
12-09-81
 
Sec. 2-188


Ord. No. 82-6
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 4-66


Ord. No. 82-6
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 4-67


Ord. No. 82-6
 
03-09-82
 
Sec. 4-68


Ord. No. 82-10
 
04-13-82
 
Sec. 2-210


Ord. No. 82-41
 
11-09-82
 
Sec. 2-8


Ord. No. 83-10
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 8-165


Ord. No. 83-10
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 8-166


Ord. No. 83-10
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 8-167


Ord. No. 83-10
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 8-168


Ord. No. 83-11
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 5-18


Ord. No. 83-11, Art. § 1
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 5-18


Ord. No. 83-11, Art. III, § 1
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 5-30


Ord. No. 83-11, Art. III, §3
 
03-08-83
 
Sec. 5-33


Ord. No. 83-16,
 
04-12-83
 
Sec. 2-42


Preamble
 
 
 
 


Ord. No. 83-16, § 1
 
04-12-83
 
Sec. 2-43


Ord. No. 83-16
 
04-12-83
 
Sec. 5-8


Ord. No. 83-33, § 1
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-180


Ord. No. 83-33, § 2
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-181


Ord. No. 83-33, § 3
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-182


Ord. No. 83-33, § 4
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-183


Ord. No. 83-33, § 5
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-184


Ord. No. 83-33, § 6
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-185


Ord. No. 83-33, § 7
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-186


Ord. No. 83-33, § 8
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-187


Ord. No. 83-33, § 9
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-188


Ord. No. 83-33, § 10
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-189


Ord. No. 83-33, § 11
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-190


Ord. No. 83-33, § 12
 
08-09-83
 
Sec. 9-191


Ord. No. 83-50
 
12-13-83
 
Sec. 2-168


Ord. No. 84-11, § 2[b]
 
03-13-84
 
Sec. 9-101


Ord. No. 84-11, § 3[e]
 
03-13-84
 
Sec. 9-102


Ord. No. 84-18
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 4-11


Ord. No. 84-21, § 1
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-25


Ord. No. 84-21, § 2
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-26


Ord. No. 84-21, § 4
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-29


Ord. No. 84-21, § 5
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-30


Ord. No. 84-21, § 6
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-31


Ord. No. 84-21, § 7
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-32


Ord. No. 84-21, § 8
 
05-10-84
 
Sec. 9-33


Ord. No. 84-25, § 5
 
06-12-84
 
Sec. 9-72


Ord. No. 84-29, § 7
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 4-13


Ord. No. 84-29, § 1
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-30


Ord. No. 84-29, § 2
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-31


Ord. No. 84-29, § 3
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-32


Ord. No. 84-29, § 4
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-33


Ord. No. 84-29, § 5
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-34


Ord. No. 84-29, § 6
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-35


Ord. No. 84-29, § 7
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-36, Sec. 4-13


Ord. No. 84-29, § 8
 
07-10-84
 
Sec. 3-37


Ord. No. 84-39
 
09-11-84
 
Sec. 2-7


Ord. No. 84-44, § 1 (b)
 
10-09-84
 
Sec. 6-134


Ord. No. 84-44, § 7
 
10-09-84
 
Sec. 6-140


Ord. No. 85-4, § 1
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-34


Ord. No. 85-4, § 2
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-35


Ord. No. 85-4, § 3
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-36


Ord. No. 85-4, § 4
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-37


Ord. No. 85-4, § 5
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-38


Ord. No. 85-4, § 6
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-39


Ord. No. 85-4, § 7
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-40


Ord. No. 85-4, § 8
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-41


Ord. No. 85-4, § 9
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-42


Ord. No. 85-4, § 10
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-43


Ord. No. 85-4, § 11
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-44


Ord. No. 85-4, § 12
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-45


Ord. No. 85-4, § 13
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-46


Ord. No. 85-4, § 14
 
02-12-85
 
Sec. 6-47


Ord. No. 85-49
 
01-14-86
 
Sec. 4-69


Ord. No. 85-49
 
01-14-86
 
Sec. 4-70


Ord. No. 85-49
 
01-14-86
 
Sec. 4-71


Ord. No. 85-49
 
01-14-86
 
Sec. 4-72


Ord. No. 86-2, § 3
 
02-11-86
 
Sec. 9-127


Ord. No. 86-24
 
07-08-86
 
Sec. 4-11


Ord. No. 86-29, § 1
 
08-12-86
 
Sec. 2-186(a)


Ord. No. 86-29, § 2
 
08-12-86
 
Sec. 2-186(b)


Ord. No. 86-29, § 3
 
08-12-86
 
Sec. 2-186(c)


Ord. No. 86-29, § 4
 
08-12-86
 
Sec. 2-186(d)


Ord. No. 86-50, § 1
 
11-11-86
 
Sec. 2-119


Ord. No. 86-50, § 2
 
11-11-86
 
Sec. 2-119


Ord. No. 86-50, § 3
 
11-11-86
 
Sec. 2-119


Ord. No. 86-50, § 7
 
11-11-86
 
Sec. 2-119


Ord. No. 87-2
 
01-13-87
 
Sec. 4-107


Ord. No. 87-4
 
02-10-87
 
Sec. 5-31


Ord. No. 87-15, § 3
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 2-187


Ord. No. 87-15, § 4
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 2-187


Ord. No. 87-14
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 8-150


Ord. No. 87-14
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 8-151


Ord. No. 87-14
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 8-152


Ord. No. 87-14
 
06-09-87
 
Sec. 8-153


Ord. No. 87-22
 
07-14-87
 
Sec. 9-128


Ord. No. 87-26
 
08-11-87
 
Sec. 2-185


Ord. No. 87-32
 
08-09-87
 
Sec. 2-6


Ord. No. 87-34, § 1[d]
 
06-14-88
 
Sec. 9-59


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[B]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-61


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[C]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-62


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[D]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-63


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[E]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-64


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [F][1]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9[F][3]-[5]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [F] [7]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [G]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-66


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [I]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-68


Ord. No. 88-1, § 9 [J]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-69


Ord. No. 88-1, § 10
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-75


Ord. No. 88-1, § 12
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-77


Ord. No. 88-1, § 13
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-78


Ord. No. 88-1, § 14
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-79


Ord. No. 88-1, § 15
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-80


Ord. No. 88-1, § 16
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-81


Ord. No. 88-1, § 17
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-82


Ord. No. 88-1, § 18
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-83


Ord. No. 88-1, § 19
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-84


Ord. No. 88-1, § 20
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-85


Ord. No. 88-6, § 2
 
02-09-88
 
Sec. 6-161


Ord. No. 88-6, § 3
 
02-09-88
 
Sec. 6-162


Ord. No. 88-6, § 4
 
02-09-88
 
Sec. 6-163


Ord. No. 88-6, § 5
 
02-09-88
 
Sec. 6-164


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9 [A]
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 7-60


Ord. No. 88-11, § 1
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-50


Ord. No. 88-11, § 2
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-51


Ord. No. 88-11, § 3
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-52


Ord. No. 88-11, § 4
 
02-08-88
 
Sec. 7-53


Ord. No. 88-11, § 5
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-54


Ord. No. 88-11, § 6
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-55


Ord. No. 88-11, § 8
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-57


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[B]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-61


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[C]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-62


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[D]
 
02-02-88
 
Sec. 7-63


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9[E]
 
02-08-88
 
Sec. 7-64


Ord. No. 88-11, § 9 [E]
 
02-08-88
 
Sec. 4-38


Ord. No. 88-13, § 1
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 8-156


Ord. No. 88-13, § 2
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 8-157


Ord. No. 88-13, § 3
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 8-158


Ord. No. 88-13, § 4
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 8-159


Ord. No. 88-16, § 1
 
03-08-88
 
Sec. 9-201


Ord. No. 88-20, § 1
 
05-10-88
 
Sec. 10-120


Ord. No. 88-29, § 9 [F][2]
 
05-01-88
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 88-29, § 9[A]
 
05-10-88
 
Sec. 7-60


Ord. No. 88-29, § 9[E]
 
05-10-88
 
Sec. 7-64


Ord. No. 88-29, § 9 [F][8]
 
05-10-88
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 88-39
 
05-10-88
 
Sec. 2-96


Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XII, §2
 
08-16-88
 
Sec. 8-85


Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XII, §3
 
08-16-88
 
Sec. 8-86


Ord. No. 88-40, Art. XV, §7
 
08-16-88
 
Sec. 8-104


Ord. No. 88-42
 
09-13-88
 
Sec. 8-84


Ord. No. 89-7
 
02-14-89
 
Sec. 5-18


Ord. No. 89-8
 
02-14-89
 
Sec. 2-104


Ord. No. 89-8, § 1
 
02-14-89
 
Sec. 2-105


Ord. No. 89-8, § 2
 
02-14-89
 
Sec. 2-106


Ord. No. 89-15
 
05-09-89
 
Sec. 9-66


Ord. No. 89-19
 
05-09-89
 
Sec. 9-70


Ord. No. 89-19
 
05-09-89
 
Sec. 9-71


Ord. No. 89-20, § 1
 
06-13-89
 
Sec. 7-90


Ord. No. 89-20, § 2
 
06-13-89
 
Sec. 7-91


Ord. No. 89-20, § 3
 
06-13-89
 
Sec. 7-92


Ord. No. 89-20, § 4
 
06-13-89
 
Sec. 7-93


Ord. No. 89-24
 
07-11-89
 
Sec. 6-139


Ord. No. 89-28
 
07-11-89
 
Sec. 8-174


Ord. No. 89-28
 
07-11-89
 
Sec. 8-175


Ord. No. 89-38, § 1
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-150 et seq.


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 2-220


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 2-221


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 2-222


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 2-223


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 4-32


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 5-36


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-54


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-60


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-104


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-113


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-119


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-125


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-136


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-139


Ord. No. 89-38, § 1
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-150


Ord. No. 89-38, § 1
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-151


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-153


Ord. No. 89-38
 
10-10-89
 
Sec. 6-154


Ord. No. 89-42, § 1
 
11-16-89
 
Sec. 3-1


Ord. No. 89-42, § 1
 
11-16-89
 
Sec. 3-2


Ord. No. 89-45
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-160


Ord. No. 89-46
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-11


Ord. No. 89-48, § 1
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-40


Ord. No. 89-48, § 2
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-41


Ord. No. 89-48, § 3
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-42


Ord. No. 89-48, § 4
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-43


Ord. No. 89-48, § 5
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-44


Ord. No. 89-48, § 6
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-45


Ord. No. 89-48, § 7
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-46


Ord. No. 89-48, § 8
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-47


Ord. No. 89-48, § 9
 
12-12-89
 
Sec. 9-48


Ord. No. 90-6
 
03-13-90
 
Sec. 9-27


Ord. No. 90-6
 
03-13-90
 
Sec. 9-28


Ord. No. 90-7, § 2
 
04-10-90
 
Sec. 6-51


Ord. No. 90-7, § 2
 
04-10-90
 
Sec. 6-52


Ord. No. 90-7, § 4
 
04-10-90
 
Sec. 6-53


Ord. No. 90-7, § 5
 
04-10-90
 
Sec. 6-54


Ord. No. 90-13, § 9 [F][2]
 
03-13-90
 
Sec. 7-65


Ord. No. 90-13, § 9 [H]
 
03-13-90
 
Sec. 7-67


Ord. No. 90-21
 
06-12-90
 
Sec. 9-159


Ord. No. 90-26, § 6
 
08-14-90
 
Sec. 9-130


Ord. No. 90-32, § 1
 
09-11-90
 
Sec. 4-20


Ord. No. 90-32, § 1
 
09-11-90
 
Sec. 4-21


Ord. No. 90-35, § 7
 
11-13-90
 
Sec. 7-56


Ord. No. 91-5, § 2
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 2-68


Ord. No. 91-5, § 3
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 2-69


Ord. No. 91-5, § 4
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 2-70


Ord. No. 91-5, § 5
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 2-71


Ord. No. 91-5, § 1
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 9-80


Ord. No. 91-5, § 2
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 9-81


Ord. No. 91-5, § 3
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 9-82


Ord. No. 91-5, § 4
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 9-83


Ord. No. 91-5, § 5
 
02-12-91
 
Sec. 9-84


Ord. No. 91-7, § 1
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-90


Ord. No. 91-7, § 2
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-91


Ord. No. 91-7, § 3
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-92


Ord. No. 91-7, § 4
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-93


Ord. No. 91-7, § 5
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-94


Ord. No. 91-7, § 6
 
03-12-91
 
Sec. 9-95


Ord. No. 91-17, § 2
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 2-75


Ord. No. 91-17, § 2
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 2-76


Ord. No. 91-17, § 4
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 2-77


Ord. No. 91-17, § 1
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-12


Ord. No. 91-17, § 3
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-14


Ord. No. 91-17, § 5
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-15


Ord. No. 91-17, § 6
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-16


Ord. No. 91-17, § 7
 
07-09-91
 
Sec. 9-17


Ord. No. 91-25, § 1
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 8-1


Ord. No. 91-25, § 2
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 8-2


Ord. No. 91-25, § 3
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 8-3


Ord. No. 91-25, § 4
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 8-4


Ord. No. 91-25, § 6
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 8-6


Ord. No. 91-26, § 1
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 3-42


Ord. No. 91-26, § 2
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 3-43


Ord. No. 91-26, § 3
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 3-44


Ord. No. 91-26, § 4
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 3-45


Ord. No. 91-26, § 4
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 2-193


Ord. No. 91-26, § 4
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 2-194


Ord. No. 91-26, § 4
 
10-08-91
 
Sec. 2-195


Ord. No. 91-34, § 1 § 3
 
12-10-91
 
Sec. 2-180


Ord. No. 91-39, § 1
 
01-01-92
 
Sec. 2-113


Ord. No. 91-39, § 2
 
01-01-92
 
Sec. 2-113


Ord. No. 92-8, § 1
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-114


Ord. No. 92-8, § 2
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-62


Ord. No. 92-8, § 3
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-63


Ord. No. 92-4, § 1
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-6


Ord. No. 92-4, § 2
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-7


Ord. No. 92-4, § 3
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-8


Ord. No. 92-4, § 4
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-9


Ord. No. 92-4, § 5
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-10


Ord. No. 92-4, § 6
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-11


Ord. No. 92-4, § 7
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-12


Ord. No. 92-4, § 8
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-13


Ord. No. 92-4, § 9
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-14


Ord. No. 92-4, § 10
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-15


Ord. No. 92-4, § 11
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-16


Ord. No. 92-4, § 12
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-17


Ord. No. 92-4, § 13
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-18


Ord. No. 92-4, § 14
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-19


Ord. No. 92-4, § 15
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-20


Ord. No. 92-4, § 16
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-21


Ord. No. 92-4, § 17
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-22


Ord. No. 92-4, § 18
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-23


Ord. No. 92-4, § 19
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-24


Ord. No. 92-4, § 20
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-25


Ord. No. 92-4, § 21
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-26


Ord. No. 92-4, § 23
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-28


Ord. No. 92-4, § 24
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-29


Ord. No. 92-4, § 24
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-30


Ord. No. 92-4, § 26
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-31


Ord. No. 92-4, § 27
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-32


Ord. No. 92-4, § 28
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-33


Ord. No. 92-4, § 29
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-34


Ord. No. 92-4, § 30
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-35


Ord. No. 92-4, § 31
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-36


Ord. No. 92-4, § 32
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-37


Ord. No. 92-4, § 33
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-38


Ord. No. 92-4, § 34
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-39


Ord. No. 92-4, § 35
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-40


Ord. No. 92-4, § 36
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-41


Ord. No. 92-4, § 37
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-42


Ord. No. 92-4, § 38
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 7-43


Ord. No. 92-8, § 1
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-61


Ord. No. 92-8, § 2
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-62


Ord. No. 92-8, § 3
 
02-10-92
 
Sec. 2-63


Ord. No. 92-9, § 1
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-58


Ord. No. 92-9, § 2
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-59


Ord. No. 92-9, § 3
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-60


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [A]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-63


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [B]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-64


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [C]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-65


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [D]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-66


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [E]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-67


Ord. No. 92-9, § 5 (F]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-68


Ord. No. 92-9, § 4 [H]
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-70


Ord. No. 92-9, § 5
 
03-10-92
 
Sec. 6-71


Ord. No. 92-17, § 9 [K]
 
05-12-92
 
Sec. 7-70


Ord. No. 92-20, § 1
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-15


Ord. No. 92-20, § 2
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-16


Ord. No. 92-20, § 3
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-17


Ord. No. 92-20, § 4
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-18


Ord. No. 92-20, § 5
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-19


Ord. No. 92-20, § 6
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-17


Ord. No. 92-20, § 7
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-21


Ord. No. 92-21, § 5
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-29


Ord. No. 92-21, § 6
 
07-14-92
 
Sec. 6-30


Ord. No. 92-26, § 1
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 7-1


Ord. No. 92-26, § 2
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 7-2


Ord. No. 92-26, § 3
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 7-3


Ord. No. 92-27, § 9
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-145


Ord. No. 92-27, § 10
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-146


Ord. No. 92-27, § 11
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-147


Ord. No. 92-27, § 12
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-148


Ord. No. 92-27, § 13
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-149


Ord. No. 92-27, § 14
 
09-08-92
 
Sec. 9-150


Ord. No. 92-28, § 1
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-45


Ord. No. 92-28, § 2
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-46


Ord. No. 92-28, § 3
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-47


Ord. No. 92-28, § 4
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-48


Ord. No. 92-28, § 5
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-49


Ord. No. 92-28, § 6
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-50


Ord. No. 92-28, § 7
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-51


Ord. No. 92-28, § 8
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-52


Ord. No. 92-28, § 9
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-53


Ord. No. 92-28, § 10
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-54


Ord. No. 92-28, § 11
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-55


Ord. No. 92-28, § 12
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-56


Ord. No. 92-28, § 13
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-57


Ord. No. 92-28, § 14
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-58


Ord. No. 92-28, § 15
 
10-13-92
 
Sec. 4-59


Ord. No. 92-36 § 3
 
12-22-92
 
Sec. 3-3


Ord. No. 92-36
 
12-12-92
 
Sec. 3-3


Ord. No. 93-3
 
02-08-93
 
Sec. 7-99


Ord. No. 93-4, § 1
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(a)


Ord. No. 93-4, § 2
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(b)


Ord. No. 93-4, § 3
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(c)


Ord. No. 93-4, § 4
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(d)


Ord. No. 93-4, § 5
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(e)


Ord. No. 93-4, § 6
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 2-184(f)


Ord. No. 93-5, § 1
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 6-50


Ord. No. 93-5, § 2
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 6-51


Ord. No. 93-5, § 3
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 6-52


Ord. No. 93-5, § 4
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 6-53


Ord. No. 93-5, § 5
 
03-09-93
 
Sec. 6-54


Ord. No. 93-7
 
04-13-93
 
Sec. 10-119


Ord. No. 93-10
 
05-11-93
 
Sec. 7-71


Ord. No. 93-13
 
05-11-93
 
Sec. 2-196


Ord. No. 93-18
 
10-12-93
 
Sec. 4-14


Ord. No. 93-19
 
12-08-93
 
Sec. 2-168


Ord. No. 93-22
 
12-08-93
 
Sec. 2-187


Ord. No. 94-1
 
01-11-94
 
Sec. 3-3


Ord. No. 94-3
 
03-08-94
 
Sec. 2-185


Ord. No. 94-4
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 3-50


Ord. No. 94-5, § 1B
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-151


Ord. No. 94-5, § 2A
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-152


Ord. No. 94-5, § 2B
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-152


Ord. No. 94-5, § 3A, B
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-153


Ord. No. 94-5, § 4A, B
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-154


Ord. No. 94-5, § 5 A, B
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-155


Ord. No. 94-5, § 6
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-156


Ord. No. 94-5, § 7
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-157


Ord. No. 94-5, § 8
 
05-10-94
 
Sec. 4-158


Ord. No. 94-9
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-36


Ord. No. 94-9, § I, A
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-37


Ord. No. 94-9, § I, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-38


Ord. No. 94-9, § I, C
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-39


Ord. No. 94-9, § II
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-40


Ord. No. 94-9, § III, A
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-45


Ord. No. 94-9, § III, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-46


Ord. No. 94-9, § III, C
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-47


Ord. No. 94-9, § III, D
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-48


Ord. No. 94-9, § IV
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-55


Ord. No. 94-9, § V, A
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-60


Ord. No. 94-9, § V, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-61


Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-80


Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, C
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-81


Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, D
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-82


Ord. No. 94-9, § VII, E
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-83


Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, A
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-85


Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-86


Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, C
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-87


Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, D
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-88


Ord. No. 94-9, § VIII, E
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-89


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, A
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-94


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, B
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-95


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, D
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-97


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, E
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-98


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, F
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-99


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, G
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-100


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, H
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-101


Ord. No. 94-9, § IX, I
 
08-09-94
 
Sec. 10-102


Ord. No. 94-14, § 1
 
09-13-94
 
Sec. 9-205


Ord. No. 94-14, § 2
 
09-13-94
 
Sec. 9-206


Ord. No. 94-14, § 3
 
09-13-94
 
Sec. 9-207


Ord. No. 94-15, § 1
 
09-13-95
 
Sec. 9-201


Ord. No. 94-17
 
12-13-94
 
Sec. 9-127


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-55


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-56


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-57


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-58


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-60


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-61


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-62


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-63


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-64


Ord. No. 94-18, § 1
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 9-65


Ord. No. 94-19
 
10-17-94
 
Sec. 10-131


Ord. No. 94-25
 
12-13-94
 
Sec. 3-50


Ord. No. 95-4
 
02-14-95
 
Sec. 4-15


Ord. No. 95-5
 
04-11-95
 
Adopting Ordinance


Ord. No. 95-5 § X
 
04-11-95
 
Sec. 7-60


Ord. No. 95-11
 
04-11-95
 
Sec. 9-14


Ord. No. 95-11
 
04-11-95
 
Sec. 9-16


Ord. No. 95-12
 
04-11-95
 
Sec. 6-29


Ord. No. 95-18
 
06-13-95
 
Sec. 3-12


Ord. No. 95-20 § 2
 
07-11-95
 
Sec. 4-150


Ord. No. 95-21
 
08-08-95
 
Sec. 8-1


Ord. No. 95-23
 
09-12-95
 
Sec. 6-128


Ord. No. 95-23
 
09-12-95
 
Sec. 6-129


Ord. No. 95-23
 
09-12-95
 
Sec. 6-130


Ord. No. 95-26
 
11-14-95
 
Sec. 4-11


Ord. No. 95-27
 
11-14-95
 
Sec. 2-6


Ord. No. 95-29
 
11-14-95
 
Sec. 2-196


Ord. No. 95-31
 
11-14-95
 
Adopting Ordinance


Ord. No. 95-32 § 1
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-75


Ord. No. 95-32 § 2
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-76


Ord. No. 95-32 § 3
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-77


Ord. No. 95-32 § 4
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-78


Ord. No. 95-32 § 5
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-79


Ord. No. 95-32 § 6
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-80


Ord. No. 95-32 § 7
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-81


Ord. No. 95-32 § 8
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-82


Ord. No. 95-32 § 9
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-83


Ord. No. 95-32 § 10
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-84


Ord. No. 95-32 § 11
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-85


Ord. No. 95-32 § 12
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-86


Ord. No. 95-32 § 13
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-87


Ord. No. 95-32 § 14
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-88


Ord. No. 95-32 § 15
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-89


Ord. No. 95-33
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 8-104


Ord. No. 95-34
 
12-12-95
 
Sec. 6-137


Ord. No. 96-8
 
6-11-96
 
Adopting Ordinance


Ord. No. 96-14
 
8-13-96
 
Sec. 5-30


Ord. No. 96-15
 
8-13-96
 
Sec. 2-198


Ord. No. 96-18
 
9-10-96
 
Sec. 2-198


Ord. No. 96-29
 
12-10-96
 
Sec. 2-96, 2-187, 2-192


Ord. No. 96-30
 
12-10-96
 
Sec. 9-56


Ord. No. 97-5
 
3-11-97
 
9-100 - 9-112


Ord. No. 97-6
 
- -
 
9-125 - 9-140


Ord. No. 97-7
 
3-11-97
 
8-120


Ord. No. 97-12
 
6-10-97
 
9-201


Ord. No. 97-15
 
8-12-97
 
8-104, 8-106, 8-142


Ord. No. 97-16
 
9-9-97
 
10-167


Ord. No. 97-17
 
7-8-97
 
9-56


Ord. No. 97-18
 
7-8-97
 
2-199, 2-200


Ord. No. 97-20
 
9-9-97
 
9-56


Ord. No. 97-22
 
9-9-97
 
10-22


Ord. No. 97-24
 
10-1-97
 
10-20, 10-22


Ord. No. 98-02
 
1-13-98
 
5-30


Ord. No. 98-04
 
2-10-98
 
6-75 - 6-89


Ord. No. 98-06
 
7-14-98
 
9-216 - 9-229


Ord. No. 98-11
 
7-14-98
 
4-38, 7-60, 7-64, 7-65, 7-66, 7-68, 7-71


Ord. No. 98-12
 
7-14-98
 
5-30


Ord. No. 98-16
 
9-8-98
 
5-30


Ord. No. 98-25
 
12-29-98
 
2-90


Ord. No. 99-02
 
1-19-99
 
10-78, 10-79, 10-81, 10-82


Ord. No. 99-04
 
3-9-99
 
9-216 - 9-229


Ord. No. 99-13
 
7-13-99
 
2-220, 2-221


Ord. No. 99-15
 
7-13-99
 
2-43


Ord. No. 99-16
 
7-13-99
 
2-201


Ord. No. 99-17
 
7-13-99
 
2-96


Ord. No. 99-18
 
7-13-99
 
6-129


Ord. No. 99-25
 
12-28-99
 
2-187


Ord. No. 2000-02
 
2-15-00
 
2-200, 2-202


Ord. No. 2000-06
 
5-16-00
 
2-178


Ord. No. 2000-08
 
5-16-00
 
6-128 - 6-130


Ord. No. 2000-09
 
5-16-00
 
6-17 - 6-19


Ord. No. 2000-13
 
6-20-00
 
8-161


Ord. No. 2000-14
 
6-20-00
 
8-3


Ord. No. 2000-15
 
6-20-00
 
8-191, 8-192


Ord. No. 2000-17
 
6-20-00
 
6-170, 6-171


Ord. No. 2000-12
 
7-18-00
 
6-136


Ord. No. 2000-16
 
7-18-00
 
5-37


Ord. No. 2000-24
 
9-15-00
 
6-134


Ord. No. 2000-22
 
11-21-00
 
6-59


Ord. No. 2000-38
 
12-19-00
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2000-40
 
12-19-00
 
2-185


Ord. No. 2000-41
 
12-19-00
 
10-39, 10-40, 10-45, 10-46, 10-48, 10-55, 10-61, 10-62, 10-63, 10-66, 10-67,
10-68, 10-70, 10-72, 10-73, 10-74, 10-78, 10-79, 10-81, 10-82, 10-83, 10-86,
10-87, 10-88, 10-89, 10-96, 10-102


Ord. No. 2001-03
 
2-20-01
 
10-20, 10-22


Ord. No. 2001-06
 
3-20-01
 
9-208


Ord. No. 2001-11
 
5-15-01
 
2-169


Ord. No. 2001-13
 
8-21-01
 
9-126, 9-127, 9-132


Ord. No. 2001-14
 
8-21-01
 
2-107


Ord. No. 2001-17
 
8-21-01
 
8-3


Ord. No. 2001-18
 
8-21-01
 
2-221, 8-43


Ord. No. 2001-16
 
9-18-01
 
3-3


Ord. No. 2001-21
 
9-18-01
 
2-178


Ord. No. 2001-24
 
10-16-01
 
2-203


Ord. No. 2001-25
 
10-16-01
 
2-204


Ord. No. 2001-26
 
10-16-01
 
6-38, 6-42, 6-47


Ord. No. 2001-27
 
10-16-01
 
3-3


Ord. No. 2002-02
 
1-30-02
 
6-128


Ord. No. 2002-04
 
2-19-02
 
10-20, 10-21, 10-23, 10-25, 10-26, 10-30


Ord. No. 2002-06
 
2-19-02
 
8-176, 8-183


Ord. No. 2002-07
 
3-19-02
 
8-41


Ord. No. 2002-09
 
4-16-02
 
6-75 - 6-90


Ord. No. 2002-11
 
4-16-02
 
7-75, 7-76, 7-80


Ord. No. 2002-12
 
4-16-02
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2002-17
 
7-16-02
 
9-85 - 9-85.8


Ord. No. 2002-18
 
7-16-02
 
10-23


Ord. No. 2002-20
 
10-15-02
 
9-85 - 9-85.8


Ord. No. 2002-23
 
9-10-02
 
4-141


Ord. No. 2002-24
 
10-15-02
 
10-20, 10-23 - 10-25


Ord. No. 2002-26
 
10-15-02
 
2-123


Ord. No. 2002-27
 
10-15-02
 
3-3


Ord. No. 2002-34
 
11-19-02
 
10-7, 10-13


Ord. No. 2002-35
 
11-19-02
 
9-208


Ord. No. 2002-40
 
12-17-02
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2003-01
 
1-21-03
 
6-60


Ord. No. 2003-07
 
3-18-03
 
10-25


Ord. No. 2003-11
 
5-20-03
 
6-59


Ord. No. 2003-13
 
6-17-03
 
3-36, 4-13


Ord. No. 2003-16
 
9-16-03
 
2-230


Ord. No. 2003-21
 
10-21-03
 
10-88


Ord. No. 2003-22
 
10-21-03
 
10-74


Ord. No. 2003-23
 
10-21-03
 
7-71


Ord. No. 2003-24
 
10-21-03
 
10-48, 10-89


Ord. No. 2003-25
 
11-18-03
 
2-124


Ord. No. 2003-27
 
11-16-03
 
2-231


Ord. No. 2003-28
 
11-18-03
 
9-61


Ord. No. 2003-29
 
11-18-03
 
8-215


Ord. No. 2003-32
 
11-18-03
 
6-116


Ord. No. 2004-03
 
1-20-04
 
6-77


Ord. No. 2004-10
 
4-13-04
 
2-205


Ord. No. 2004-16
 
5-16-04
 
6-128


Ord. No. 2004-13
 
9-15-04
 
10-115.1 - 10.115.5


Ord. No. 2004-14
 
5-19-04
 
6-170, 6-171


Ord. No. 2004-20
 
9-15-04
 
7-40, 7-42


Ord. No. 2004-26
 
11-16-04
 
2-170


Ord. No. 2004-27
 
11-16-04
 
6-100


Ord. No. 2005-3
 
2-16-05
 
7-63


Ord. No. 2005-15
 
9-21-05
 
9-86


Ord. No. 2005-20
 
11-16-05
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2006-02
 
2-15-06
 
5-23, 5-24, 5-28


Ord. No. 2006-04
 
4-19-06
 
6-34, 6-35, 6-37 - 6-41, 6-43, 6-45, 6-50, 6-53


Ord. No. 2006-10
 
8-16-06
 
9-67, 9-141


Ord. No. 2006-14
 
9-20-06
 
6-42


Ord. No. 2006-19
 
10-18-06
 
10-78 - 10-83


Ord. No. 2006-26
 
12-20-06
 
8-68, 8-132, 8-136, 8-138


Ord. No. 2007-02
 
1-17-07
 
Repeal 2-122


Ord. No. 2007-03
 
2-21-07
 
9-208


Ord. No. 2007-04
 
3-21-07
 
6-180 - 6-206


Ord. No. 2007-05
 
2-21-07
 
7-92


Ord. No. 2007-08
 
5-16-07
 
6-138


Ord. No. 2007-09
 
5-16-07
 
4-16


Ord. No. 2007-12
 
6-20-07
 
8-132


Ord. No. 2007-14
 
8-15-07
 
2-113


Ord. No. 2007-15
 
8-15-07
 
6-95 - 6-109


Ord. No. 2007-17
 
9-19-07
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2007-25
 
12-19-07
 
10-45 - 10-48, 10-101


Ord. No. 2007-27
 
12-19-07
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2007-33
 
12-27-07
 
10-119 - 10-144, 10-146 - 10-189


Ord. No. 2008-02
 
4-16-08
 
6-75 - 6-92


Ord. No. 2008-03
 
3-19-08
 
7-54, 7-560, 7-64, 7-65, 7-68, 7-69, 7-71, 7-75, 7-80


Ord. No. 2008-09
 
8-20-08
 
8-107


Ord. No. 2008-10
 
9-17-08
 
4-170 - 4-177


Ord. No. 2008-12
 
9-17-08
 
9-26, 9-28


Ord. No. 2008-13
 
9-17-08
 
8-162


Ord. No. 2008-14
 
9-17-08
 
4-11


Ord. No. 2008-21
 
12-17-08
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2008-22
 
12-17-08
 
4-190 - 4-193


Ord. No. 2008-24
 
12-17-08
 
9-57


Ord. No. 2009-02
 
1-28-09
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2009-03
 
3-18-09
 
2-206


Ord. No. 2009-06
 
6-17-09
 
2-171


Ord. No. 2009-09
 
8-19-09
 
5-19


Ord. No. 2009-10
 
1-28-09
 
9-85.2


Ord. No. 2009-11
 
10-7-09
 
9-55, 9-56, 9-57, 9-58, 9-61, 9-62


Ord. No. 2009-15
 
11-4-09
 
9-126


Ord. No. 2009-17
 
11-18-09
 
10-167.1


Ord. No. 2009-18
 
11-18-09
 
10-120, 10-161.2, 10-162.1, 10-162.2


Ord. No. 2009-21
 
12-16-09
 
6-81


Ord. No. 2010-01
 
2-3-10
 
4-192


Ord. No. 2010-02
 
2-3-10
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2010-10
 
11-3-10
 
2-207


Ord. No. 2010-11
 
11-3-10
 
8-162


Ord. No. 2010-12
 
11-3-10
 
4-16


Ord. No. 2010-16
 
12-1-10
 
8-132


Ord. No. 2011-01
 
2-10-11
 
6-38, 6-39, 6-42 - 6-44, 6-47


Ord. No. 2011-04
 
5-19-11
 
8-132


Ord. No. 2011-05
 
6-8-11
 
4-172


Ord. No. 2011-07
 
9-8-11
 
2-208


Ord. No. 2011-15
 
11-10-11
 
6-136, 6-137, 6-141


Ord. No. 2012-01
 
2-9-12
 
6-58, 6-59


Ord. No. 2012-03
 
3-8-12
 
8-161


Ord. No. 2012-07
 
5-10-12
 
4-200, 4-201


Ord. No. 2012-10
 
5-10-12
 
7-64


Ord. No. 2012-12
 
8-13-12
 
7-70


Ord. No. 2012-11
 
9-13-12
 
3-3


Ord. No. 2013-01
 
3-14-13
 
6-59


Ord. No. 2013-02
 
3-14-13
 
5-30


Ord. No. 2013-05
 
7-8-13
 
4-64 - 4-73


Ord. No. 2013-06
 
9-12-13
 
9-35


Ord. No. 2013-12
 
11-14-13
 
9-30, 9-61


Ord. No. 2013-14
 
12-12-13
 
2-209


Ord. No. 2013-15
 
12-12-13
 
2-181


Ord. No. 2014-01
 
1-9-14
 
10-161.2


Ord. No. 2014-03
 
4-10-14
 
8-29, 8-30


Ord. No. 2014-15
 
11-13-14
 
7-60, 70-64, 7-65, 7-67


Ord. No. 2014-16
 
11-13-14
 
2-209.1


Ord. No. 2014-17
 
11-13-14
 
9-30


Ord. No. 2015-01
 
3-12-15
 
8-85, 8-94, 8-98, 8-100, 8-105, 8-130, 8-132, 8-135, 8-136, 8-136A, 8-137,
8-138, 8-139, 8-139A, 8-139B, 8-140, 8-140A, 8-141, 8-142, 8-191, 8-192,
8-208, 8-215


Ord. No. 2015-02
 
2-12-15
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2015-03
 
2-26-15
 
9-201


Ord. No. 2015-12
 
6-15-15
 
10-131


Ord. No. 2015-22
 
11-12-15
 
10-1 - 10-32


Ord. No. 2016-02
 
3-10-16
 
10-119


Ord. No. 2016-07
 
5-12-16
 
2-233


Ord. No. 2016-09
 
5-12-16
 
2-6


Ord. No. 2016-11
 
5-12-16
 
2-209.2


Ord. No. 2016-16
 
6-23-16
 
2-250


Ord. No. 2016-18
 
6-23-16
 
2-232


Ord. No. 2016-19
 
7-14-16
 
9-30, 9-61


Ord. No. 2016-20
 
9-8-16
 
2-202


Ord. No. 2016-27
 
12-8-16
 
9-55 - 9-58


Ord. No. 2016-28
 
12-8-16
 
9-126


Ord. No. 2016-29
 
12-8-16
 
9-85.2


Ord. No. 2016-30
 
12-8-16
 
9-201, 9-203


Ord. No. 2017-02
 
2-1-17
 
9-56


Ord. No. 2017-06
 
7-13-17
 
8-132


Ord. No. 2017-07
 
7-13-17
 
8-136, 8-136A


Ord. No. 2017-09
 
10-12-17
 
8-132


Ord. No. 2017-16
 
12-14-17
 
2-209.3


Ord. No. 2017-17
 
12-14-17
 
2-209.4


Ord. No. 2017-18
 
12-14-17
 
2-209.5


Ord. No. 2018-2
 
5-24-18
 
10-162.6, 10-167.2


Ord. No. 2018-3
 
4-26-18
 
6-211 - 6-213


 
 
 
 
 




 


