
Danville, IN Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF DANVILLE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 23-2018, passed 11-  -18; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service, 2018 Acts,
Pamphlet No. 5





Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TOWN OFFICIALS



 




Mike Neilson, Town Council President




Tom Pado, Town Council Vice-President




Marcia Lynch, Town Council Member




Jim Stephens, Town Council Member




Dennis Wynn, Town Council Member








Jennifer Pearcy, Clerk-Treasurer




Gary Eakin, Town Manager




Laura Parker, Assistant Town Manager/Town Planner




Chou-il Lee, Town Attorney




Will Lacey, Park Superintendent




Ray Raney, Police Chief




Mark Morgan, Fire Chief




Ray Whitaker, Public Works Superintendent




Jim Russell, Water Superintendent




Jerry Crisp, Wastewater Superintendent




Barry Lofton, Stormwater Administrator










DANVILLE TOWN HALL
49 North Wayne Street
Danville, Indiana 46122
Phone: (317) 745-4180
Fax: (317) 745-3005
www.danvilleindiana.org



Adopting Ordinance



ORDINANCE NO. 13-2002



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE DANVILLE, INDIANA
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and



WHEREAS, Indiana statutes empower and authorize the political subdivision to
revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, the Danville Town Council has authorized a general compilation,
revision and codification of the ordinances of the Political Subdivision of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Danville, Indiana:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the town of Danville as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Danville,
Indiana."



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following titles:




(See Attached Table of Contents)




Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.  Also, this ordinance shall not repeal any ordinances establishing the
Town's zoning and subdivision control regulations or ordinances that zone or
re-zone real property.  This ordinance shall not repeal Town ordinances
numbers 16 and 17 adopted in 1986 and ordinances adopted in 2002.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Town Council and the Clerk of the Town is hereby
authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of ordinances in the
Office of the Clerk.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public
hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Town Council of the Town of Danville on this 16th
day of December, 2002.



                     Town Council, Town of Danville



                     _____________________________________
___



                     David Odle



                     _____________________________________
___



                     Myron Anderson



                     _____________________________________
___



                     Jeff Martin



                     _____________________________________
___



                     Mike Neilson



                     _____________________________________
___



                     Dick Burrows



Attest:



___________________________________



Pauletta Frye,



Clerk-Treasurer



Town of Danville



ORDINANCE NO. 7-2007



AN ORDINANCE CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF
DANVILLE INTO THE DANVILLE TOWN CODE



   WHEREAS, Indiana statutes empower and authorize municipalities to
revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into book form as a code of ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the last time the general and permanent ordinances of the Town
of Danville were revised, amended, restated, codified and compiled in book
form was in 2005; and



   WHEREAS, the passage of general and permanent ordinances by the Town
Council since the last codification in 2005 has created the need to update
the Town's Code of Ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the Town Council authorized American Legal Publishing
Corporation to prepare the supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the Town has determined that the supplement to the Town's Code
of Ordinances, prepared by American Legal Publishing Corporation, accurately
and satisfactorily codifies and compiles the ordinances of the Town passed
since the Code of Ordinances was adopted in 2005.



   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Danville, Indiana
that:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Danville as revised,
amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form, know as the “Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Danville, Indiana,” are hereby amended by the
2007 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances prepared by American Legal
Publishing Corporation.



Section 2.   Such supplement to the Code of Ordinances shall be deemed
published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the Town Council and
the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is hereby authorized and ordered to
incorporate such supplement in Code of Ordinances in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



Section 3.   Such supplement to the Code of Ordinances shall be in full
force and effect as provided in Section 4, and Code with the supplement shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinances and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
for the ordinances contained have been given.



Section 4.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately
upon passage and adoption by the Danville Town Council.



   Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Danville on this 21st day of
May, 2007.



                              TOWN OF DANVILLE



                              Myron Anderson
/s/                   



                              Jeff Martin /s/ 
                             



                              Steve Hartsock
/s/                           



                              Dennis Wynn /s/ 
                           



                              Mike Neilsen
/s/                         



                              Members for the
Danville Town Council



Attest:



Pauletta Frye /s/                               



Danville Clerk-Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 22-2009



AN ORDINANCE CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF
DANVILLE INTO THE DANVILLE TOWN CODE



   WHEREAS, Indiana statutes empower and authorize municipalities to
revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into book form as a code of ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the last time the general and permanent ordinances of the Town
of Danville were revised, amended, restated, codified and compiled in book
form was in 2006; and



   WHEREAS, the passage of general and permanent ordinances by the Town
Council since the last codification in 2006 has created the need to update
the Town’s Code of Ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the Town Council authorized American Legal Publishing
Corporation to prepare the supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and



   WHEREAS, the Town has determined that the supplement to the Town’s
Code of Ordinances, prepared by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
accurately and satisfactorily codifies and compiles the ordinances of the
Town passed since the Code of Ordinances was adopted in 2006.



   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Town Council of Danville, Indiana
that:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Town of Danville as revised,
amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form, know as the “Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Danville, Indiana,” are hereby amended by the
2009 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances prepared by American Legal
Publishing Corporation.



Section 2.   Such supplement to the Code of Ordinances shall be deemed
published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the Town Council and
the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town is hereby authorized and ordered to
incorporate such supplement in Code of Ordinances in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



Section 3.   Such supplement to the Code of Ordinances shall be in full
force and effect as provided in Section 4, and Code with the supplement shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinances and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
for the ordinances contained have been given.



Section 4.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately
upon passage and adoption by the Danville Town Council.



   Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Danville on this 16th day of
November , 2009.



                              TOWN OF DANVILLE



                              Jeff Martin /s/ 
                             



                              Richard Burrows
/s/                       



                              Steve Hartsock
/s/                           



                              Mike Neilson
/s/                             



                              Marcia Lynch
/s/                           



                              Members of the
Danville Town Council



Attest:



Amy J. Roberts /s/                               



Danville Clerk-Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 20-2011



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE TOWN OF DANVILLE, INDIANA



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Political
Subdivision, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of this Political Subdivision; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



   NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE TOWN OF DANVILLE.



Section 1.   The 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Political Subdivision as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation
of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby
adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and Approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASS AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision on
this  5th  day of  December 2011



                                       T
OWN COUNCIL



                                       �
�  Jeff Martin /s/                               



                                       �
�  Richard Burrows /s/                       



                                       �
�  Steve Hartsock /s/                           



                                       �
�  Mike Neilson /s/                             



                                       �
�  Marcia Lynch /s/                           



Attest:



Amy J. Roberts /s/                               



Clerk-Treasurer



ORDINANCE NO. 7-2013



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE TOWN OF DANVILLE, INDIANA



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2011 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Danville, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Danville; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are
based on or make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Danville Town Council to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance
take effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF DANVILLE.



Section l.   That the 2013 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Danville as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Danville is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file
in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASS AND ADOPTED by the Town Council for the Town of Danville on this 20th
day of May 2013.



                                       �
�     TOWN COUNCIL



                                       �
�     Marcia Lynch /s/                                 
 



                                       �
�     Mike Neilson /s/                                 
 



                                       �
�     Jeff Martin /s/                                 
     



                                       �
�     Steve Hartsock /s/                               
 



                                       �
�                                                
               



Attest:



Amy Cating /s/                                   



Clerk-Treasurer



ORDINANCE 20-2014



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE TOWN OF DANVILLE, INDIANA



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Danville, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Danville; and



WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on
or make reference to sections of the Indiana code; and



WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Danville Town Council to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Indiana; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date;



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF DANVILLE.



Section 1.   That the 2014 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
Town of Danville as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted
by reference as if set out in its entirety.



Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the
Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Danville is hereby authorized and ordered to
insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file
in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Town Council for the Town of Danville on this 17th
day of November 2014.



                                    TOWN
COUNCIL



                                       �
�  Marcia Lynch /s/                           



                                       �
�  Mike Neilson /s/                             



                                       �
�  Steve Hartsock /s/                           



                                       �
�  Jeff Martin /s/                               



                                       �
�  Dennis Wynn /s/                             



Attest:



Amy J. Cating /s/                               



Clerk-Treasurer



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY





         11.   DEBT SERVICE RESERVE ACCOUNT




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.17   Town Manager



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Danville Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,”
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.



   (B)   Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto and newly enacted laws.  Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code.  All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between two or more sections.



   (D)   (1)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be
resolved by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted.



      (2)   The section most recently enacted supersedes any
conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content.  These
descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only, and do not affect
the meaning, application, or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation.  This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense.  Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar
and appropriate  meaning in law shall be understood according to  their
technical import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of persons unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk- Treasurer of the Town Council.



      COUNCIL.  The Danville Town Council.



      COUNTY.  Hendricks County, Indiana.



      HIGHWAY.  Includes bridges, roads and streets unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      MONTH.  One calendar month.



      PERSON.



         (a)   Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.



         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any
unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  When referring to sections or
divisions in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or
next preceding that in which the words occur unless some other section is
designated.



      TOWN.  The Town of Danville, Indiana.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.  Include printing, lithographing or
other modes of representing words and letters.  Where the written signature
of a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person
or the person’s mark.



      YEAR.  One calendar year unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable.  If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



   (D)   The provisions of this section are severable in the manner
provided by division (B) of this section.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices.  Reference to a public office or
officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of
the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date
of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the
ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or
the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



      (2)   If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state
holiday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   (A)   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a
former section or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former
section or law is not revived unless it so expressly provides.



   (B)   The repeal of any section shall not extinguish or release any
penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under the section unless the
repealing section so expressly provides.



   (C)   The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for
the purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the
enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code shall not
be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and
prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date
of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this
code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the
existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.



      (2)   In addition to the indication thereof as may appear in
the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in
concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example:  (I.C. 36-5-2-2)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-85)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, seeI.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.



This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.  The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize
highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the
acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.17  TOWN MANAGER.



   For provisions concerning the Town Manager, see I.C. 36-5-5 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction of a second offense, be subject to a fine not exceeding $7,500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Am. Ord. 33-2006, passed 1-8-06)



Statutory reference:



   Power to prescribe fines up to $2,500 granted, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)



CHAPTER 11:  DEBT SERVICE RESERVE ACCOUNT



Section



   11.01   Debt service reserve account



§ 11.01  DEBT SERVICE RESERVE ACCOUNT.



   There is hereby continued, within the Sinking Fund, the Debt Service
Reserve Account (“Debt Service Reserve Account”). On the date of delivery
of the Bonds, the town may deposit funds on hand, Bond proceeds, unless the
Bonds are sold to the SRF Program, or a combination thereof, into the Debt
Service Reserve Account up to an amount which shall cause the balance therein
to equal but not exceed the hereinafter defined Reserve Requirement. The
Reserve Requirement means a balance which shall equal but not exceed an
amount equal to the maximum annual debt service on the 1991 Bonds and the
Bonds, which is herein defined as the initial reserve requirement, and which
amount will be decreased on the second day of each October to the maximum
annual debt service on the then outstanding 1991 Bonds and Bonds in the then
present or any succeeding year (“Reserve Requirement”); provided, if the
Bonds are sold to the SRF Program, that the town shall give 15-days written
notice to the State before transferring funds out of the Reserve Account.
Further, in the event any revenue bonds are hereafter issued which are
payable from the Net Revenues of the waterworks on a parity with the 1991
Bonds and Bonds (“Parity Bonds”), such Reserve Requirement shall be equal
to the combined maximum annual debt service on the 1991 Bonds, Bonds and such
Parity Bonds; provided, however, that in the event at the time of issuance of
any Parity Bonds it is determined by nationally recognized bond counsel that
maintenance of a reserve at an amount equal to combined maximum annual debt
service would preclude the interest on such Parity Bonds from being
excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes, then the town
may issue such Parity Bonds by an authorizing ordinance which shall provide
that in lieu of being secured by or payable from the Reserve Account herein
continued, such Parity Bonds will be secured by and payable from a separate
reserve account therein created with a reserve requirement fixed at the
maximum amount then determined as not precluding the interest on such Parity
Bonds from being excludable from gross income for federal income tax
purposes. The Reserve Requirement under this ordinance is in addition to any
amounts to be maintained in the Debt Service Reserve Account under the
ordinances authorizing the Outstanding Bonds. If no initial deposit is made
or if the balance in the Debt Service Reserve Account does not equal the
Reserve Requirement, a sum of Net Revenues of the waterworks shall be
deposited into the Debt Service Reserve Account on the last day of each
calendar month until the balance in the Debt Service Reserve Account equals
but does not exceed the Reserve Requirement. The monthly deposits of Net
Revenues shall be equal in amount and sufficient to accumulate the Reserve
Requirement within five years of the date of delivery of the Bonds. The Debt
Service Reserve Account shall constitute the margin for safety and protection
against default in the payment of principal of and interest on the 1991
Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds, and the monies in the Debt Service
Reserve Account shall be used to pay current principal and interest on the
1991 Bonds, the Bonds and any Parity Bonds to the extent that monies in the
Bond and Interest Account are insufficient for that purpose. Any deficiency
in the balance maintained in the Debt Service Reserve Account shall be made
up from the next available Net Revenues remaining after credits into the Bond
and Interest Account. Any monies in the Debt Service Reserve Account in
excess of the Reserve Requirement shall either be transferred to the
Waterworks Improvement Fund or be used for the redemption or purchase of
outstanding bonds or installments of principal of fully registered bonds at a
price not exceeding par and accrued interest.



(Ord. 22-2001, passed 11-19-01)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   TOWN GOVERNMENT





         31.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU





         32.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS





         33.   TOWN POLICIES





         34.   FUNDS





         35.   FEES




CHAPTER 30:  TOWN GOVERNMENT



Section



   30.01   Council meetings



   30.02   Terms of Council members and Clerk-Treasurer



   30.03   Blanket bond for public officials



§ 30.01  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Town Council shall hold public meetings on the first and
third Mondays of each month with a Work Study Session to be held on the
fourth Monday of each month.



   (B)   The regular Council meetings shall be held at the Town Hall, 6
South Jefferson Street, Danville Indiana.



(Ord. passed 12-29-59)



§ 30.02  TERMS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The elective officers of the town shall be one member from
each ward in the town and the Clerk- Treasurer for the town at large.



   (B)   (1)   The Council members shall run from and be elected
from the ward in which each trustee resides and all residents of the town,
who are otherwise eligible to cast votes in a primary or general election,
shall have the right to vote for any member.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected at large.



   (C)   The terms of each Council member and of the Clerk-Treasurer
shall be four years and the terms of all officers elected at any regular
election shall begin at 12 p.m. on January 1 next following their election.



   (D)   (1)   Three Town Council Districts shall be established
with boundaries as described below:



         (a)   District  No. 1.  Commencing at a point of
beginning at U.S. 36 and East Main St.; thence west along U.S. 36 (Main St.)
to South Wayne St.; thence south on Wayne St. to Marion St.; thence east on
Marion St. to Cook Ave.; thence south along Cook Ave. to West Mill St.;
thence west along West Mill St. to Mackey Road; thence north along Mackey
Road to U.S. 36; thence west along U.S. 36 to the west corporate boundary;
thence north along the corporate boundary line to the corporate boundary line
located just north of Danville North Elementary; thence east along said
corporate boundary line to S.R. 39; thence north along the corporate boundary
line to the corporate boundary line just north of Woodfield Subdivision;
thence east along said corporate boundary line to the east corporate boundary
of Blanton Woods; thence south along the corporate boundary line to the
corporate boundary line that turns west; thence along said corporate boundary
line to Washington St.; thence south along Washington St.; thence south along
Washington St. to the corporate boundary line just north of Lawton Ave.;
thence north on West Fork White Lick Creek that turns west to Sycamore Ln.
and south of Sycamore Ln. to corporate boundary line; thence north on the
corporate boundary line; thence west along the corporate boundary line to
North County Road 50 East then north along County Road 50 East; thence east
on the corporate boundary line north of Wexford; thence north along the
corporate boundary line then east along the corporate boundary line that
connects to Money Lane; thence south along Money Lane to Sherwood Lane;
thence east along Sherwood Dr. To Willow Dr.; thence south along Willow Dr.
to Sycamore Lane; thence east along Sycamore Lane to Meadow Dr.; thence south
along Meadow Dr. to East Main St.; thence southeast on East Main St. to the
commencing point of East Main St. and U.S. 36.



         (b)   District No. 2.  Commencing at a point of
beginning at the intersection of U.S. 36 and Wayne St.; thence south on Wayne
St. to Marion St.; thence west on Marion St. to Cook Ave.; thence southwest
on Cook Ave. to Mill St.; thence west on Mill St. to Mackey Road; thence
north on Mackey Road to U.S. 36; thence west on U.S. 36 to west corporate
boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to south
corporate boundary line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to west
corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to
north corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to
west corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to
northeast corporate boundary line; thence northeast on said corporate
boundary  line to east corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence east on said
corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line; thence south on said
corporate boundary line to south corporate boundary line, thence east on said
corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line; thence south on said
corporate boundary line to south corporate boundary line; thence east on said
corporate boundary line to Cartersburg Road; thence south on corporate
boundary line east of Cartersburg Road to south corporate boundary line;
thence east on said corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line;
thence south on said corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary
line; thence west on said corporate to west corporate boundary line; thence
south on said corporate boundary line to south corporate boundary line;
thence east on said corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line;
thence south on said corporate boundary line to south corporate boundary
line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary
line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to south corporate
boundary line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to west corporate
boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to north
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west
corporate boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to
south corporate boundary line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to
U.S. 36; thence west on U.S. 36 to the commencing point of Wayne St. and U.S.
36.



         (c)   District No. 3.  Commencing at a point of
beginning at the intersection of East Main St. and U.S. 36 (Main St.); thence
east along U.S. 36 to said east corporate boundary line south of Woodbury;
thence north on said corporate boundary line to the east of Woodbury; thence
east on East Main St. to said corporate boundary line; thence south along
said corporate boundary line to said corporate boundary line; thence east
along said corporate boundary line to the north corporate boundary line;
thence north on said corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary fine;
thence east on said corporate boundary line to the west corporate boundary
line of Commerce Park; thence south along said corporate boundary line west
of Commerce Park to south corporate boundary line of Commerce Park; thence
east along said corporate boundary line south of Commerce Park to north
corporate boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to east
corporate boundary line; thence north on north corporate boundary line to
east  corporate boundary line connecting with County Road 400 East; thence
north along County Road 400 East to East Main St.; thence east on East Main
St. to north corporate boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary
line to east corporate boundary line; thence east on said corporate boundary
line to north corporate boundary line; thence north on said corporate
boundary line to east corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate
boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary line; thence east on said
corporate boundary line to County Road 400 East; thence north on County Road
400 East to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate
boundary line to east, corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said
corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line; thence south on said
corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said
corporate boundary line to County Road 400 East; thence south on County Road
400 East to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate
boundary line to west corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate
boundary to East Main St.; thence west on East Main St. to west corporate
boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to north
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west
corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to East
Main St.; thence west on East Main St. to County Road 300 East; thence north
on County Road 300 East to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said
corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said
corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary line; thence south on said
corporate boundary line to northeastern corporate boundary line; thence
northwest on said corporate boundary line to connecting north corporate
boundary line; thence north on east corporate boundary line to north
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west
corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to East
Main St.; thence west on East Main St. to west corporate boundary line;
thence north on said corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary
line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary
line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to East Main St.; thence
west on East Main St. to east corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary line; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line; thence west on said
corporate boundary line to the corporate boundary line east of County Road
200 East; thence north on County Road 200 East to south corporate boundary
line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary
line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to north corporate
boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to east corporate
boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to north
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to the
corporate boundary line east of County Road 200 East; thence north on the
corporate boundary line east of County Road 200 East to south corporate
boundary line; thence east on said corporate boundary line to east corporate
boundary line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to north
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to the
corporate boundary line east of County Road 200 East; thence north on said
corporate boundary line to the corporate boundary line north of 10th St.;
thence west on said corporate boundary line to east corporate boundary line;
thence north on said corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary
line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west corporate boundary
line; thence north on said corporate boundary line to the northernmost
corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to west
corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to
north corporate boundary line; thence west on said corporate boundary line to
west corporate boundary line; thence south on said corporate boundary line to
10th St.; thence east on 10th St. to west corporate boundary line; thence
south on said corporate boundary line to north corporate boundary line;
thence west on said corporate boundary line to Money Ln.; thence south on
Money Ln. to Sherwood Dr.; thence east on Sherwood Dr. to Willow Dr.; thence
south on Willow Dr. to Sycamore Ln.; thence east on Sycamore Ln. to Meadow
Dr.; thence south on Meadow Dr. to East Main St.; thence southwest on East
Main St. to the commencing point of East Main St. and U.S. 36.



      (2)   A Council member shall be elected at-large from each
district and two Council members shall be elected at-large without regard to
the districts. The members of the Town Council shall be elected at-large by
the voters of the whole town.



   (E)   (1)   Two Council positions shall be subject to election in
the year 2002 and every four years thereafter, with one of the two positions
being Council District 1 and the other being Council District 3. The
remaining three Council positions shall be subject to election in the year
2003 and every four years thereafter, with two of the three positions being
at-large positions not representing a specific district and the other one
being Council District 2.



      (2)   The terms of Council members elected in 1998 shall
continue through the year 2002 and those elected in 1999 shall continue
through the year 2003, irrespective of the changes in the number and
boundaries of the Council Districts made in 2001. Should any Council position
be vacated prior to the end of the aforementioned terms, a replacement chosen
to fill the vacancy shall reside in the district the vacating member was
elected from and shall serve only for the remainder of that term.



(Ord. 3-1978, passed 10-11-78; Am. Ord. 23-2001, passed 12-3-01; Am. Ord.
26-2001, passed 12-27-01; Am. Ord. 10-2002, passed 10-21-02; Am. Ord.
11-2002, passed 10-21-02; Am. Ord. 26-2012, passed 12-3-12)



§ 30.03  BLANKET BOND FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS.



   The Town Council is authorized to obtain a blanket surety and crime
bond, pursuant to I.C. 5-4-1-18.  The Clerk-Treasurer’s bond shall be in
the minimum amount of $25,000.



(Ord. 23-1997, passed 1-20-97)



CHAPTER 31:  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



Section



   31.01   Creation



   31.02   Violations Clerk; staff; duties



   31.03   Violations; jurisdiction



   31.04   Issuance of complaints



   31.05   Appearance; denial or admission



   31.06   Late charge



   31.07   Other legal action; authority



   31.08   Civil penalties



§ 31.01  CREATION.



   There shall be created the Ordinance Violations Bureau, herein
“Bureau,” pursuant to I.C. 33-6-3-1 et seq., as amended.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95)



§ 31.02  VIOLATIONS CLERK; STAFF; DUTIES.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is appointed and shall serve as the
Violations Clerk, who administers the Bureau.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer and his or her staff, as his or her
agents, shall accept written appearances, waivers of trial and admissions of
violations and payment of civil penalties in the amount and for the
violations as provided below at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office during the
hours specified on the Ordinance Violations Bureau form accompanying a
complaint issued under authority of this chapter.



   (C)   In addition to the staff of the Clerk-Treasurer, staff of
the  Police Department, who are covered by a surety bond of at least
$15,000, shall also serve as agents of the Violations Clerk, for purposes of
accepting written appearances, waivers of trial and admissions of violations,
and payments of civil penalties in the amounts for parking violations
established in the schedule of violations set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   These parking violations are established by Ordinance
Nos. 14-1986 and 13-1988, and any amendments thereto.



      (2)   The Ordinance Violations Bureau form accompanying
complaints issued for parking violations under authority of this chapter
shall specify the location where and the hours when the acceptance of written
appearances, waivers of trial and admissions of violations, and payments of
civil penalties may be made.



      (3)   All payments of civil penalties for parking violations
received by staff of the Police Department shall be delivered to the
Clerk-Treasurer's office within one day of their receipt.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95; Am. Ord. 3-2008, passed 2-19-08)



§ 31.03  VIOLATIONS; JURISDICTION.



   (A)   Ordinances and this code of ordinances’ provisions
identified in the schedule in division (C) below shall be within the
jurisdiction of the Bureau subject to the civil penalties listed to the right
of each Bureau ordinance.  For some Bureau ordinances, second and any
additional violations, admissions or judgments of violations of that
ordinance, occurring within 12 months of any other violation, admission or
judgment of violation will be subject to a greater civil penalty.



   (B)   Where applicable, those greater penalties for second and
additional violations and admissions or judgments are listed to the right of
the penalty that applies to the first violation, admission or judgment of
violation.



   (C)   For the following schedule, the ordinance or code of
ordinances (“CO”) provisions are listed with their civil penalty:



      (1)   CO Title XIII, Chapter 130, Section 05, Smoking
Prohibited in Municipal Buildings:  $25/$50;



      (2)   CO Title IX, Chapter 93, Sections 02 to 99, General
Provisions (prohibiting nuisances):  $50/$100;



      (3)   CO Title IX, Chapter 93, Sections 35 to 46, Noise
Regulations:  $50;



      (4)   CO Title XIII, Chapter 130, Section 01 Open Alcoholic
Beverage Containers:  $25;



      (5)   CO Title IX, Chapter 90, Sections 20 to 25, Smoke
Detectors:  $50;



      (6)   CO Title IX, Chapter 91, Littering:  $25;



      (7)   CO Title IX, Chapter 93, Sections 20 to 22, Outdoor
Burning:  $50;



      (8)   CO Title XI, Chapter 110, Transient Merchants;
Solicitors:  $50;



      (9)   CO Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 01, General Restricted
Parking, and Chapter 74, Parking Schedules (for all citations for the
violation of provisions on the stopping, standing and/or parking of vehicles
except for those in Schedule VI):  $20/$30 and $40 for a third and each
additional violation thereafter within 12 months of any two preceding parking
violation citations;



      (10)   CO Title XV, Chapter 150, Sections 25 to 31, Unsafe
Buildings and Structures:  $50/$100;



      (11)   CO Title IX, Chapter 94, sections 01 to 12,
Construction, Reconstruction or Alteration (of streets, alleys, curbs and
sidewalks):  $25;



      (12)   CO Title VII, Chapter 74, Schedule VI, Handicapped
Parking Spaces:  $50/$75;



      (13)   CO Title IX, Chapter 95, Animals:  $50/$100;



      (14)   CO Title IX, Chapter 92, Section 01, Operation of
Businesses (in parks):  $25;



      (15)   CO Title IX, Chapter 92, Section 03, Ellis Park Hours
of Operation:  $25;



      (16)   CO Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 06, Permits;
Application; Fee (for failing to obtain a building permit):  $50;



      (17)   CO Title XIII, Chapter 130, Section 04, Tampering with
Fire Hydrants:  $50;



      (18)   CO Title IX, Chapter 90, Sections 01 to 06, Alarm
Systems (for false fire alarm notifications); for registered alarms systems
$15 for a third, $30 for a fourth, $60 for a fifth and $90 for a sixth and
each additional violation thereafter within 12 months of the preceding
violations and for unregistered alarms systems $25 for a third, $50 for a
fourth, $80 for a fifth and $100 for a sixth and each additional violation
thereafter within 12 months of the preceding violations.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95; Am. Ord. 24-1997, passed 11-3-97; Am. Ord. 9-2008,
passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 14-2009, passed 9-8-09)



§ 31.04  ISSUANCE OF COMPLAINTS.



   Any police officer or other town official or employee authorized by an
ordinance of the town or state law to issue complaints for violations of
ordinances may issue complaints for the violation of Bureau ordinances.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95)



§ 31.05  APPEARANCE; DENIAL OR ADMISSION.



   (A)   Any person upon whom a complaint is issued pursuant to this
chapter, except for parking violations, shall appear at the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office to admit or deny the violation within seven days
of the issuance of the complaint, or shall have delivered his or her
admission and entire penalty payment or written denial to the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office within seven days of the issuance of the complaint.



   (B)   Any person upon whom a complaint for a parking violation is
issued pursuant to this chapter, shall appear at the Police Department
administrative office to admit or deny the violation within seven days of the
issuance of the complaint, or shall have delivered his or her admission and
entire penalty payment or written denial to the Police Department
administrative office within seven days of the issuance of the complaint.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95; Am. Ord. 3-2008, passed 2-19-08)



§ 31.06  LATE CHARGE.



   If a complaint for a violation of a Bureau ordinance brought pursuant
to this chapter does not bring an admission of violation and payment of the
civil penalty or is not properly responded to in writing within seven days of
the issuance of the complaint, the Bureau shall add a late charge of $5 per
violation to the amount otherwise payable under § 31.03.  After 30 days of
the issuance of the complaint, the Bureau shall not accept admission of a
violation or payment of the civil penalty without the consent of the Town
Manager who may withhold that consent if the violation has been referred to
the Town Ordinance Prosecutor for legal proceedings.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95)



§ 31.07  OTHER LEGAL ACTION; AUTHORITY.



   The identification in § 31.03 of an ordinance or code provision as a
Bureau ordinance does not precluded the town from taking other legal action
to enforce the ordinance or code provision, in lieu of issuing a complaint
under the authority of this chapter seeking the civil penalty prescribed by
§ 31.03, if the ordinance or code provision provides for other enforcement
options, including, but not limited to injunctive relief and recovery of
abatement costs or of damages.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95)



§ 31.08  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   The town ordinances and code provisions, identified above as Bureau
ordinances, are hereby amended to provide and declare the civil penalty
scheduled with the ordinance or code provision to be the specific monetary
penalty for the violation of that ordinance.



(Ord. 5, passed 5-15-95)



CHAPTER 32:  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



Section



   32.01   Park and Recreation Department; Board



   32.02   Economic Development Commission



   32.03   Department of Redevelopment; Commission



   32.04   Plan Commission



   32.05   Board of Zoning Appeals



   32.06   Citizens Advisory Board



   32.07   Volunteer Fire Department



   32.08   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners



Cross-reference:



   Impact Fee Review Board, see § 35.03



§ 32.01  PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT; BOARD.



   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3, there is hereby created
the Park and Recreation Department that shall be managed by a Park and
Recreation Board pursuant to this section and I.C. 36-10-3.



   (B)   The Park and Recreation Board shall be composed of:



      (1)   Four members appointed by the Town Council President; 
(The Town Council President shall appoint persons who have been identified by
the Town Council as qualified for this Board based on their interest in and
knowledge of parks and recreation.  No more than two members shall be of the
same political party.)



      (2)   One member of the Town School Board, appointed by the
Town School Board.



   (C)   (1)   The expiration date of all terms shall be on the
first Monday in January.



      (2)   A member shall continue on the Board, after his or her
term has expired, if a successor has not been appointed, until the
appointment is made.  If an appointment for any new term is not made by the
first Monday in April, the incumbent shall be deemed as having been appointed
to another term.



      (3)   As a term expires, each new appointment is for a
four-year term.



      (4)   If a vacancy occurs during a member’s term, a new
member shall be chosen for the remainder of the term by the authority making
the original appointment to this position.



   (D)   One Town Council member shall serve as the Council’s liaison
to the Board.  The liaison shall be appointed for a term of one year by the
Town Council President.  While this liaison shall not be a voting member of
the Board, he or she shall be notified of all meetings of the Board and shall
be allowed to participate in all Board meetings, the same as for members of
the Board, except he or she shall not vote on official Board business.



   (E)   (1)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board
shall elect the President and Vice-President from its membership.  The
Vice-President shall have authority to act as the President of the Board
during the absence or disability of the President.



      (2)   The Board may select the Secretary from within or
without its own membership.



   (F)   Board members shall perform their responsibilities and duties
as members of this Board in a manner that represents the overall interests of
the town and not of any faction or segment of the town. Causes warranting
removal from the Board shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Failure to regularly attend Board meetings;



      (2)   Failure to follow town policies and procedures in
dealing with town employees, property, facilities or equipment;



      (3)   Committing a conflict of interest under state law or
using one’s position on the Board to create a special benefit for the
member or his or her relatives or friends;



      (4)   Repeated formal support of Board actions that violate or
undermine the Department’s budget as adopted by the Town Council;



      (5)   Engaging in conduct that reflects poorly on the public
image of the town and/or its officials, appointees or employees; and



      (6)   Being formally charged with having committed any crime
prosecutable as a misdemeanor or felony.



   (G)   The Board shall have those powers provided to park and
recreation boards under I.C. 36-10-3 with respect to the Park and Recreation
Department and the town’s park and recreation functions.



   (H)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget for the
Department to the Town Council.  The annual budget submitted by the Board
must detail all anticipated receipts and all intended expenditures of the
Department and it must be in the form required by the Town Council, in the
same manner as required of other town departments.



   (I)   The Board shall obtain the approval of the Town Council with
respect to:



      (1)   Any real property the Board intends to acquire by
purchase, exchange, lease or gift;



      (2)   Any real property the Board intends to dispose by sale,
exchange, lease or gift;



      (3)   The amount of any bonds the Board intends to issue;
and/or



      (4)   The amount of any special taxes the Board seeks to
impose, prior to making any formal commitment to proceed in the acquisition
or disposal of real property, the issuance of any bonds or the imposition of
any special taxes pursuant to its authority under I.C. 36-10-3.  This
requirement does not replace or diminish any other Town Council authority or
role, recognized in state law, with respect to the aforementioned processes.



   (J)   In the event there shall be any uncertainty with respect to
the Board’s powers under this section, the Town Council shall resolve the
uncertainty.  If the Town Council determines that the Board has ceased to
fulfill the role it intended for the Board, the Town Council may repeal this
section and assume all powers and responsibilities of the Board pursuant to
the Council’s authority under I.C. 36-1-3.



(Ord. 14-1998, passed 5-4-98)



§ 32.02  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-11.9 and 36-7-12, the Economic
Development Commission is hereby created and granted all powers and duties of
a commission, as set forth in I.C. 36-7-12, and the Department of Economic
Development be established only for the purpose of satisfying the requirement
of I.C. 36-7-12.



   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-7-12, the Town Council
shall nominate its nominee for membership on the Commission.



(Ord. 24-1994, passed 12-19-94)



§ 32.03  DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT; COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Town Council now deems it to be in the best interest of
the town and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for rehabilitation,
redevelopment or economic development of areas by private enterprise by
establishing the Department of Redevelopment.



   (B)   The Town Council hereby establishes the Department of
Redevelopment of the town.  The Department will be controlled by a board of
five members known as the Redevelopment Commission.



   (C)   Pursuant to the Act, I.C. 36-7-14 et seq., all of the
territory within the corporate boundaries of the town will be a taxing
district to be known as the Redevelopment District of the town for the
purpose of levying and collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment
purposes, as provided in the Act.  The Town Council finds and determines
that all of the taxable property within this special taxing district will be
considered to be benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic
development projects carried out under the Act to the extent of the special
taxes levied under the Act.



(Ord. 21-1990, passed 11-19-90)



§ 32.04  PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Plan Commission under the
authority provided in I.C. 36-7-4-207 through 36-7-4-220.



   (B)   Upon the establishment of a seven member municipal plan
commission, two citizen members shall initially be appointed for a term of
three years and two shall initially be appointed for a term of four years. 
Each member’s term expires on the first Monday of January of the second,
third, or fourth year, respectively, after the year of the member’s
appointment.



(I.C. 36-7-4-218)



   (C)   (1)   When a municipal plan commission exercises
jurisdiction outside the incorporated area of the municipality as provided
for in § 205 (I.C. 36-7-4-205) of the advisory planing law, the executive of
the county in which the unincorporated area is located shall appoint two
additional citizen members to the Municipal Plan Commission.  The citizen
members must:



         (a)   Be residents of:



            1.   The unincorporated area; or



            2.   The county, and must also be owners of real
property located in whole or in part within the unincorporated area; and



         (b)   Not be of the same political party.



However, at least one of the members must be a resident of the unincorporated
area.



      (2)   Initially, one member under subsection (1) above shall
be appointed for a term of one year and the other for a term of four years. 
Thereafter, each appointment is for a term of four years.  The additional
citizen members are entitled to participate and vote in all deliberations of
the municipal plan commission.



      (3)   If the unincorporated area referred to in subsection (1)
above lies in two counties, the executive of each of those counties shall
appoint one of the additional citizen members.  The executive of the county
having the larger proportion of the unincorporated area shall appoint its
member first, and the executive of the other county shall then appoint its
member, who must not be of the same political party.



(I.C. 36-7-4-214)  (Ord. 2-1952, passed 6-2-52)



§ 32.05  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Established. There is hereby re-established an Advisory Board
of Zoning Appeals to be known as the “Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town
of Danville, Indiana.” The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be a continuation
of the present Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Danville heretofore
established under I.C. 36-7-4-900 Series.



   (B)   Membership.



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five
members appointed as follows:



         (a)   Three members appointed by the Town Council
President, of whom one must be a member of the Plan Commission and two must
not be members of the Plan Commission.



         (b)   One member appointed by the Town Council must not
be a member of the Plan Commission.



         (c)   One member appointed by the Plan Commission from
the Plan Commission’s membership who must be a citizen member of the Plan
Commission other than a member appointed under division (B)(1)(a).



      (2)   Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals may not hold
other elective office in municipal, county or state government, except as
permitted in this section; and all members must be residents of the town.



   (C)   Terms of office. Following adoption of this section, each of
the above members shall be re- appointed for the balance of the term being
served on the present Board of Zoning Appeals.  Thereafter each member shall
be for a term of four years.  Each term shall expire on the first Monday in
January of the year of termination.



   (D)   Territorial jurisdiction.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have jurisdiction over all the land subject to the Zoning Ordinance.



   (E)   Subject matter jurisdiction.  The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the following:



      (1)   To review, approve or deny special exceptions.



      (2)   To review, approve, or deny variances of use from the
terms of this section.



      (3)   To review, approve, or deny variances from the
development standards (such as height, bulk, or area) of this section.



      (4)   To review, hear and determine appeals from:



         (a)   Any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by an administrative official or staff member under the Zoning
Ordinance; and



         (b)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative board or other body except the Plan Commission in
relation to the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.



   (F)   Staff.  The staff of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consist of the Administrator as defined in this section and any other
employees of the town that he or she may direct from time to time to assist
him or her or the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   Authority.  The staff shall have the authority to take
those lawful actions necessary to enforce the terms of this section on behalf
of the Plan Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   Duties.  The authority to perform inspections, review
applications, and issue permits is hereby delegated to the staff.



   (G)   Rules and procedures.



      (1)   Rules and by-laws.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have sole authority to adopt rules as permitted by I.C. 36-7-4-916 as well as
by- laws concerning organization, selection of officers, forms for
applications, filing requirements, procedures, and notices for and conduct of
meetings. Upon adoption of such rules and by-laws they shall be applicable to
the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be printed and made available to
applicants and other interested parties.



      (2)   Facilities and funding.  The town shall provide
suitable facilities for the holding of Board of Zoning Appeals hearings and
the storage of its recorded documents and accounts.  The town shall, in its
annual budget, provide sufficient funds for the functioning of the Board and
its staff.



      (3)   Minutes.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep
minutes of all of its proceedings and keep a record of all votes and actions
taken. All minutes and records shall be considered public records.



      (4)   Filing.  All applications for variances, special
exceptions, and requests for appeal shall be filed by the applicant with the
Planning Director.



      (5)   Hearings.  All hearings required for variances and
appeals shall be by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  Procedures for public
notice setting forth time and place for all hearings of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be established by the Board of Zoning Appeals, except that
public notice and due notice to all interested parties shall be given at
least ten days before the date set for the hearing, and shall comply with the
regulations set forth in I.C. 5-3-1-2 and I.C. 5-3-1-4.



§ 32.06  CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Citizens Advisory Board
(“CAB”).  The CAB shall be comprised of five members: one a member of
the Town Council; one a Waste Management representative; and three residents
of the town, appointed by Council. 



   (B)   Meetings of the CAB shall take place once each calendar
quarter when called by the Town Council member, who shall serve as Chairman.



   (C)   The purpose of the CAB shall be to monitor ongoing facility
operations, address any citizen complaints which may arise (including those
of property owners adjacent to the facility with respect to well water
quality at their properties), and provide input regarding end use of the
facility.  In addition, the CAB shall have such further responsibilities as
may be agreed upon between the town and Waste Management.



(Ord. passed 4-24-94)



§ 32.07  VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Employees who work full-time at an hourly rate for Town
departments, other than the Fire Department, but are members of the Fire
Department, shall be considered as "employee volunteers" and shall be
entitled to only the nominal compensation established by this section for
their services to the Fire Department.



   (B)   "Employee volunteers" of the Fire Department shall receive
nominal compensation to pay for personal expenses for items, including but
not limited to shoes and belts, travel, meals, books and supplies for
training purposes, in an amount of $150.00 per month.



   (C)   The rules of the Fire Department shall include continuing
qualification requirements for "employee volunteer" members of the Department
to ensure their active participation in the Department.  Employees who fail
to meet these continuing qualification requirements shall not be allowed to
provide services for the Fire Department, unless the Chief of the Department
finds that special circumstances should temporarily excuse the employee from
meeting these requirements.



(Ord. 8-2003, passed 7-7-03)



§ 32.08  BOARD OF METROPOLITAN POLICE COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   The office of Town Marshal is hereby abolished and a Board of
Metropolitan Police Commissioners (referred to as “the Board” herein) is
hereby established for the town.



   (B)   The Board shall consist of five members.



      (1)   Not more than three Board members may be members of the
same political party, if individuals who satisfy this requirement can be
found to serve on the Board.



      (2)   Each Board member shall be a resident of the town.



      (3)   The Town Council shall appoint each Board member.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (5) below, the term of
each Board member expires January 1 of the third year after the member's
appointment.



      (5)   The initial terms of each position on the Board shall be
staggered so that the term of not more than two Board members may expire each
year. In making its initial appointments to each position on the Board, the
Council shall determine which initial terms shall be for one, two and three
years, with the initial terms to be held by Town Council members being
one-year terms.



      (6)   The Town Council may remove a Board member for any cause
that the Council considers sufficient.



      (7)   The Town Council may not appoint a police officer
employed by the town to serve on the Board.



   (B)   Up to two members of the Town Council may serve as ex officio
members of the Board.  A Board member appointed to serve on the Board while
servicing as a Town Council member vacates the member's position on the Board
when the member is no longer a member of the Town Council.



   (C)   This division does not apply to a Board member who is a member
of the Town Council. Before performing any function of a Board member, an
individual shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation of office before
the Circuit Court Clerk of Hendricks County.



   (D)   This division applies to all Board members. In the oath or
affirmation before the Circuit Court Clerk, each member shall state that, in
each appointment or removal made by the Board to or from the Police
Department under this section, the Board member will not appoint or remove a
member of the Police Department because of the persons’s political
affiliation or for another cause or reason other than that of the person’s
fitness.



   (E)   The oaths and affirmations required by this section shall be
delivered to the Circuit Court Clerk for filing among the Circuit Court
Clerk's records.



   (F)   This division does not apply to a Board member who is a member
of the Town Council.  A Board member shall give bond in the penal sum of
$5,000, payable to the state and conditioned upon the faithful and honest
discharge of the member's duties. The bond must be approved by the Town
Council.



   (G)   The Town Council shall fix the salary of Board members.



      (1)   A Board member's salary is payable monthly out of the
town treasury.



      (2)   A Board member who is also a member of the Town Council
may not receive compensation as a Board member.



   (H)   The Board may appoint, subject to the qualifications for
employment determined by the Board and approved by the Town Council, as many
persons as necessary to serve in the Police Department.



      (1)   One person shall be appointed to serve as the Police
Chief.



      (2)   The Board may also appoint other employees that are
necessary to carry on the work of the Police Department.



      (3)   The Board may recommend, and the Town Council shall
determine, the compensation to be paid to members of the Police Department in
amounts that are just and reasonable.



      (4)   All persons appointed must be of good moral character
and serve only during good behavior.



   (I)   The Board constitutes the Safety Board of the town for
purposes of the suspension, demotion or dismissal of any member of the Police
Department.



      (1)   Proceedings for the suspension, demotion, or dismissal
of any member of the Police Department shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed by I.C.36-8-3-4.



      (2)   The disciplinary provisions of I.C.36-8-3-4.1 also apply
to the Safety Board and the Police Chief.



   (J)   The Board may make general and special rules for the
government and discipline of the Police Department, and may make special and
general orders to the Department through the Police Chief, its executive head.



   (K)   The operation, management and control of a Police Department
under this section shall be governed by statutes applicable to the management
and control of other municipal police departments if those statutes are
consistent with this section.



      (1)   The members of the Police Department may exercise all
powers granted to members of police departments by other statutes. 



      (2)   The members of the Police Department are entitled to all
the rights, powers and privileges granted by statute to members of police
departments.



   (L)   The Board may provide that all appointments to the Police
Department are probationary for a period not to exceed one year.



      (1)   If the Board finds, upon the recommendation of the Chief
of the Department during the probationary period, that the conduct or
capacity of a member is not satisfactory, the Board shall notify the member,
in writing, that the member is being suspended or will not receive a
permanent appointment.



      (2)   If a member is notified that the member will not receive
a permanent appointment, the member's employment immediately ceases.



      (3)   Otherwise, at the expiration of the probationary period,
the member is considered regularly employed.



(Ord. 13-2008, passed 8-18-08)



CHAPTER 33:  TOWN POLICIES



Section



   33.01   Purchasing procedures



   33.02   Smoking in municipal buildings



   33.03   Prepayment of claims



   33.04   Payment of claims for membership



   33.05   Pool privileges for town employees



   33.06   Cellular telephone allowance



§ 33.01  PURCHASING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Town Council shall serve as the purchasing agency for the
town.



   (B)   The Town Council, as the town’s purchasing agency, shall
have all the powers and duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may be
supplemented from time to time by ordinances and policies adopted by the Town
Council.



   (C)   The Town Council shall act as the purchasing agency for every
agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department or
other establishment of the town.



   (D)   The Town Council designates the Clerk- Treasurer, Town
Manager, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Planning Director, Wastewater
Superintendent, Water Superintendent, Public Works Supervisor and Parks
Department Superintendent as purchasing agents for the town, subject to any
and all limitations on their authority as established by statute or
established policy or procedure of the town.



   (E)   Subject to the policies and procedures of the town, purchasing
agents may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less than $25,000 on
the open market without inviting or receiving quotes.



   (F)   The provisions of I.C. 5-23, public-private agreements are
adopted for use by the town.



   (G)   The following are the required purchasing rules for the state:



      (1)   Purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States;
and



      (2)   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be
specified for all town purchases and shall be purchased unless the purchasing
agent determines that:



         (a)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United
States in reasonably available quantities;



         (b)   The prices of the supplies manufactured in the
United States exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and
comparable supplies manufactured elsewhere;



         (c)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the
United States is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced
available supplies manufactured elsewhere; or



         (d)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the
United States is not in the public interest.



(Ord. 18-1998, passed 6-15-98)



§ 33.02  SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No person shall have, in his or her possession, any lighted
tobacco product, tobacco derivative, including, but not limited to pipes,
cigars, cigarettes or other devices used for the smoking of tobacco or
tobacco derivatives, while within any building owned by the town.



   (B)   Any person who defaces or removes a posted sign indicating
that smoking is prohibited from a building owned by the town without proper
authorization may be subject to a fine for each violation.



(Ord. 24-1997, passed 11-3-97)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.03  PREPAYMENT OF CLAIMS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-5-4-12A, B, C and D, the Town Council does
now hereby specifically authorize the payment of certain claims in advance of
Council allowance by the adoption of this section so that monies may be
disbursed pursuant to I.C. 36-5-4-12 for lawful town purposes.



   (B)   The Town Council hereby ordains that claims that may be paid
in advance are limited to the following types of claims:



      (1)   Claims for the disbursement of money for property or
services purchased or leased from the United States government or an agency
or political subdivision of the United States government;



      (2)   Monies to be disbursed for the purchase of payment of
license fees or permit fees for the town and/or the utility systems of the
town;



      (3)   Monies to be disbursed for the payment of claims for
insurance premiums for the town or the utility systems of the town;



      (4)   Monies to be disbursed for utility payments and/or
utility connection charges for the town;



      (5)   Monies to be disbursed for the payment of claims for
federal grant programs upon the following conditions:



         (a)   Advance funding under a federal grant program is
not prohibited; and



         (b)   Any party contracting with the town, under a
federal grant program, has provided sufficient security to the town for the
amount advanced to the contracting party should the federal grant not be
awarded to the town.



      (6)   Monies to be expended for grants of state funds
authorized by statute;



      (7)   Monies to be expended for claims for the payment of
maintenance agreements or service agreements upon property or equipment owned
by the town;



      (8)   Monies to be expended for claims for the payment of
lease agreements or rental agreements for property used by the town or its
utility systems;



      (9)   Monies to be expended for claims for payment of the
principal and/or interest payments on bonds owed by the town or its utility
systems;



      (10)   Monies to be expended for claims for payroll for
services provided by employees to the town;



      (11)   Monies to be expended for claims to pay state, federal
or county taxes of any nature owned by the town;



      (12)   Monies to be expended for charge card payments to avoid
late fees;



      (13)   Refunds due on water deposit accounts and overpayments.



      (14)   Refunds due on rental property deposits or
cancellations; and



      (15)   Invoices that offer a discount for early payment.



   (C)   It is hereby required that, prior to the Clerk- Treasurer
paying any claim in advance, listed above, that the claim be supported by a
fully itemized claim form prior to the issuance and drafting of any check
from the funds of the town for the payment of the claims.



   (D)   The Town Council shall review and formally allow the claim at
the next regular or special meeting of the Town Council, following the
pre-approved payment of the expenses listed herein.



(Ord. 9-1992, passed 8-3-92; Am. Ord. 4-2008, passed 3-17-08)



§ 33.04  PAYMENT OF CLAIMS FOR MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Town Board is hereby authorized to budget and appropriate
funds from the General Fund or from other funds to pay the expenses incurred
in promoting the betterment of the municipality.



   (B)   Expenditures may include, but are not necessarily limited to
the following:



      (1)   Membership dues in local, regional, state and national
associations of a civic, educational or governmental nature, which have, as
their purpose, the betterment and improvement of municipal operations;



      (2)   Direct expenses for travel, meals and lodging in
conjunction with municipal business or meetings or organizations to which the
municipality belongs;



      (3)   Expenses incurred in the promotion of economic or
industrial development for the municipality, including meeting room rental,
decorations, meals and travel;



      (4)   Commemorative plaques, certificates or objects such as
commemorative keys; and



      (5)   Other purposes which are deemed by the Town Council to
directly relate to promotion or betterment of the town.



   (C)   (1)   No expenses shall be allowed without prior written
authorization and approval of the Town Council.



      (2)   Claims for expenses under this section shall be allowed
as prescribed by law.



(Ord. 3-1982, passed 4-5-82)



§ 33.05  POOL PRIVILEGES FOR TOWN EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   By the powers vested in the Town Council and by the laws of
the state, the full-time employees of the town shall be issued free
admissions passes to the Danville Park Pool for themselves, their spouses and
their dependents residing in their residence who have not attained the age of
18 years until further order of the Council.



   (B)   This benefit conferred upon the full-time town employees shall
not be considered a term of employment, nor shall there be any contractual
right to enjoy this benefit and the same may be terminated by the Council at
any time, without any notice, to any town employee.



   (C)   The benefit conferred upon the town employees or their spouses
and dependents under the age of 18 residing in their residence is a
conditional benefit which can be terminated for any individual at the
election of the Board, without any notice or explanation for the actions of
the Board.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer, the Town Manager or others, at their
instruction, are to provide identification to the town employees and their
spouses and dependents, for free admission to the Danville Park Pool and
shall make an accounting of the same.



(Ord. passed 5-2-83)



§ 33.06  CELLULAR TELEPHONE ALLOWANCE.



   Employees holding a position requiring cellular telephone availability
will receive a monthly cellular telephone allowance as set forth in Ord.
8-2011, as the same may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 8-2011, passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. 10-2011, passed 6-20-11)



CHAPTER 34:  FUNDS



Section



   34.01   Park and Recreation Department; Non-Reverting Operating Fund



   34.02   Criminal Investigation Fund



   34.03   Host Community Agreement Fund



   34.04   Special trust funds



   34.05   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund



   34.06   Park, Police and Fire Donation Fund



   34.07   Rainy Day Fund



   34.08   Utility Plant Replacement Fund



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see § 35.02



   Parks and Recreation Infrastructure Improvement Fund, see § 35.03



   Payment of claims for membership, see § 33.04



   Stormwater Utility Fee Fund, see § 53.14



§ 34.01  PARK AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT; NON-REVERTING OPERATING FUND.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created in accordance with the Park
and Recreation Law, being I.C. 36-10-3-22, a special Non-Reverting Operating
Fund for the purpose of depositing fees collected from the rental of the
Blanton House and from park programs. Park programs shall include the
following:



         (a)   Adult sport leagues/tournaments;



         (b)   Classes of instructional nature;



         (c)   Special events;



         (d)   Festivals;



         (e)   Central Normal Gym/Hargrave Hall Gym;



         (f)   Fitness Center;



         (g)   Cafeteria;



         (h)   Classrooms at Hargrave Hall.



      (2)   The Non-Reverting Fund shall reflect separate accounts
for budgetary purposes and will be a budgeted appropriation per State Board
of Accounts.



   (B)   Fees collected from the rental of the Blanton  House and from
park programs shall be deposited in a separate account to be known as “The
Danville Parks and Recreation Non-Reverting Fund.” Expenditures may be made
from this fund for the following:



      (1)   Facility maintenance;



      (2)   Facility improvements;



      (3)   Park maintenance and improvements;



      (4)   Supplies;



      (5)   Equipment;



      (6)   Equipment maintenance;



      (7)   Advertising and marketing;



      (8)   Park activities;



      (9)   Sport leagues;



      (10)   Special events;



      (11)   Programs;



      (12)   Additional salaries and contracted personnel;



      (13)   Other related expenditures as to the operation of Park
and Recreation responsibilities under the Superintendent's direct supervision.



   (C)   Funds received into this operating fund do not need to be
appropriated by the Town Council.



(Ord. 6-2001, passed 5-21-01; Am. Ord. 22-2005, passed 11-7-05; Am. Ord.
3-2006, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord. 26-2009, passed 12-28-09)



§ 34.02  CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION FUND.



   (A)   There is created the Criminal Investigation Fund with the
monies deposited in the Fund to be expended by the Chief of Police, without
appropriation, but in accordance with the provisions, limitations and
conditions of this section.



   (B)   The monies deposited in the Criminal Investigation Fund shall
not be commingled with nor shall they be a part of the General Fund of the
town.



   (C)   The source of funds to be deposited in the Criminal
Investigation Fund shall be both funds from the public sale of seized
property in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 34-24-1-1 et seq. and
funds derived from the sale of seized property indisposed of in accordance
with the United States Department of Justice policy.  Any monies from either
of these two sources paid into the General Fund of the town shall be
deposited in the Criminal Investigation Fund by the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town.



   (D)   Authorized expenditures from the Criminal Investigation Fund
shall be utilized solely for law enforcement purposes and may include the
following:



      (1)   Purchase of vehicles and equipment needed for law
enforcement function;



      (2)   Purchase of weapons and protective equipment;



      (3)   Purchase of investigative communi- cations equipment;



      (4)   Purchase of automated data processing (ADP) equipment
and software to be used in support of law enforcement purposes;



      (5)   Use as reward money or expenses of running a “sting”
operation;



      (6)   Money used to make “buys” in connection with
anticipated arrests; and



      (7)   Costs associated with public education on drug
awareness, alcohol abuse or other issues related to prevention of illegal or
criminal activity.



   (E)   (1)   Expenditures from the Criminal Investigation Fund
shall be made by the Chief of Police, under the authority and pursuant to
such limitations as may be granted and imposed by the Town Council, subject
to formal claim approved by the Town Council and in accordance with the town
purchasing policy.



      (2)   The authorized action and limitation may include, but
shall not be limited to the following:



         (a)   The dollar amount of law enforcement expenditures
which may be made without prior approval by the Town Council; and



         (b)   Reporting requirements by the Chief of Police on
the dollars received and expenditures made from the Criminal Investigation
Fund which reports must be made at least annually.



   (F)   (1)   There shall be no reversion of the Criminal
Investigation Fund or any monies paid into the Criminal Investigation Fund to
the General Fund of the town.



      (2)   Funds from the sale of seized property may accumulate in
the Criminal Investigation Fund.



   (G)   The Criminal Investigation Fund is to be used exclusively for
law enforcement purposes.



(Ord. 8-2000, passed 6-5-00)



§ 34.03  HOST COMMUNITY AGREEMENT FUND.



   (A)   (1)   A special revenue fund, entitled the Host Community
Agreement Fund, is hereby established. The Fund is to receive all payments
made to the town under the agreement.



      (2)   No tax revenues or other monies received from the state
shall be deposited in the Fund.



   (B)   Monies deposited in the Fund may be expended by the Town
Council for any item, activity or project falling within the scope of any
designated purpose of the Fund, as listed in division (D) of this section. 
Additionally, the Town Council may authorize the Town Clerk-Treasurer to
borrow money from the Fund in specified amounts to pay Town expenses if the
Council determines that sufficient and appropriate other revenues can be
expected to be received in the future to fully reimburse the Fund for the
loan. Expenditure of these monies does not require any additional Town
Council action authorizing an appropriation, but no expense shall be allowed
from the Fund without prior approval of the Town Council done pursuant to the
town’s procedure for the payment of claims.



   (C)   Monies deposited in the Fund shall not revert or transfer to
any other fund of the town, at the end of each calendar or fiscal year or at
any other time, without Town Council action specifically authorizing the
reversion or transfer.



   (D)   The purposes for which the monies in this Fund are to be
expended include:



      (1)   To acquire real estate, rights-of-way, easements or
other interests in real estate to be used for the construction of or access
to municipal buildings or other facilities, public ways, sidewalks, water
lines, sanitary sewers or storm sewers or for public recreational use;



      (2)   To purchase, lease, construct, equip and maintain
buildings or other facilities for the town or its utilities, public ways,
sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewers or storm sewers;



      (3)   To prepare real estate for the purchase or construction
of buildings and other facilities for the town or its utilities by
demolition, grading or making other necessary improvements to the real estate;



      (4)   To purchase or lease vehicles and other equipment for
the town, including its Police and Fire Departments;



      (5)   To pay the costs of preparing and revising important
town documents such as its comprehensive plan, annexation fiscal plans,
policies and procedures and code of ordinances and for establishing new
ordinance enforcement procedures;



      (6)   To retire, in whole or in part, the town’s bonded
indebtedness;



      (7)   To be used as the town’s share for participating in
state or federal grant programs that require or encourage a local match;



      (8)   To be used by the town as incentive grants for local
civic organizations; and



      (9)   To contract for or employ the services of any person or
firm to work on any activity or project falling within the scope of the
previously listed purposes, including, but not limited to engineering,
financial and legal professionals.



(Ord. 1-1995, passed 1-3-95; Am. Ord. 9-2003, passed 7-7-03)



§ 34.04  SPECIAL TRUST FUNDS.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall establish and maintain a
special trust fund in which should be deposited all payments received under
the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act.  Whenever possible, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall invest the funds in an account which will draw interest
during periods which are provided for in the regulations of the
administration and control of the funds.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town is further directed to expend
funds out of the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act, as herein provided,
only upon direction of the Town Council and in accordance with the laws and
procedures applicable to the expenditure of the Revenue Sharing Fund.



(Ord. 18-1972, passed 12-16-72)



§ 34.05  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of I.C. 36-9-16-2 through
36-9-16-4, there is hereby created a special fund to be known as the
Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund of the town, into which the cigarette
taxes allotted to the town by reason of I.C. 6-7-1-30.1 and I.C. 6-7-1-31.1 ,
as amended, shall be deposited.



   (B)   The Fund shall be a cumulative fund and all of the monies
deposited into the Fund shall be appropriated and used solely for capital
improvements, as hereinafter defined, and none of the monies shall revert to
the General Fund of the town or to be used for any purposes other than
capital improvements.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.  The construction or improvement of any
property owned by the town, including, but not limited to streets,
thoroughfares and sewers and the retirement of general obligation bonds of
the town issued and the proceeds used for the purpose of constructing CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS.  The term shall not include salaries of any public officials
or employees, except those which are directly chargeable to a CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT.



(Ord. 15-1965, passed 8-3-65)



§ 34.06  PARK, POLICE AND FIRE DONATION FUND.



   There is hereby created a donation fund for the purpose of depositing
donated funds.  Authorized expenditures are limited to the use within the
department for which the donation was intended.



§ 34.07 RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund.  There is hereby established a
Rainy Day Fund to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised
by a general or special tax levy on taxable property within the town whenever
the purpose of such tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and
unencumbered balance remains.



   (B)   Purpose of the Fund.  The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day
Fund may be used for the operation of the town and its various departments,
when the town does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs,
including, but not limited to, costs of services, supplies, equipment,
capital improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.



   (C)   Transfer to Fund.  On or before December 31 of each year, the
Town Council shall determine the amount, if any, of any unused and
unencumbered funds available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which
transfer may not exceed more than 10% of the town's total budget for that
fiscal year.



   (D)   Appropriations.  The Town Council may authorize the
expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day  Fund by appropriations made in the
same manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon
making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the
intent of the Fund.



(Ord. 4-2004, passed 2-17-04)



§ 34.08  UTILITY PLANT REPLACEMENT FUND.



   (A)   Fees collected from a customer for wastewater service
including but not limited to payments for tap charges, tap fees, and
connectioncharges shall be deposited into a separate account known as the
"Plant Replacement Fund" as directed by the Wastewater Superintendent.
Expenditures may be made from this fund for the purpose of improving,
replacing, and extending the town's wastewater system.



   (B)   Fees collected from a customer for water service including but
not limited to payments for tap charges, tap fees, and connection charges
shall be deposited into either the Plant Replacement Fund or the water
utility operating fund in specified amounts as directed by the Water
Superintendent. Expenditures may be made from this fund for the purpose of
improving, replacing, and extending the town's water system.



(Ord. 18-2015, passed 9-8-15)



CHAPTER 35:  FEES



Section



   35.01   Provisions concerning fees



   35.02   Fee schedule



   35.03   Impact fee for financing park and recreational infrastructure



§ 35.01  PROVISIONS CONCERNING FEES.



   (A)   Applications or petitions with associated fees shall be
submitted to the office of the Town Manager or his or her designated
officials.



   (B)   All fees shall be payable to the town and are non-refundable
except for fees identified as deposits and refundable.



   (C)   Persons shall be given a receipt of payment.



(Ord. 3-2001, passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 3-2002, passed 5-6-02)



§ 35.02  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The following fees be hereby established.



   (A)   Improvement location permit fees.



      (1)   Residential uses.



 

Residential Uses


Use
 
Fee




Principal Uses:


Single-family dwelling
 
$300, plus $.10 per square foot


Two-family dwelling
 
$400, plus $.10 per square foot


Multi-family dwelling
 
$400, plus $50 per unit, plus $.10 per square foot


Accessory Uses:


Fences
 
$50


Decks
 
$50


Driveway addition or modification
 
$50


Garages, sheds or similar structures

≤ 500 sq. ft.

≥ 501 sq. ft.
 
 

$75

$150


Room Additions:


One to three rooms
 
$100, plus $.10 per square foot


More than three rooms
 
$150, plus $.10 per square foot


Remodeling:


One to three rooms
 
$100, plus $.10 per square foot


More than three rooms
 
$150, plus $.10 per square foot


Trades:


Electrical
 
$50


Plumbing
 
$50


Mechanical
 
$50


Moving a building/structure
 
$30


Demolition:


Principal
 
$50


Accessory
 
$25


Roofing:


One additional layer
 
$25


Remove and replace
 
$50


Temporary Use:


Mobile home (12-month limit)
 
$50




 



      (2)   Commercial or industrial uses.



 


Commercial or Industrial Uses



Use
 
Fee




Principal
 
$400, plus $.10 per square foot up to 25,000 square feet; then $.06 per
square foot for each square foot above 25,000


Accessory:


Storage or similar structures
 
$200 plus $.10 per square foot


Fences
 
$75


Pools
 
$300


Parking lots
 
$200


Driveway addition or modification
 
$100


Addition/Expansions:


Principal
 
$200, plus $.10 per square foot


Accessory
 
$150 plus $.10 per square foot


Remodeling:


Principal
 
$200, plus $.10 per square foot


Accessory
 
$150 plus $.10 per square foot


Trades:


Electrical
 
$60


Plumbing
 
$60


Mechanical
 
$60


Moving a building/structure
 
$60


Demolition (COA may be required):


Principal
 
$100


Accessory
 
$50


Roofing:


One additional layer
 
$100


Remove and replace
 
$150


Temporary Use:


Mobile home (12-month limit)
 
$50


Construction trailer (18-month limit)
 
$50


Commercial/retail sales trailer
 
$50




 



      (3)   Sign fees.



 


Sign Fees



Use
 
Fee




Banners
 
$10


Temporary or portable
 
$20


Permanent
 
$25 minimum, plus $1 per one square foot of signage area over 25 square feet


Wireless communication facilities
 
$200


Certificate of appropriateness application
 
$50


Re-inspection fee
 
$30


Right-of-way cuts
 
$150, plus the required bond


Garage/yard sale permit
 
$5


NOTES TO TABLE:

- If construction or improvements are started without obtaining the required
Improvement Location Permit, the following penalties shall be imposed for
each consecutive offense by a person or company occurring in a calendar year:
first offense: equal to the permit fee; second offense: three times the
permit fee; third offense and above: five times the permit fee.  Any
applicable penalty shall be paid in addition to the Improvement Location
Permit fee prior to the issuance of the permit.

- The fees established hereby shall be ten times the listed amount if a stop
work order is issued and construction continues.




 



      (4)   Planning administration fees.



 

Planning Administration


Use
 
Fee




Petition to annex
 
$50


Zoning amendment or map change
 
$250


Site plan review
 
$200


Field inspection
 
As set forth in Developers Inspection Agreement


R2C architectural assessment
 
$100


Stormwater quality review
 
$200


CPOD Design Review
 
$200


Subdivision:


Minor subdivision
 
$300, plus $5 per lot


Major subdivision
 


   Preliminary plat
 
$300, plus $5 per lot


   Final plat
 
$300, plus $5 per lot


   Approved plat amendment
 
$100


   Vacation of recorded plat, public way
 
$100, plus $5 per lot


Planned Unit Development:


Preliminary plan
 
$300


Final plan
 
$300, plus $5 per acre


Approved plan amendment
 
$200, plus $5 per acre


Non-Residential Subdivision:


Preliminary plan
 
$400


Final plan
 
$200, plus $5 per acre


Approved plan amendment
 
$200, plus $5 per acre




 



   (B)   Zoning administrative fees.



 


Zoning Administration Fees



Use
 
Fee


Administrative appeal
 
$100


Variances:


   Use variance
 
$300


   Development standards variance
 
$150, plus $10 for each additional


   Special exceptions
 
$200



 



   (C)   Utility tap fees.



 


Utility Tap Fees




Use

 

Fee





Returned checks for insufficient funds
 
$25


Hydrant rental deposit
 
$200


One-inch hydrant meter rental
 
$100 deposit (minimum charge of $32.56/5,000 gallons)


Two-inch hydrant rental
 
$100 deposit


Three-inch hydrant rental
 
$325 deposit


Water:


Five-eighths to three-fourths inch tap and meter
 
$1,800


Meter only
 
$1,200


One-inch tap and meter
 
$4,500


Meter only
 
$3,000


One and one-quarter inch tap and meter
 
$7,200


Meter only
 
$4,800


One and one-half inch tap and meter
 
$10,440


Meter only
 
$6,960


Two-inch tap and meter
 
$18,000


Meter only
 
$12,000


Three-inch tap and meter
 
$27,600, plus time and materials


Meter only
 
$27,600


Four-inch tap and meter
 
$48,000, plus time and material


Meter only
 
$48,000


Six-inch tap and meter
 
$48,000, plus time and material


Meter only
 
$48,000


Eight-inch tap and meter
 
$48,000, plus time and material


Meter only
 
$48,000


Monthly Metered Rates (all users)
 

Rate per 1,000 gallons



First 2,000 gallons
 

$7.04




Next 3,000 gallons

 
$6.16


Next 10,000 gallons
 
$5.60


Next 15,000 gallons
 
$5.10


Next 20,000 gallons
 
$4.62


Next 50,000 gallons
 
$3.84


Over 100,000 gallons
 
$3.28




 



 


Utility Tap Fees




Use

 

Fee






Minimum Monthly Charges (all users):




Water Meter Size

 

Gallons

 

Fee Per Month



Five-eighths to three-quarters inch
 

2,000

 

$14.08



One-inch
 

5,000

 

$32.56



One and one-quarter inch
 

8,000

 

$49.36



One and one-half inch
 

11,600

 

$69.52



Two-inch
 

20,000

 

$114.06



Three-inch
 

46,000

 

$192.78



Four-inch
 

80,000

 

$372.66



Six-inch
 

182,000

 

$718.42



Eight-inch
 

323,800

 

$1,183.52




Use

 

Fee



Automatic Sprinkler Charges (per annum):


One-inch
 

$10.76



Two-inch
 

$43.38



Three-inch
 

$97.65



Four-inch
 

$173.59



Six-inch
 

$386.98



Eight-inch
 

$687.13



Ten-inch
 

$1,074.07



Twelve-inch
 

$1,547.85



Fire Protection (per month):


Private (per hydrant; per annum)
 

$386.98



Five-eighths to three-fourths inch
 

$4.22





 



 


Utility Tap Fees




Use

 

Fee





One-inch
 
$10.54


One and one-quarter inch
 
$16.87


One and one-half inch
 
$24.45


Two-inch
 
$42.17


Three-inch
 
$96.99


Four-inch
 
$168.68


Six-inch
 
$168.68


Eight-inch
 
$168.68


Sanitary Sewer:


Five-eighths to three-fourths inch
 
$2,500


One-inch
 
$6,250


One and one-quarter inch
 
$10,000


One and one-half inch
 
$14,500


Two-inch
 
$25,000


Three-inch
 
$57,500


Four-inch
 
$100,000


Six-inch
 
$100,000


Eight-inch
 
$100,000


Summer Sewer Rates:


Single-family residential unmetered rate
 
$49.95


Wastewater:


Metered Monthly Rates - all usage
 
Rate per 1,000 gallons

Phase I - $2.67

Phase II - $3.47


Base Monthly Charges:
 
Phase I
 
Phase II


Five-eighths to three-fourths inch
 
$12.00
 
$15.60


One-inch
 
$26.23
 
$34.10




 



 


Utility Tap Fees




Use

 

Fee





One and one-quarter inch
 
$40.47
 
$52.61


One and one-half inch
 
$57.64
 
$74.93


Two-inch
 
$97.40
 
$126.62


Three-inch
 
$220.74
 
$286.96


Four-inch
 
$382.03
 
$496.64


Six-inch
 
$865.90
 
$1,125.67


Eight-inch
 
$1,539.46
 
$2,001.30


Unmetered Residential Users (Rate per Month):
 
Phase I - $26.66
 
Phase II - $34.66




 



 

Connection Charges:



Meter

 

Area Ratio

 

Meter Only

 

Installed Cost





Five-eighths to three-fourths inch
 
1.0
 

$1,200

 

$1,800



One-inch
 
2.5
 

$3,000

 

$4,500



One and one-quarter inch
 
4.0
 

$4,800

 

$7,200



One and one-half inch
 
5.8
 

$6,960

 

$10,440



Two-inch
 
10.0
 

$12,000

 

$18,000



Three-inch
 
23.0
 

$27,600

 

$27,600(1)



Four-inch
 
40.0
 

$48,000

 

$48,000(1)



Six-inch
 
91.0
 

$48,000

 

$48,000(1)



Eight-inch
 
161.9
 

$48,000

 

$48,000(1)



(1) Plus time and material charges


When a utility customer is ten days or more delinquent, that customer shall
be disconnected from Danville water distribution system until the water bill
in arrears is paid in full. The reconnection fee charged shall be $50.




 



   (D)   General administrative fees.



 


Administrative Fees




Use

 

Fee





Comprehensive plan
 
$25


Zoning ordinance
 
$25


Zoning or base map
 
$10


Subdivision control ordinance
 
$25


Construction standards
 
$25


Transient merchant permit
 
$25 per day


Specially called meeting (Plan Commission or BZA)
 
$100


Parking space rental (south lot)
 
$5 per month or $60 per year


Law enforcement reports
 
As set in I.C. 5-2-8-2


Photocopies of town documents

   8.5” x 11”

   8.5” x 14”

   15” x 11” (computer paper)
 

$0.05

$0.07

$0.10


Photographs
 
As set in I.C. 5-2-8-2


Gun permits
 
As set in I.C. 35-47-2


Administrative fee
 
$2


Accident reports
 
$7


Vehicle inspection
 
$5


Code of Ordinances
 
$50


Stormwater technical standards
 
$25


Fingerprinting for background check
 
$5


Credit card convenience fee
 
$3


Copy of background check
 
$10


Danville Police training room
 
$50 per day


Firing range
 
$200 per calendar year allows two times per month, and $25 each additional
day per month


For-profit party permit
 
$250


First violation
 
$2,500


Second violation during a 12-month period
 
$5,000


Third violation during a 12-month period
 
$7,500


All subsequent violations during a 12- month period
 
$10,000




 



   (E)   Parks and recreation fees.



      (1)   Facility rental rates.



 


ELLIS PARK






Use

 

Fees




Location

 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



Train Station
 
Full day
 
6:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
$200
 
$250


Shelter 1
 
Full day
 
6:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
$50
 
$100


Shelter 2
 
Full day
 
6:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
$50
 
$100


Shelter 2/Amphi theater
 
Full day
 
6:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
$25 0
 
$300


Gazebo
 
Full day
 
6:00 a.m. - 11:00 p.m.
 
$50
 
$100



DANVILLE ATHLETIC CLUB




Use

 

Fees




Location

 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



Bosstick
 
Weeke nd hourly
 
Operating hours
 
$30
 
$35


Full day
 
Operating hours
 
$150
 
$200


Hargrave
 
Weeke nd hourly
 
Operating hours
 
$25
 
$30


Full day
 
Operating hours
 
$75
 
$100



GILL FAMILY AQUATIC CENTER




Use

 

Fees




Location

 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



GFAC rental (+ tax)
 
Hourly rental
 
7:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m.

(2 hour maximum )
 
$150
 
$175




 



 


BLANTON HOUSE




Use

 

Fees



 

Type

 

Hours

 

Rate





HIGH SEASON
 
Wedding Package
 
16 hours
 
$3,500


April, May, June, September, October
 
Weekend/Fri-Sun
 
Minimum 8 hours
 
$300


Weekday/Mon-Thurs
 
Minimum 4 hours
 
$50


REGULAR SEASON
 
Wedding Package
 
16 hours
 
$3,000


July, August
 
Weekend/Fri-Sun
 
Minimum 8 hours
 
$250


Weekday/Mon-Thurs
 
Minimum 4 hours
 
$50


OFF SEASO N
 
Wedding Package
 
16 hours
 
$600


November, December, January, February, March
 
Weekend/Fri-Sun
 
Minimum 4 hours
 
$50


Weekday/Mon-Thurs
 
Minimum 4 hours
 
$50




 



      (2)   Park programs.



 


PROGRAMS




Use

 

Fees




Park programs

 

Fees vary by program




Location

 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Swim lessons
 
45 minute s
 
$45
 
$50


Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Little Guppie s
 
45 minute s
 
$45
 
$50



 



      (3)   Park memberships.



 


FACILITY MEMBERSHIPS






Danville Athletic Club




Use

 

Fees





 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



Single
 
Monthly debit
 
24 hours
 

$25



Single
 
Monthly
 
24 hours
 
$30
 
$34.50


Single
 
3 month
 
24 hours
 
$69
 
$79.35


Single
 
6 month
 
24 hours
 
$135
 
$155.25


Single
 
1 year
 
24 hours
 
$263
 
$302.45


Family of 2
 
Monthly debit
 
24 hours
 

$45



Family of 2
 
3 month
 
24 hours
 
$125
 
$143.75


Family of 2
 
6 month
 
24 hours
 
$243
 
$279.45


Family of 2
 
1 year
 
24 hours
 
$473
 
$543.95


Family of 4
 
Monthly debit
 
24 hours
 

$55



Family of 4
 
3 month
 
24 hours
 
$153
 
$175.95


Family of 4
 
6 month
 
24 hours
 
$297
 
$341.55


Family of 4
 
1 year
 
24 hours
 
$578
 
$664.70


Town Employee
 
1 year
 
24 hours
 

$12




Gil l Family Aquatic Center




Use

 

Fees



10% discount for pre-season sales




Locati on

 

Type

 

Hours

 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Single
 
Seasonal
 
$75
 
$100


Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Family of 2
 
Seasonal
 
$125
 
$150


Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Family of 4
 
Seasonal
 
$175

$25/each additional
 
$200

$25/each additional


Gill Family Aquatic Center
 
Town Employee
 
Seasonal
 

$3 per person





 



      (4)   Park point of sale purchases.



 


POINT OF SALE




Danville Athletic Center






Use

 

Fees




Resident

 

Non- Resident



Daily fees
 
Day pass/basketball
 
$5
 
$7


Initiation fees


 
 
Individual
 
   $25


 
 
Family of 2
 
   $40


 
 
Family of 4
 
   $40


 
 
Each additional key fob
 
   $15



Gill Family Aquatic Center




Use

 

Fees



Concessions
 
Varies by product


Daily uses
 

Resident

 

Non- Resident



 
 
Daily pass
 
$5
 
$7


 
 
Twilight pass (4:00 p.m. - 7:00 p.m.)
 
$3
 
$3.50


 
 
3 and under
 
Free
 
Free


 
 
Spectator pass
 
$3
 
$3.50


 
 
Summer park program

Registered participants

Fridays (9:00 - 11:00 a.m.)
 
$2
 
$2


 
 
20+ large group rate
 
$3
 
$3.50




 



(Ord. 3-2001, passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 1-2002, passed 2-4-2002; Am. Ord.
3-2002, passed 5-6-02; Am. Ord. 8-2002, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 9-2002,
passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 2-2003, passed 2-18-03; Am. Ord. 5-2003, passed
4-21-03; Am. Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-5-03; Am. Ord. 12-2003, passed 10-20-03;
Am. Ord. 19-2004, passed 8-2-04; Am. Ord. 28-2004, passed 11-1-04; Am. Ord.
35-2004, passed 12-6-04; Am. Ord. 3-2005, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 9-2005,
passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2-2006, passed 3-6-06; Am. Ord. 11-2006, passed
5-1-06; Am. Ord. 29-2006, passed 12-28-06; Am. Ord. 30-2006, passed 12-28-06;
Am. Ord. 8-2008, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 9-2008, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord.
6-2009, passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord. 16-2009, passed 8-17-09; Am. Ord. 25-2009,
passed 12-7-09; Am. Ord. 7-2010, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 14-2010, passed
11-1-10; Am. Ord. 04-2011, passed 5-2-11; Am. Ord. 6-2011, passed 4-18-11;
Am. Ord. 9-2011, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 11-2011, passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord.
3-2012, passed 2-6-12; Am. Ord. 18-2012, passed 7-16-12; Am. Ord. 3-2013,
passed 3-18-13; Am. Ord. 19-2014, passed 10-6- 14; Am. Ord. 3-2015, passed
2-2-15; Am. Ord. 6-2015, passed 3-16-15; Am. Ord. 14-2015, passed 6-1-15; Am.
Ord. 12-2016, passed 5-16-16; Am. Ord. 23-2018, passed 11-  -18)



§ 35.03  IMPACT FEE FOR FINANCING PARK AND RECREATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE.



   (A)   Limitation on imposition of Impact Fee.  This section shall
expire and become void five years after its effective date (May 1, 2017) as
required by I.C. 36-7-4-1340, unless action is undertaken to extend this
section consistent with Indiana law.



   (B)   Establishment of Impact Zone. There is hereby established one
Recreation Infrastructure Impact Zone (the "Impact Zone"), the boundaries of
which are co-terminus with the existing corporate boundaries of the town, as
such boundaries may be extended from time to time through annexation, and
over which boundaries the town exercises planning and zoning jurisdiction. In
this regard, the Town Council specifically finds that there is a functional
relationship between the components of the Recreation Zone Improvement Plan
for Parks and Recreation Facilities (the "Plan") and that the Plan provides a
reasonably uniform benefit to all citizens throughout the Impact Zone as of
the adoption of this section. The Town Council further finds that all areas
within the Impact Zone are contiguous as required by I.C. 36-7-4-1316. Except
as provided herein, this section shall apply uniformly to all residential
developments within the Impact Zone. This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Development meeting the requirements set forth in I.C.
36-7-4-1322(g);



      (2)   Improvements which do not require a building permit;



      (3)   Improvements which do not create a need for new and
additional infrastructure, including the erection of a sign, construction of
accessory buildings, structures or fences, or the alteration, renovation or
expansion of an improvement where the use, or intensity thereof, has not
changed;



      (4)   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed
improvement provided that the replacement improvement does not create a need
for new and additional infrastructure over and above the infrastructure
needed by the original improvement prior to the destruction or partial
destruction thereof; and



      (5)   Non-residential development.



   (C)   Zone Improvement Plan.  As a precondition to the adoption of
this section, the Town Council undertook a comprehensive and detailed park
and recreational impact analysis through the employment for that purpose of
Lehman & Lehman, Inc. The Town Council now finds that the resulting study and
data base constitute a sufficient study to constitute a "Zone Improvement
Plan" as contemplated by I.C. 36-7-4-1318. Additionally, on October 17, 2016,
the Town Council adopted the Zone Improvement Plan as an official part of the
Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Danville, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-500 et
seq. The Town Council does hereby adopt the plan prepared by Lehman & Lehman,
Inc., dated August 2016, as its Zone Improvement Plan and specifically finds
that the Zone Improvement Plan contains the following elements:



      (1)   A description of the nature and location of existing
infrastructure in the Impact Zone;



      (2)   A reasonable determination of the current level of
service provided within the Impact Zone;



      (3)   A reasonable determination of the community level of
service for the Impact Zone;



      (4)   Reasonable estimates relating to the nature and location
of development that is expected to occur within the Impact Zone during the
following ten-year period;



      (5)   A reasonable estimate of the nature, location, costs,
sequencing, and timing of the park and recreational infrastructure necessary
to provide the community level of service for the developments contemplated
in division (C)(4) above;



      (6)   A general description of the sources and amounts of
money used to pay for infrastructure during the previous five years;



      (7)   Reasonable provisions for the completion of the
infrastructure necessary to raise the current level of service to the
community level of service within the following ten-year period;



      (8)   Reasonable provisions for the nature, location, and cost
of infrastructure that is necessary to raise the current level of service to
the community level of service;



      (9)   Reasonable provisions concerning the revenue sources and
estimated amounts of revenue that the town intends to use to raise the
current level of service to the community level of service for existing
development;



      (10)   A reasonable estimate of the share of the park and
recreational costs identified in division (C)(5) above that will he used to
raise the current level of service for existing development or provide
service to existing development, or to provide service to new development;



      (11)   A reasonable estimate of revenues that are from sources
other than impact fees and will be used to finance the cost of raising the
current level of service for existing development or providing service to
existing development;



   (D)   Establishment of Park and Recreation Impact Fees.



      (1)   Based on the Plan, it is determined that each dwelling
unit hereafter constructed in the town, not specifically excepted hereunder,
shall pay a recreational Impact Fee in the amount of $789.



      (2)   The Town Council hereby makes as part of the record of
these proceedings all the data collected, calculations made, and conclusions
reached by the town's consultant, Lehman & Lehman, Inc., on the process of
developing the Zone improvement Plan, and specifically instructs the
employees of the town to make such data available to the public for review
during regular business hours, along with any other information that is part
of the public record created as a result of the process involved in enacting
this section.



      (3)   In the event any parcel of real estate subject to the
Plan undergoes a change in use from a use for which the Impact Fee does not
pertain to a dwelling unit, an Impact Fee will be assessed against said real
estate.



      (4)   Any person or entity otherwise obligated to pay the fee
established by this section whose property was totally or partially destroyed
by fire, storm, or other casualty beyond his/her/its control, shall be exempt
from said fee if he/she/it repairs or replaces the destroyed structure
without creating a burden on infrastructure greater than the burden imposed
by the destroyed infrastructure. In the event of such additional burden, the
fee shall be calculated based only on the increased burden created by the
structure.



   (E)   Credit in lieu of payment.



      (1)   A fee payer is entitled to a credit against an Impact
Fee if the owners or developer of the development constructs or provides
infrastructure that is an infrastructure type for which the town imposed an
Impact Fee in the Impact Zone or constructs or provides an improvement as
defined by I.C. 36-7-4-1335(a). Such infrastructure or improvement will be
public property or furnished or constructed under the requirements of the
town (including but not limited to the Plan) and available for use by other
development in the area. The amount of a credit will be determined at the
date the Impact Fee is assessed. If an assessment is not requested, the
amount of the credit will be determined at the time the structural building
permit is issued. The amount of the credit shall be determined by the person
constructing or providing the infrastructure or improvement and the Town
Council. The amount of the credit will be equal to the sum of the cost of
constructing or providing the infrastructure or improvement and the fair
market value of land, real property interests, and site improvements provided.



      (2)   The amount of the credit may be increased or decreased
after the date the Impact Fee is assessed if, between the date the Impact Fee
is assessed and the date the structural building permit is issued, there is a
substantial and material change in the cost or value of the infrastructure or
improvement that is constructed or furnished from the cost or value
determined on the date the Impact Fee is assessed. Provided however, at the
time the amount of the credit is determined on the date the impact fee is
assessed, the person providing the infrastructure or improvement and the Town
Council may agree that the amount of the credit may not be subsequently
increased or decreased.



      (3)   The person providing the infrastructure or improvement
may waive the person's right to a credit against an Impact Fee by executing a
written waiver and filing such waiver with the Town Council.



      (4)   If the actual cost of constructing or providing the
infrastructure or improvement and the fair market value of land, real
property interests, and site improvements provided is less than the amount of
the Impact Fee assessed, the difference shall be due as otherwise provided.
If the amount of the credit exceeds the Impact F ee provided for by this
section, no fee will be due to the town and no refund will be due to the fee
payer.



      (5)   If the parties cannot agree on the cost or fair market
value used in calculating the credit, the fee payer or the person
constructing or providing the infrastructure or improvement may file with the
town's Impact Review Board a petition for determination of the amount of the
credit. This petition must be filed not later than 30 days after the
structural building permit is issued for the development on which the Impact
Fee is imposed. Immediately after receiving a timely filed petition for
determination of a credit amount, the Review Board shall provide a copy of
the petition to the Town Council. Not later than 30 days after receiving a
copy of the petition, the Town Council shall provide to the Board a response
on the form prescribed by the Board. The Board shall immediately provide the
petitioner a copy of the Town Council's response. The Review Board shall
review the petition and the response and hold a public hearing to determine
the amount of the credit not later than 30 days after the response is
provided to the Board. At the hearing, each party may appear and present
evidence in person, by agent, or by attorney. A person may not communicate
with a member of the Board before the hearing with intent to influence the
member's action regarding the appeal. The Board may reverse, affirm, modify
or otherwise establish the amount of the credit. Within five days after
making its decision, the Board shall provide to the petitioner and the Town
Council a copy of its written findings and decision. A fee payer aggrieved by
the Board's final determination of the amount of the credit may, within 30
days of the determination, appeal the determination to the Circuit or
Superior Courts of Hendricks County. This appeal shall be determined by a
trial denovo.



      (6)   In addition, a fee payer or other person or entity
responsible for installing infrastructure or improvements may designate in
writing a method of allocating its credits to future fee payers who may be
successors in interest to the credits earned by the fee payer or others, as
part of the certification provided for above.



   (F)   Impact Fee due upon issuance of a building permit.



      (1)   The fee imposed pursuant to the terms of this section
shall be due and payable upon the issuance of a building permit by the town.
It is understood that the term BUILDING PERMIT is synonymous with the term
STRUCTURAL BUILDING PERMIT as that term is used in I.C. 36-7-4-1323, in that
the issuance of a building permit authorizes the applicant to commence
construction activities, structural or otherwise. The fee which is calculated
pursuant to the terms of this section, which is a per dwelling unit fee,
shall be due at said time unless the amount of the fee upon calculation is
greater than $5,000 in which case an installment plan may be requested by the
applicant in accordance with the terms set forth in I.C.36-7-4-1324.



      (2)   In an installment plan, a maximum of $5,000 or 5% of the
Impact Fee, whichever is greater, shall become due and payable on the date
the building permit is issued for the development on which the fee is
imposed. The first installment may not become due and payable less than one
year after the building permit is issued, and the last installment may not be
due and payable less than two years after the building permit is issued. When
an Impact Fee is paid through an installment plan, interest shall accrue at
the rate of 5% per annum on the portion of the Impact Fee that is outstanding
and does not begin to accrue until the date the structural building permit is
issued for the development or part of the development on which the Impact Fee
is imposed. If all or part of an Impact Fee is not paid when due and payable,
the amount of the installment shall be increased on the first day after the
installment is due and payable by a penalty equal to 10% of the installment
amount that is overdue. Interest, as identified above, shall also be charged
on the penalty amount.



      (3)   If a fee payer requests, the amount of the fee shall be
assessed upon the voluntary submission of a development plan or upon the
issuance of the building permit whichever is earlier. For purposes of this
section, ASSESSMENT means the act of calculating the amount of the fee which
shall be due. The town shall make such assessment within 30 days of the date
of such voluntary request or at the issuance of the building permit with or
without the request.



   (G)   Lien rights established.  Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1325, the
town acquires a lien against the real estate which is the subject of the fee
on the date a building permit is issued. Upon adoption, this section shall be
recorded, and thereafter, it shall constitute constructive notice of the lien
rights of the town with respect to a parcel of real estate which is the
subject of an installment payment of the fee. The town may, in its
discretion, file a specific instrument setting forth its lien rights with
respect to a parcel of real estate which is the subject of an installment
payment of the fee, and such instrument shall constitute actual notice in
addition to the constructive notice provided for by the



   (H)   Form of receipt. The Clerk- Treasurer shall issue a receipt
for all fees collected, in substantially the following form.



      Received of (fee payer) this         day of            
          the sum of $            in (full) (partial) satisfaction
of Recreational Impact Fees due pursuant to the Town of Danville Ordinance
No. 22-2016 relating to improvements to be constructed on the real estate
located at                                            
                    and described on Exhibit A attached hereto and
made part hereof and subject to lien rights in favor of the Town of Danville
in the event of partial payment with payments remaining due.  The remaining
balance due (if any) is in the following amount: $                .



      



                                       �
�                                          



                                       D
anville Clerk-Treasurer



   (I)   Establishment of Impact Fee Review Board.



      (1)   The Town Council hereby establishes, pursuant to I.C.
36-7-4-1338, an Impact Fee Review Board which shall consist of three citizen
members appointed by the Town Council President and who shall qualify as
follows:



         (a)   One member shall be a real estate broker licensed
in Indiana;



         (b)   One member shall be an engineer licensed in
Indiana; and



         (c)   One member shall be a certified public accountant.



      (2)   A Board member shall not be a member of the Danville
Plan Commission.



      (3)   The initial term for the real estate broker shall be one
year. The initial terms of the engineer and the certified public account
shall be two years. At the expiration of the terms of each Review Board
member, successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the original
appointees, and each such succeeding member shall serve for a term of two
years. Each member shall continue to serve until his/her successor is
appointed and qualified.



      (4)   If any person appointed as an Impact Fee Review Board
member shall fail to qualify as provided within ten days after the mailing to
him/her of notice of his/her appointment, or if any member after qualifying
shall die, resign, or vacate office, the Town Council President shall fill
such vacancy with a new member meeting the qualifications of the member being
replaced. A new member shall serve out the remainder of the vacated term.



      (5)   If a Review Board member is unable to hear a petition
due to a conflict of interest, the Town Council President shall appoint a
temporary member to serve for the period necessary to dispose of the petition
giving rise to the conflict. The temporary member shall qualify in the same
manner as the member in whose place he/she is serving.



      (6)   The Board shall elect one of its members as President
and one as Vice-President, each of whom shall serve from the day of his/her
election until the following January 31 and until his successor is elected
and qualified.



      (7)   The Board is authorized to adopt by-laws, rules,
regulations, and procedures as it may deem necessary for the proper conduct
of its proceedings and the carrying out of its duties. Meetings and hearings
shall be held at such time as the Board may determine and upon such notice as
it may fix, in accordance with the provisions of the by-laws, rules, and
regulations adopted and Indiana law.



      (8)   A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum and
the concurrence of a majority shall be necessary to authorize any action.



      (9)   The Board shall conduct its review of the amount of an
Impact Fee assessed, the amount of a refund, and the amount of a credit using
the procedures established in I.C. 36-7-4-136 and 36-7-4-1338(c).



      (10)   The Impact Fee Review Board shall be governed by I.C.
36-7-4-1338 and all other applicable provisions of the impact fee statue.



   (J)   Appeal of fee assessment.



      (1)   Any fee payer who believes itself to be aggrieved by the
calculation of the fee may appeal the fee assessment to the Impact Fee Review
Board, and the Review Board shall conduct a hearing with regard thereto. At
such hearing, the fee payer shall bear the burden of going forward with the
evidence and shall present evidence addressing either of the following
propositions:



         (a)   A fact assumption used in determining the amount
of the fee is incorrect; or



         (b)   The amount of the fee is greater than the amount
allowed under I.C. 36-7-4-1320, 1321 and 1322.



      (2)   Upon conclusion of the hearing at which the matter is
first presented, or at the conclusion of the hearing if the matter is
continued, the Impact Fee Review Board shall determine the appropriate amount
of the fee based upon the facts presented and may reverse, affirm, modify, or
make such adjustments in the fee, as it believes are appropriate under the
circumstances, if any, including establishing the amount of an Impact Fee, a
credit, a refund, or any combination of fees, credit, or refunds.



      (3)   The Impact Fee Review Board shall make written findings
of fact supporting its decision and shall provide a copy of its decision to
the Town Council and the fee payer involved in the appeal within five days
after making its decision.



      (4)   An appeal under this division must be filed no later
than 30 days after the issuance of the building permit. The appeal shall be
initiated with the filing of a petition for review with the Clerk-Treasurer
together with a filing fee in the amount of $100. The filing fee shall be
refunded in full if:



         (a)   The petition for review is granted and the fee is
eliminated, reduced or adjusted by the  Impact Fee Review Board, by
independent action of the town, or by a court having jurisdiction; and



         (b)   The reviewing body determines that the amount of
the fee, reductions, or credits were arbitrary or capricious.



      (5)   The petition for review shall be in a form calculated to
inform the Impact Fee Review Board of the nature of complaint, the parties to
the action, and the relief requested. In addition, the petition shall
describe the new development on which the fee has been assessed, all facts
related to the assessment of the fee, and the reasons the petitioner believes
that the amount of the fee assessed is erroneous or is greater than the
amount allowed by the fee limitation set forth in this section and the
enabling statute.



      (6)   A fee payer aggrieved by a final determination ofthe
Review Board regarding the assessment of an Impact Fee may appeal the Board's
determination to the Circuit or Superior Courts of Hendricks County and is
entitled to a trial de novo. If the assessment of the eee is vacated by the
Court, the assessment ofthe Impact Fee shall be corrected by the Board.



      (7)   If a petition for review or an appeal of an Impact Fee
assessment is pending, the Impact Fee is not due and payable until after the
petition or appeal is finally adjudicated and the amount of the fee is
determined. The town shall not deny the issuance of a building permit on the
basis that the fee has not been paid or condition issuance of the permit on
the payment of the fee unless the fee totals $1,000 or less. If the fee is
$1,000 or less, the town may require the fee payer to pay the Fee or initiate
an appeal before the building permit is issued.



   (K)   Refunds.



      (1)   A fee payer is entitled to arefund of an Impact Fee if
the conditions provided for in I.C. 36-7-4-1332(a) exist. An application for
a refund must be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer not later than two years
after the right to arefund accrues. The town shall issue a refund in part or
in full or shall reject the application not later than 30 days after
receiving an application for a refund. If the town approves a refund in whole
or in part, the town shall pay the amount approved, plus interest from the
date on which the Impact Fee was paid to the date the refund is issued. The
interest rate for refunds shall be 5% per year. The Town Manager is
responsible for accepting, rejecting, and paying a refund and interest.



      (2)   If the town rejects the application for arefund or
approves a partial refund, the fee payer may appeal that rejection to the
Review Board not later than 60 days after the rejection or partial approval.
The appeal shall be on a form prescribed by the Board. Upon receipt of an
application for appeal, the Review Board shall immediately provide to the
Town Council notice of the appeal. The Review Board shall hold a hearing on
all appeals for a refund. This hearing shall be held not later than 45 days
after the application for appeal is filed with the Board. After the hearing,
the Review Board shall determine the amount of refund that shall be made to
the fee payer from the account established herein. A refund ordered by the
Board must include interest from the date the Impact Fee was paid to the date
the refund is issued, at the rate of 5% per annum. A party aggrieved by a
final decision of the Review Board regarding a refund may appeal the decision
to the Circuit or Superior Courts of Hendricks County and is entitled to a
trial denovo.



   (L)   Establishment of Park and Recreation Infrastructure
Improvement Fund.



      (1)   There is hereby established the Park and Recreation
Infrastructure Improvement Fund ("the Fund") of the town. The Fund shall be a
non-reverting fund and shall receive any and all sums collected pursuant to
this section to be utilized in connection with the purposes set forth herein.
The Fund shall consist initially of one account based upon the current
existence of one impact zone. If, and only if, an additional impact zone is
created hereafter, a separate account shall be maintained for each separate
impact zone established within the town. Interest earned on the Fund or on
any account with the Fund, shall be deposited and maintained within the Fund
or the separate account. The Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain records of the
status of the Fund or any account which may be established therein, and shall
make an annual report of the Fund and accounts which shall be available to
the public in general and fee payers, upon request.



      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1332, the Clerk-Treasurer is
designated as the town official responsible for acting on refund requests. In
order to facilitate refunds when they may be due, the Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to identify the puipose of any fee paid in order that a refund, if
any, may be paid from the Fund or account into which the fee was originally
deposited.



   (M)   Use of Impact Fees collected pursuant to this section. Any and
all fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this section may be utilized
only for the following purposes by the town, acting by and through its Town
Council, which for the purposes of this section is identified as the
infrastructure agency contemplated by I.C. 36-7-4-1317:



      (1)   Providing funds to be utilized by the town for the
purpose of paying the capital costs of new park and recreational
infrastructure that is needed to serve the new development within the
corporate limits of the town as the same may be amended from time to time and
any area over which the town may exercise any of its authority;



      (2)   An amount not to exceed 5% of the annual collections of
the fee to be utilized for expenses incurred by the town for the consulting
services used to establish this section;



      (3)   To pay any refund due pursuant to the terms of this
section; and



      (4)   To pay the debt service cost of an obligation issued to
provide new park and recreational infrastructure described in division (M)(1)
above.



   (N)   Indiana Impact Fee Law. The Town Council specifically
acknowledges the existence of I.C. 36-7-4-1300 et seq. which regulates the
imposition of impact fees by municipal corporations within the State of
Indiana. The substantive and procedural requirements of I.C. 36-7-4-1300 et
seq. shall control in the events of conflicts with this section which are
unintended by the Council.



   (O)   Amendment and review.  The fee provided for herein is based
upon data which, in large part, is subject to inflation and other economic
and market forces over which the town has no control. The Council may cause a
review to be made by town staff or consultants as may be required to
determine the continuing validity of the Impact Fee, the Impact Zone, and the
Plan. The Council shall consider and adopt such amendments as are necessary
to cause a substantive compliance with all constitutional and statutory
requirements. To the extent required by the facts and circumstances, this
process shall include the steps necessary to update the Plan and the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 22-2016, passed 10-17-16)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS





         51.   PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS





         52.   SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES





         53.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT





         54.   WATER CONSERVATION




CHAPTER 50:  SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



Section




General Provisions




   50.001   Purpose and policy



   50.002   Administration



   50.003   Abbreviations



   50.004   Definitions



   50.005   Confidential information



   50.006   Pretreatment charges and fees



Sewer Use Requirements



   50.020   Prohibited discharge standards



   50.021   Abnormal waste surcharge



   50.022   National categorical pretreatment standards



   50.023   Local limits



   50.024   Town’s right of revision



   50.025   Dilution



Pretreatment of Wastewater



   50.035   Pretreatment facilities



   50.036   Additional pretreatment measures



   50.037   Accidental discharge; slug control plans



Wastewater Discharge Permit



   50.050   Wastewater analysis



   50.051   Permit required



   50.052   Existing connections



   50.053   New connections



   50.054   Application contents



   50.055   Application signatories and certification



   50.056   Decisions



   50.057   Duration



   50.058   Contents



   50.059   Appeals



   50.060   Modification



   50.061   Transfer



   50.062   Revocation



   50.063   Reissuance



   50.064   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions



Reporting Requirements



   50.075   Baseline monitoring reports



   50.076   Compliance schedule progress reports



   50.077   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   50.078   Periodic compliance reports



   50.079   Reports of changed conditions



   50.080   Reports of potential problems



   50.081   Reports from unpermitted users



   50.082   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting



   50.083   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   50.084   Analytical requirements



   50.085   Sample collection



   50.086   Timing



   50.087   Record keeping



Compliance Monitoring



   50.100   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   50.101   Search warrants



Administration and Enforcement



   50.115   Notification of violation



   50.116   Agreed orders



   50.117   Show cause hearing



   50.118   Compliance orders and schedule



   50.119   Cease and desist orders



   50.120   Administrative fines



   50.121   Emergency suspensions



   50.122   Cost recovery



   50.123   Termination of discharge



   50.124   Public nuisances



Judicial Enforcement Remedies



   50.135   Injunctive relief



   50.136   Civil penalties



   50.137   Remedies nonexclusive



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly-owned treatment works for the town and enables the town to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33
USC 1251 et seq., and the General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR 403.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly-owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly-owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly-owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly-owned treatment works;



      (3)   To protect both publicly-owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the publicly- owned treatment works;



      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly-owned
treatment works; and



      (6)   To enable the town to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly-owned
treatment works is subject.



   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly-owned
treatment works.  This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town Manager shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the Town Manager may be delegated by the Town Manager
to other town personnel.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings.



   BOD5.  Biochemical oxygen demand, five day.



   CFR.  Code of Federal Regulations.



   COD.  Chemical oxygen demand.



   EPA.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington D.C.



   EPA REG. V.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region V, Chicago,
Illinois.



   FOG.  Fats, oil and grease.



   gpd.  Gallons per day.



   I.C.  Indiana Code.



   IDEM.  Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



   I/I.  Inflow and infiltration (clear water flow).



   mg/l.  Milligrams per liter.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   O&G.  Oil and grease.



   POTW.  Publicly-owned treatment works.



   RCRA.  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



   SIC.  Standard Industrial Classification.



   SIU.  Significant industrial user.



   SNC.  Significant noncompliance.



   TSS.  Total suspended solids.



   USC.  United States Code.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Regional Administration of U.S. EPA Region V.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   The following:



         (a)   If the user is a corporation:



            1.   The president, secretary, treasurer or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision- making functions
for the corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; or



         (c)   If the user is a federal, state or local
governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated
to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility or their designee.



      (2)   The individuals described herein may  designate another
authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the
authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and
the written authorization is submitted to the Council.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5. The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (such
as mg/l).



   BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion
of an industrial user’s treatment facility.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33 USC 1317, which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405 through 471.



   CLEAR WATER FLOW.  Groundwater or precipitation related water which
enters the sanitary sewer collection system through pipe defects
(infiltration) or conduits (inflow).



   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The Town Council of the town.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLING.  Method of sampling which weights sample volume
with discharge flow rate.



   COUNCIL.  The Town Council or any other duly authorized officials
acting on its behalf.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Region V Water Management
Division Director or other duly authorized official of the Agency.



   EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to the source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act,
being 33 USC 1317.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into
the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d)
of the Act, being 33 USC 1317 et seq.



   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.  The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, does one of the following:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes
or operations, its sludge processes, or its selected sludge disposal methods.



      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.



      (3)   Prevents the use of the POTW’s sewage sludge or its
sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following statutory
provisions, regulations, or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state
or local regulations:



         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1345).



         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 USC 6901),
including:



            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



            2.   The rules contained in any sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of SWDA (42 USC 6941).



         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401).



         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 USC 2601).



   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is (or may be) a



discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the Act,
being 33 USC 1317, which will be applicable to the source if the standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site.  In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) or (c) above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner
or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
on-site construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation or removal of



existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment.



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts, which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation hereunder.



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the town’s NPDES permit (IN0024392), including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.  This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.



   POLLUTANT.  Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (such as pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD5, COD, toxicity or odor).



   PRETREATMENT.



      (1)   The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing the pollutants
into the POTW.



      (2)   This reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed
by an applicable pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 50.020.



   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  As defined by § 212 of the
Act, 33 USC 1292, which is owned by the town.  This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.



   SEWAGE.  Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations and the like).



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU.



      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater;



         (b)   Contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the Council on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Council may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant
industrial user.



   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC. The status of an industrial user that
has caused or allowed a violation that meets one or more of the following
criteria:



      (1)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard
or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l).



      (2)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC equals
1.4 for biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fats, oil, and
grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).



      (3)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), such as daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard that the POTW determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public.



      (4)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has:



         (a)   Caused imminent endangerment to human health,
welfare, or the environment; or



         (b)   Resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency
authority under 327 IAC 5-19-3(1)(G) to halt or prevent such a discharge.



      (5)   Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for:



         (a)   Starting construction;



         (b)   Completing construction; or



         (c)   Attaining final compliance.



      (6)   Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date,
required reports, such as the following:



         (a)   Baseline monitoring reports;



         (b)   Ninety-day compliance reports;



         (c)   Periodic self-monitoring reports; or



         (d)   Reports on compliance with compliance schedules.



      (7)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



      (8)   Any other violation or group of violations, which may
include a violation of BMPs, that the POTW determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the approved POTW pretreatment program.



   SLUG LOAD or SLUG.  Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
50.020.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION CODE or SIC.  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



   STORMWATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from precipitation, including snowmelt.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



   TOWN.  The town, under the jurisdiction of the Town Council.



   TOWN MANAGER.  The person designated by the Town Council who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly
authorized representative.



   UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional
incident and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards
because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user.  An
UPSET does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.



   USER or INDUSTRIAL USER.  A source of discharge to the municipal sewer
system.



   WASTEWATER.  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 16-2012, passed 6-18-12; Am. Ord.
1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.005  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   (1)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge
permits and monitoring programs, and from the Town Manager’s inspection and
sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town Manager, that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.



      (2)   Any request must be asserted at the time of submission
of the information or data.



   (B)   (1)   When requested and demonstrated by the user
furnishing a report that the information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related
to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report.



      (2)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
“effluent data,” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302, will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.006  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The Council may adopt reasonable fees to offset the cost incurred of
setting up and operating the town’s pretreatment program which may include:



   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including
the cost of processing the applications;



   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (E)   Pretreatment fees and other payments from users for
pretreatment services may be established by ordinance or in written
agreements between the Town Council and the user of the pretreatment services
of the town.



      (1)   Other fees as the Council may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein.



      (2)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable
by the town.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord.
13-2012, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord. 2-2013,
passed 3-4-13)



SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 50.020  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. 
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national,
state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the
POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.5 or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants
which will cause interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Ammonia Nitrogen, released in a discharge at a flow rate
and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants which will cause interference with the POTW;



      (6)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



      (7)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;



      (8)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW sewers including in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;



      (9)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except as approved by the
Town Manager;



      (10)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (11)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the town’s NPDES permit;



      (12)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (13)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater unless
specifically authorized by the Town Manager;



      (14)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (15)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Town Manager in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (16)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (17)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; and



      (18)   Upsets and/or bypass:



         (a)   A user may not allow an upset of pretreatment
system bypass unless the event is unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe properly damage.



         (b)   For the purpose of this division, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



            SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.  SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   (C)   Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.021  ABNORMAL WASTE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   In the event the approving authority excludes a customer from
the requirements of § 50.020 and the customer discharges abnormal industrial
wastes to the public sanitary sewerage system having an average total
suspended solids (TSS) content in excess of 250 mg/l and/or an average of
five-day BOD in excess of 250 mg/l and/or Ammonia Nitrogen in excess of 45
mg/l, the customer shall pay a surcharge based upon the excess strength of
his or her wastes.



   (B)   No reduction in sewerage service charges, fees or taxes will
be permitted because of the fact that certain industrial wastes discharged to
the public sanitary sewerage system contain less than 250 milligrams per
liter of suspended solids, 250 milligrams per liter BOD or 45 mg/l Ammonia
Nitrogen.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.022  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Town Manager may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Town Manager
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard. in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.023  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The following pollutant limitations are established to protect
against pass through and interference.  No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following daily maximum concentrations based upon
a 24-hour composite sample.



   (B)   Additionally, no person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following maximum concentrations times a multiplier of one
and one-half based upon samples needed for compliance verification
purposes.  The one and one-half sample multiplier does not apply to Hex.
Chromium, Cyanide and Oil and Grease in that analytical procedures do not
allow for composite techniques to be applied to these parameters. For Hex.
Chromium, Cyanide and Oil and Grease, three sample results shall be analyzed
with results not to exceed the following noted limitations:



      (1)   Arsenic, 0.08 mg/l (total);



      (2)   BOD5, 500 mg/l (daily maximum);



      (3)   Cadmium, .7 mg/l (total);



      (4)   Hex. Chromium, .93 mg/l;



      (5)   Chloride, 2,000 mg/l;



      (6)   Total Chromium, 32 mg/l;



      (7)   Total Suspended Solids, 500 mg/l (daily maximum);



      (8)   Copper, 4.24 mg/l;



      (9)   Cyanide, .23 mg/l (total);



      (10)   Lead, 1.57 mg/l (total);



      (11)   Mercury, .038 mg/l (total);



      (12)   Molybdenum, 1.2 mg/l;



      (13)   Nickel, 5.75 mg/l;



      (14)   Oil and Grease, 100 mg/l;



      (15)   Selenium, .40 mg/l;



      (16)   Silver, 1.26 mg/l;



      (17)   Zinc, 38 mg/l (total);



      (18)   Ammonia, 500 mg/l.



   (C)   As an alternative to the total oil and grease limitations
established by this section, the control authority may establish in an IWP a
limitation of 100 mg/l for non-polar grease.  The alternative limitation is
subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The user submits an application for the alternative
limit;



      (2)   The user provides information regarding the user’s
products, processes and operations that shows to the control authority’s
satisfaction that the oil and grease discharged by the user is predominantly
of animal or vegetable origin;



      (3)   The user shows that the oil and grease in the user’s
discharges is not visible, free or floating at 50°F at anytime;



      (4)   The user has sampling facilities that allow for both
visual inspection of the user’s discharge and using the equipment necessary
for collection samples for floatable oil and grease;



      (5)   The oil and grease in the user’s discharge is not
related to past instances of obstruction, interference or pass through;



      (6)   Users subject to the alternative limit shall continue to
operate and maintain grease traps and any other oil and grease separation and
treatment equipment and shall continue all existing practices that reduce
discharges of oil and grease;



      (7)   If the control authority determines that a user subject
to the alternative limit has caused, alone or in conjunction with other
discharges, obstruction, interference or pass through, then the user shall
comply with the total oil and grease limitation or another appropriate
limitation established by the district in the user’s IWP; and



      (8)   Any other appropriate conditions set forth in the
user’s SIU.



   (D)   (1)   The above limits apply at the point where the
wastewater is discharged to the POTW.



      (2)   All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise.



      (3)   The Town Manager may impose mass limitations in addition
to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.



   (E)   (1)   Upon the promulgation of the national categorical
pretreatment standard for a particular user, the standard, if more stringent
then the limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that category,
shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions
imposed under this chapter.



      (2)   The Town Manager shall notify all known affected users
of the applicable permitting and reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 4-2012, passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord.
16-2012, passed 6-18-12; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.024  TOWN’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The Council reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.025  DILUTION.



   (A)   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement.



   (B)   The Town Manager may impose mass limitations on users who are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or
in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 50.035  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   (A)   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
50.020 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the Town
Manager, whichever is more stringent.



   (B)   Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the user’s expense.  Detailed plans describing
the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Town
Manager for review and shall be acceptable to the Town Manager before the
facilities are constructed. The review of plans and operating procedures
shall, in no way, relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the
facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the town under
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.036  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Town Manager may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams and other conditions as may be necessary to protect
the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Town Manager may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on his or her property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. 
A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.



   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



   (D)   Users which operate vehicular wash facilities shall provide,
operate and maintain pretreatment facilities approved by the Town Manager to
control solids and preclude the discharge of toxics to the POTW.



   (E)   Users which operate food preparation facilities shall provide,
operate and maintain pretreatment facilities approved by the Town Manager to
control the discharge of greases, fats, oils and food solids to the POTW.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.037  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE; SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the Town Manager shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan.  The Town Manager may require any user to develop, submit for
approval and implement a plan.  Alternatively, the Town Manager may develop
a plan for any user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Town Manager of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 50.080; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge.  The procedures include, but are not limited to
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT



§ 50.050  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   (A)   When requested by the Town Manager, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30
days of the request.



   (B)   The Town Manager is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.051  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Town
Manager, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to § 50.052 may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.



   (B)   The Town Manager may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out herein. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or
with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.



   (D)   The Town Council may enter into contractual agreement with any
significant industrial user whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or
character, which contains the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in § 50.023 of this chapter, may be accepted by the Danville POTW
for handling and treatment.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 13-2012, passed 5-21-12; Am. Ord.
1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.052  EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter and who wishes to continue the discharges in the future, shall,
within 30 days after the date, apply to the Town Manager for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with § 50.054 and shall not cause or allow
discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the effective date of
this chapter, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued
by the Town Manager.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.053  NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain the permit prior
to the beginning or recommencing of the discharge.  An application for this
wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 50.054, must be filed at
least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.054  APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. The Town Manager may require all users to
submit as part of an application the following information:



      (1)   All information required by § 50.075;



      (2)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and
proposed or actual hours of operation;



      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and
maximum per day;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation and all points of discharge;



      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and



      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Town Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.



   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.055  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.



   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:



   “I certify, under penalty of law, that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted.  Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete.  I am aware that there
are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.056  DECISIONS.



   The Town Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.  Within 15 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Town Manager will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit.  The Town Manager may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.057  DURATION.



   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit.  A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years,
at the discretion of the Town Manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.058  CONTENTS.



   A wastewater discharge permit shall include conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Town Manager to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which, in no event, shall exceed five years;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the Council in accordance with
§ 50.061 and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy
of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



      (3)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
record-keeping requirements; and  (These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law.)



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule.  The schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-
routine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town
Manager to ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.059  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall provide public notice of the issuance
of a wastewater discharge permit.



   (B)   Any person, including the user, may petition the Town Manager
to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 15 days of
notice of its issuance.



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.



      (4)   If the Town Manager fails to act within 30 days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.  Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.



      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the County Circuit Court within 30 days.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.060  MODIFICATION.



   The Town Manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to the following reasons:



   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;



   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user’s operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the town’s POTW, town personnel or the receiving waters;



   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;



   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or



   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation
to a new owner or operator.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.061  TRANSFER.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to
the Town Manager and the Town Manager approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer.



   (B)   The notice to the Town Manager must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (C)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.062  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Town Manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for
good cause, including, but not limited to the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the Town Manager of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Town
Manager of changed conditions pursuant to § 50.079;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the Town Manager or his or her agent
timely access to the facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement
or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership.



      (2)   All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular
user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that
user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.063  REISSUANCE.



   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with § 50.054, a minimum of 180 days prior to the
expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.064  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   (A)   If another municipality or sewer district contributes
wastewater to the POTW, the Town  Manager shall enter into an
inter-municipal or inter- district agreement with the contributing entity.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A)
above, the Town Manager shall request the following information from the
contributing entity:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing entity;



      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing entity that are discharging to the POTW; and



      (3)   Other information as the Town Manager may deem necessary.



   (C)   An agreement, as required by division (A) above, shall contain
the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing entity to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 50.023;  (The
requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be revised as
necessary to reflect changes made to the town’s ordinance or local limits.)



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing entity to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling and enforcement will be conducted by the contributing municipality,
which of these activities will be conducted by the Town Manager, and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality
and the Town Manager;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing entity to provide the
Town Manager with access to all information that the contributing entity
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the
contributing entity’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing entity’s
discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the Town Manager access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing entity’s jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties
deemed necessary by the Town Manager; and



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of
the terms of the inter-municipal or inter-district agreement.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 50.075  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the Town Manager a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) below.



      (2)   At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to
the Town Manager a report which contains the information listed in division
(B) below.



      (3)   (a)   New source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards.



         (b)   A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations.  A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by the user.  This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information that  shows the
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Town Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process.  Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.  The sample
shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 50.084.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 50.085. Sampling and analysis may be performed by
the POTW in lieu of the industrial user.  Where the POTW itself collects all
of the information required for a reporting requirement, the significant
industrial user will not be required to submit the report.



      (6)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule.  If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment and/or O&M. 
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.  A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in §
50.076.



      (8)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 50.055.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.076  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 50.075(B)(7).



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards.  Such events include, but are
not limited to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, project status reports, beginning operation and attain
compliance.



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Town Manager no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
progress reports to the Town Manager.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.077  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   (A)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to the pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Town Manager a report containing the information described in §
50.075(B).



   (B)   (1)   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term
production rate.



      (2)   For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.



      (3)   All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 50.055.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.078  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Town Manager, but, in no case, less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period.  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 50.055.



   (B)   (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user’s discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order
at all times.



      (2)   The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Town Manager,
using the procedures prescribed in § 50.085, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.079  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Each user must notify the Town Manager of any planned
significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter
the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the
change.



   (B)   The Town Manager may require the user to submit the
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 50.054.



   (C)   The Town Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
§ 50.055 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under § 50.060
in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (D)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of
any previously unreported pollutants.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.080  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge or a slug load that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Town Manager of the incident.  This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Town Manager, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences.  The notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) above.  Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.081  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Town Manager as the Town Manager may
require.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.082  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the Town Manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Town Manager within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation.



   (B)   The user is not required to resample if the Town Manager
monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the Town
Manager samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.083  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous
waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge
into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.  The notification must include the name of
the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other).



      (2)   If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of the
waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent the information is known and readily
available to the user:  an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of
constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and
an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months.



      (3)   All notifications must take place no later than 180 days
after the discharge commences.  Any notification under this division (A)
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.



      (4)   However, notifications of changed conditions must be
submitted under § 50.079.  The notification requirement in this section
does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 50.075,
50.077 and 50.088.



   (B)   (1)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of
division (A) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.



      (2)   Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than these quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA,
being 42 USC 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste
or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must
notify the Town Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director and IDEM of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the
effective date of the regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.084  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.



   (B)   If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.085  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques.  In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Town
Manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
three grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged.  In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge
limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease (O&G), temperature, pH, cyanide,
phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.086  TIMING.



   (A)   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked.



   (B)   For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.087  RECORD KEEPING.



   (A)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of requirements. 
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, and
the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of the analyses.



   (B)   (1)   These records shall remain available for a period of
at least three years.



      (2)   This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the town, or where the user
has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Town
Manager.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 50.100  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her agent shall have the right to
enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying
with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder.



   (B)   Users shall allow the Town Manager ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Town Manager or his or her
agent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.



      (2)   The Town Manager or his or her agent shall have the
right to set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, the
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s
operations.



      (3)   The Town Manager may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary.  The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense.  All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum of once per year
to ensure their accuracy.



      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Town Manager and
shall not be replaced.  The costs of clearing the access shall be born by
the user.



      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town Manager or his
or her agent access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.101  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Town Manager has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the town designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Town Manager may seek issuance
of a search warrant from the County Circuit Court.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 50.115  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   When the Town Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town Manager may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation.



   (B)   Informal notice. An informal notice may be a documented phone
call, written warning, or a meeting notifying the SIU of minor incidences
that have occurred and that need to be corrected. Repeat performance of the
same incidence or escalation of the incidence will result in increased
enforcement action.



   (C)   Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user
to the Town Manager.



   (D)   Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town
Manager to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.116  AGREED ORDERS.



   (A)   The Town Manager may enter into agreed orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance.  The documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document.



   (B)   The documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant hereto and shall be judicially
enforceable.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.117  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   (A)   The Town Manager may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement to appear before the Town Manager and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.



   (B)   (1)   Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for the action and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.



      (2)   The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 15 days
prior to the hearing.  The notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user.



      (3)   A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.118  COMPLIANCE ORDERS AND SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Compliance schedule. A compliance schedule is a formal time
and management schedule that will be included in an enforcement order and
that has been established for the non-compliant SIU to achieve compliance. It
is established for existing SIUs to meet the categorical pretreatment
standards and local standards. The compliance schedule will contain
increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events that will lead to compliance. All compliance
schedules shall contain the following:



      (1)   Monitoring requirements along with the location for
monitoring;



      (2)   A description of how the date will be used for
evaluating compliance;



      (3)   Enforcement action that will be associated with
non-compliance; and



      (4)   Closure date after which the SIU will be considered
either non-compliant with the established compliance schedule or evaluated
for compliance.



   (B)   When the Town Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town Manager may issue an order to the user responsible for
the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time.



   (C)   (1)   If the user does not come into compliance within the
time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated.



      (2)   Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the sewer.



   (D)   A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.119  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Town Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Town Manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist
all violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.120  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Town Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town Manager may fine the user an amount of at least $1,000
per day, per violation, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), but no
more than $2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation nor more than
$7,500 per violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with I.C.
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B).



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 60 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.8% per month.  A lien
against the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and
penalties.



   (C)   Users desiring to dispute the fines must file a written
request for the Town Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.  Where a
request has merit, the Town Manager may convene a hearing on the matter.  In
the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user.  The Town Manager
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as
notices and orders, to the fine.



   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 8-2012, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.121  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Town Manager may immediately suspend a user’s discharge,
after formal notice to the user, whenever the suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons.



   (B)   The Town Manager may also immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present,
an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution.  In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Town
Manager may take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals.  The Town Manager may
allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Town Manager that the period of endangerment has
passed unless the termination proceedings herein are initiated against the
user.



      (2)   (a)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in
part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Town Manager
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under § 50.137.



         (b)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.122  COST RECOVERY.



   In addition to administrative fines imposed by the town, the SIU shall
be responsible for paying at a minimum, but not limited to, the following
reasonable and necessary costs that may be incurred by the town for the
SIU’s failure to comply.



   (A)   Cost of mileage and labor incurred in detecting and correcting
the violation.



   (B)   Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and
correcting the violation.



   (C)   Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or
associated with detecting and correcting the violation.



   (D)   Costs of any additional equipment acquired or expended by the
town for detecting or corrective the violation.



   (E)   Repair and/or replacement of any part of the sewerage system
damaged by the violation.



   (F)   Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by the
town as a result of the violation.



   (G)   Any and all expenses of outside professionals to include, but
not be limited to, engineers, scientists and/or legal counsel.



   (H)   Other costs associated with the detection and correction of
the violations.



(Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.123  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions in § 50.062, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 50.020
through 50.025.



   (B)   The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 50.137 why the
proposed action should not be taken.  Exercise of this option by the Town
Manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.124  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other pertinent standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the Town Manager.



   (B)   Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to
the provisions of this code of ordinances governing nuisances, including
reimbursing the town for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying
the nuisance.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 1-2013, passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord.
2-2013, passed 3-4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 50.135  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   When the Town Manager finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town Manager may petition the County Circuit Court through
the Town Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this
chapter on activities of the user.



   (B)   (1)   The Town Manager may also seek other action as is
appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation.



      (2)   A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.136  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the town, for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation, per day. 
In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



   (B)   The Town Manager may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the town.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



§ 50.137  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive.  The Town
Manager may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user.  Further, the Town Manager is empowered to take more than
one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 14-2000, passed 8-7-00; Am. Ord. 2-2013, passed 3-4-13)



CHAPTER 51:  PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Sewer usage



   51.03   Private sewage disposal system



   51.04   Building sewers



   51.05   Discharges



   51.06   Pretreatment of wastes



   51.07   Pretreatment facilities



   51.08   Unpolluted waters



   51.09   Industrial cooling water



   51.10   Wastewater information to be provided



   51.11   Wastewater strength



   51.12   Interceptors



   51.13   Notification of unusual/accidental discharge



   51.14   Damage to sewage works property



   51.15   Inspections; permission to enter properties



   51.16   Violations



   51.17   Variances



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen expressed in
mg/l utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures with nitrification inhibition in five days at 20° C.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning three feet outside the building wall.



   BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY.  A building drain which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.



   BUILDING DRAIN, STORM.  A building drain which conveys stormwater or
other clear water drainage, but no wastewater.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal. (Also called house connection.)



   BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. A building sewer which conveys sanitary or
industrial sewage only.



   BUILDING SEWER, STORM.  A building sewer which conveys stormwater or
other clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm
or surface water.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the
NPDES permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants,
and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. The term
SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE is not subject to precise definition, but generally
contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental
removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial. Examples
of the additional pollutants which may be considered compatible include:
chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus
compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen compounds, and fats, oils, and greases of
animal or vegetable origin (except as prohibited where these materials would
interfere with the operation of the treatment works).



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   FECAL COLIFORM.  Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state, such that
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment
facility approved by the town.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



   INFILTRATION.  The water entering a sewer system, including building
drains and sewers, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited
to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.
(INFILTRATION does not include and is distinguished from INFLOW. )



   INFILTRATION/INFLOW.  The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.



   INFLOW.  The water discharge into a sewer system, including building
drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders,
cellars, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water
discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross
connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catch basins,
stormwaters, surface run-off, street wash waters or drainage. ( INFLOW does
not include, and is distinguished from, INFILTRATION.)



   INSPECTOR.  The person or persons duly authorized by the town, through
its Board of Trustees, to inspect and approve the installation of building
sewers and their connection to the public sewer system.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.  An industry that:



      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day; or



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or



      (3)   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in standards issued under Section 307 (a) of PL 92-500; or



      (4)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on a treatment works or on
the quality of effluent from that treatment works.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
groundwater.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Shall have the same meaning as defined in the
Sewage Rate Ordinance.



   NPDES PERMIT.  A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of
the United States pursuant to Section 402 of PL 92-500.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, group or other entity.



   pH.  The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams per
liter of solution.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned
industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.



   PRIVATE SEWER.  A sewer which is not owned by a public authority.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than  inch in any
dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public
authority and will consist of the following increments:



      (1)   COLLECTOR SEWER shall mean a sewer whose primary purpose
is to collect wastewaters from individual point source discharges.



      (2)   FORCE MAIN shall mean a pipe in which wastewater is
carried under pressure.



      (3)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER shall mean a sewer whose primary
purpose is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment
facility.



      (4)   PUMPING STATION shall mean a station positioned in the
public sewer system at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes,
and to which storm, surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
(including polluted cooling water). The three most common types of sewage are:



      (1)   SANITARY SEWAGE shall mean the combination of liquid and
water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing
facilities.



      (2)   INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE shall mean a combination of liquid and
water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and
resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment (this
shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling
water).



      (3)   COMBINED SEWAGE shall mean wastes including sanitary
sewage, industrial sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the
wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  The structures, equipment and processes to collect,
transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the
effluent and accumulated residual solids.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than ten minutes more than three times the average 24 hours
concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system.



   STANDARD METHODS.  The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, The American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control Federation.



   STORM SEWER.  A sewer for conveying water, ground water or unpolluted
water from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of
the town, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering under standard laboratory procedure.



   TOTAL SOLIDS.  The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



   TOXIC AMOUNT.  Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants, which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations, and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307 (a) of
PL 92-500.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER.  The material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when heated at 55° C for 15 to 20 minutes.



   WATERCOURSE.  A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.02  SEWER USAGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any human
or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any
sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly, stormwaters, surface water,
ground water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted
water, or unpolluted industrial process water.



   (C)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof run-off,
subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted water or unpolluted industrial
process water may be admitted to storm sewers which have adequate capacity
for their accommodation. No person shall use such sewers, however, without
the specific permission of the town. No new connection shall be made to any
sanitary sewer unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers,
lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant including capacity
for BOD and suspended solids.



   (D)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the jurisdiction
of the town any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and
the NPDES Permit.



   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any
natural outlet any wastewater or other polluted waters except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter and
the NPDES Permit.



   (F)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (G)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within
the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the town is hereby
required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet
of the property line.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available
under the provisions of § 51.02(G), the building sewer shall be connected to
a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $__ shall be paid to the town
at the time the application is filed.



   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24
hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Board of
Health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted
to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in division (D) above,
a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the
town.



   (G)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or dirt.



   (H)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Officer.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.04  BUILDING SEWERS.



   (A)   No unauthorized person, other than one authorized by the town,
shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof, or make any cut into or excavation of a
public street or alley to repair a building sewer or other private sewer
line,  without first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



      (1)   For residential and commercial service, and



      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent in the judgement of the Inspector. A permit and inspection fees of
$__ for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $__ for an
industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer at the
time the application is filed.



   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (D)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



   (E)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector,
to meet all requirements of this chapter.



   (F)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the town. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. FD-5 shall
apply.



   (G)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (H)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface run-off or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (I)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the town or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. FD-5. All such connections shall be made gas tight and water
tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installations.



   (J)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Inspector or his or her representative.



   (K)   The responsibility for the maintenance and repair of building
sewers and other private sewer lines, whether located on private property or
in public rights-of-way including streets and alleys, shall be borne by the
owner(s) of the building(s) served by the building sewer or private sewer
line.



   (L)   All excavations for building sewer or private sewer line
installation, repair or maintenance  shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 13-1997, passed 4-21-97)



§ 51.05  DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the sewage treatment plant.



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works or interfere with
any treatment process.



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, paper, dishes, cups, milk containers, and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge to the receiving waters.



      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.



      (7)   Any waters or wastes having pH in excess of 9.5.



      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein.



      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amendable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies
having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



   (B)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.05(A) of this
chapter, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Superintendent may:



         (a)   Require new industries (or other large users) or
industries (or other large users) with significant increase in discharges to
submit information on wastewater quantities characteristics and obtain prior
approval for discharges;



         (b)   Reject the wastes in whole or in part for any
reason deemed appropriate by the town;



         (c)   Require pretreatment of such wastes to within the
limits of normal sewage as defined;



         (d)   Require control or flow equalization of such
wastes so as to avoid any slug loads or excessive loads that may be harmful
to the treatment works; or



         (e)   Require payment of a surcharge on any excessive
flows or loadings discharged to the treatment works to cover the additional
costs of having capacity for and treating such wastes.



      (2)   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization, of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent
and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.



   (C)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   (D)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at his or her expense, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. Agents of the town, the State Water Pollution
Control Agencies, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing.



   (E)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standards Method for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at the control manhole, except for applications for
NPDES permits and report thereof which shall be conducted in accordance with
rules and regulations adopted by the USEPA (40 CFR Part 136). In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.



   (F)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the town for treatment, subject to payment
therefore, by the industrial concern, at such rates as are compatible with
the Rate Ordinance.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



Cross-reference:



   Sewer Use Requirements, see Ch. 50



§ 51.06  PRETREATMENT OF WASTES.



   Pretreatment of industrial wastes from major  contributing industries
prior to discharge to the treatment works is required and is subject to the
Rules and Regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA) (40 CFR Part 403), and Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures
for Analysis of Pollutants (40 CFR Part 136), in addition to any more
stringent requirements established by the town and any subsequent State or
Federal Guidelines and Rules and Regulations.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



Cross-reference:



   Sewer Use Requirements, see Ch. 50



§ 51.07  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
pretreatment or control facilities shall be submitted for approval of the
town and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval
in writing, is granted. Where such facilities are provided, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating order by the
owner at his or her expense and shall be subject to periodic inspection by
the town to determine that such facilities are being operated in conformance
with applicable Federal, State and local laws and permits. The owner shall
maintain operating records and shall submit to the town a monthly summary
report of the character of the influent and effluent to show the performance
of the treatment facilities and for comparison against town monitoring
records.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.08  UNPOLLUTED WATERS.



   Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing systems or
swimming pools, shall be discharged to a storm sewer, where it is available,
or to a combined sewer approved by the town. Where a storm sewer is not
available, discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the town and by
the State of Indiana. Where a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural sewer
is not available, such unpolluted water may be discharged to a sanitary sewer
pending written approval by the town.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.09  INDUSTRIAL COOLING WATER.



   Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils or
grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants and
the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with § 51.08.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.10  WASTEWATER INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED.



   The town may require users of the treatment works, other than
residential users, to supply pertinent information on wastewater flows and
characteristics. Such measurements, tests, and analysis shall be made at the
users’ expense. If made by the town, an appropriate charge may be assessed
to the user at the option of the town.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.11  WASTEWATER STRENGTH.



   The strength of wastewaters shall be determined, for periodic
establishment of charges provided for in the Rate Ordinance, from samples
taken at the aforementioned structure at any period of time and of such
duration and in such manner as the town may elect, or, at any place mutually
agreed upon between the user and the town. Appropriate charges for sampling
and analysis may be assessed to the user at the option of the town. The
results of routine sampling and analysis by the user may also be used, for
determination of charges after verification by the town.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.12  INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the town they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors or traps will
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning
and inspection. They shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures and shall be of
substantial construction, be gas tight, water tight, and equipped with easily
removable covers. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or
traps shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.13  NOTIFICATION OF UNUSUAL/ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.



   Users of the treatment works shall immediately notify the town of any
unusual flows or wastes that are discharged accidently or otherwise to the
sewer system.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.14  DAMAGE TO SEWAGE WORKS PROPERTY.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.15  INSPECTIONS; PERMISSION TO ENTER PROPERTIES.



   (A)   The Superintendent, Inspector and other duly authorized
employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The Superintendent or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical,
oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways
or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the town employees and the town shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by town employees and against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain safe conditions as required in § 51.05(E).



   (C)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



Cross-reference:



   Compliance Monitoring, see §§ 50.100—50.101



§ 51.16  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any persons found to be violating §§ 51.02(B), (C) or
51.04(H) of this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $100
per month, per billing account. This penalty shall be impose beginning the
month immediately following passage and adoption of this chapter by the Board
of Trustees.



   (B)   There shall be a moratorium upon the requirements for payment
by any persons for a period of six months from the time of enactment of this
chapter of the penalty as set forth in division (A) above. Further, any
person who has, pursuant to division (C) below, consented to the inspection
of their respective premises within 90 days of the date of adoption of this
chapter, shall not be liable for payment until such inspection has been
accomplished and the person given the opportunity to bring the premises into
compliance within the time frame set out in division (C).



   (C)   A person may avoid liability for payment of the penalty
established in division (A) above upon a showing that he is in compliance
with all provisions of §§ 51.02(B), (C) or 51.04(H) of this chapter, which
showing shall consist of the following procedures and conditions as to each
building or appurtenance connected to the sanitary sewer:



      (1)   Each such person shall, as to each such building or
appurtenance so connected to the sanitary sewer, execute a “Grant of
Permission” to the Town of Danville, to come upon the property and within
the premises thereon, of such persons to inspect and/or perform sewer tests
as may be deemed necessary by the town to verify the compliance hereinbefore
referred to;



      (2)   The Grant of Permission set forth in subsection (1)
above shall be deemed to include periodic inspections and/or tests as may be
determined to be necessary by the Town of Danville to maintain, insure and
monitor compliance with the provisions of §§ 51.02(B), (C) or 51.04(H) of
this chapter;



      (3)   The term “Town of Danville” as used herein, shall
mean and include such employees, or designees of the Town of Danville,
Indiana, as it shall, from time to time utilize in making the inspections
and/or tests heretofore referred to. Such persons shall have on their
persons, identification to verify the fact that they in fact represent the
town for the purposes.



      (4)   The inspections shall be made upon reasonable notice of
at least 48 hours. There shall be no fee charged for the inspections.



      (5)   If, upon the initial inspection contemplated by division
(B) above to verify compliance, a person is in fact not found to be in
compliance, the person shall be given 14 days from the date of the inspection
to so comply.



   (D)   In the event a person if found to be in compliance as
heretofore set forth, and, upon subsequent inspection is found not to be in
compliance, the person shall be liable for payment of an amount equal to the
sum of the months since adoption of this chapter, multiplied by the monthly
penalty in effect during such period as the case may be; provided that, such
liability shall be reduced to 50% of the amount if the person complies within
a period of ten days after notice by the Town of Danville of his or her
non-compliance a second or subsequent time, then the person shall be liable
for a sum equal to $500 plus an amount equal to the sum of the months since
adoption of this Chapter multiplied by the monthly penalty in effect during
such period as the, case may be.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees has determined that the measures
heretofore set out are a reasonable means of insuring compliance with §§
51.02(B), (C) or 51.04(H) of this chapter and are further necessary to
protect and insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town
and surrounding areas.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 51.17  VARIANCES.



   (A)   In the event that circumstances uniquely applicable to a
particular parcel of property causes compliance with a requirement of this
chapter to be a hardship on the property owner, the Town Council (Board of
Trustees) may grant the property owner a variance from the requirement.



   (B)   Variances from requirements of this chapter may only be
granted by the Town Council upon a determination that the following
conditions apply:



      (1)   The grant will not be injurious to public health and
safety;



      (2)   The grant will not cause harm to the town’s sewer
system and its effective operation;



      (3)   The grant will not violate any Federal or State law,
rule or regulation;



      (4)   The grant will not adversely affect the revenues pledged
to any outstanding sewage works revenue bonds;



      (5)   The use or value of the area adjacent to the property
included in the variance will not be adversely affected;



      (6)   The need for the variance arises from some condition
peculiar to the property involved;



      (7)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will
constitute an unusual and unnecessary hardship as applied to property for
which the variance is sought.



   (C)   The Town Council may impose restrictions on variances from
this chapter that it grants.  If the Town Council determines that the
restrictions have not been followed, the Town Council may revoke the
variance.  If without the variance a violation of the chapter exists, the
town may undertake enforcement of this chapter against the owner of the
property for which the variance has been revoked.



(Ord. 9-1994, passed 5-16-94)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
except provisions covered under § 51.16 shall be served by the town with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in division (A) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $__ for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
the town by reason of such violation.



(Ord. 17-1986, passed 11-3-86)



CHAPTER 52:  SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   User charges



   52.03   Sewer rates and charges



   52.04   Sewage bill allowances



   52.05   Charges based on strength and character



   52.06   Billing



   52.07   Operational studies



   52.08   Laws and prohibitions



   52.09   Special contracts



   52.10   Appeals



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the Town of Danville, Indiana, or any
duly authorized officials acting in its behalf.



   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The same meaning as defined in the
Use Ordinance.



   DEBT SERVICE COSTS.  The average annual principal and interest
payments on all proposed revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.



   EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE.  An additional charge which is billed to
users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of NORMAL
DOMESTIC SEWAGE.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The wastewater discharges from industrial, trade
or business processes as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. 



      (1)   For the purpose of determining surcharges, wastewater or
sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:



         (a)   BOD not more than 250 mg/l; and



         (b)   S.S. not more than 250 mg/l.



      (2)   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated
domestic and/or sanitary conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial
processes.



   NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) PERMIT.  The
same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS.  Include all costs, direct and
indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport and
treatment on a continuing basis and produce discharges to receiving waters
that conform with all related Federal, State and local requirements. (These
costs include replacement.)



   OTHER SERVICE CHARGES.  Tap charges, connection charges, area charges,
and other identifiable charges other than user charges, debt service charges
and excessive strength surcharges.



   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   REPLACEMENT COSTS.  The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful
life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for
which such works were designed and constructed.



   SEWAGE.  The same meaning as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance.



   SEWER USE ORDINANCE.  A separate and companion enactment to this
chapter, which regulates the connection to and use of public and private
sewers.



   S.S. or SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The same meaning as defined in the Sewer
Use Ordinance.



   TOWN.  The Town of Danville, Indiana, acting by and through the Board
of Trustees.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to
Section 204 (b) of Public Law 92-500.



   USER CLASS.  The division of wastewater treatment customers by source,
function, waste characteristics, and process or discharge similarities (such
as residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental in
the User Charge System).



      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER.  Any establishment involved in a
commercial enterprise, business or service which based on a determination by
the town discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



      (2)   GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Any Federal, State, or local
governmental user of the wastewater treatment works.



      (3)   INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any manufacturing or processing
facility that discharges industrial waste to a waste water treatment works.



      (4)   INSTITUTIONAL USER.  Any establishment involved in a
social, charitable, religious, and/or educational function which, based on a
determination by the town discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.



      (5)   RESIDENTIAL USER.  A user of the treatment works whose
premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more
persons, including all dwelling units, and the like.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.02  USER CHARGES.



   (A)   Every person whose premises are served by the sewage works
shall be charged for the services provided. These charges are established for
each user class, as defined, in order that the sewage works shall recover,
from each user and user class, revenue which is proportional to its use of
the treatment works in terms of volume and load. User charges are levied to
defray the cost of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the
treatment works. User charge rates shall be uniform in magnitude within a
user class.



   (B)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Replacement costs,
which are recovered through the system of user charges, shall be based upon
the expected useful life of the sewage works equipment.



   (C)   The various classes of users of the treatment works for the
purposes of this chapter, shall be as follows:



      (1)   Residential;



      (2)   Commercial;



      (3)   Governmental;



      (4)   Institutional;



      (5)   Industrial.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.03  SEWER RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   For the use of and the services rendered by sewage works,
rates and charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot,
parcel of real estate or building that is connected with the town sewage
system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or
other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sewage system of the
town. 



   (B)   Such rates and charges include user charges, debt service
costs, excessive strength surcharges and other service charges, which rates
and charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an
amount determinable as follows:



      (1)   (a)   The sewage rates and charges shall be based on
the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to such
rates and charges, as the same is measured by the water meter there in use,
plus a base charge based on the size of the water meter installed, except as
herein otherwise provided. For the purpose of billing and collecting the
charges for sewage service, the water meters shall be read monthly and the
users shall be billed monthly (or period equaling a month). The water usage
schedule on which the amount of the rates and charges shall initially be
determined as follows:



            1.   Treatment rate per 1,000 gallons of usage per
month:




      User   Debt





      Charge   Service   Total





      $1.29   $.56   $1.85




plus



            2.   Base Rate—as follows:



 


Monthly Base Rate



Base rate
 
User charge
 
Debt service
 
Total




5/8 - 3/4 inch water meter
 
$ 5.45
 
$ 2.90
 
$ 8.35


1 inch water meter
 
11
 

7.25

 
18.25


1 inch water meter
 
16.55
 
11.60
 
28.15


1 inch water meter
 
23.25
 
16.85
 
40.10


2 inch water meter
 
38.75
 
29
 
67.75


3 inch water meter
 
86.85
 
66.70
 
153.55


4 inch water meter
 
149.75
 
116
 
265.75


6 inch water meter
 
338.45
 
263.90
 
602.35




 



         (b)   As part of the Financial Management System
requirements, each year the town shall evaluate the adequacy and
proportionality of the User Charge System and Debt Service Recovery System.
Periodic changes in the User Charge System will be necessary in order to
adequately fund the Replacement Fund.



      (2)   (a)   For users of the sewage works that are
unmetered water users or accurate meter readings are not available, the
monthly charge shall be determined as an average of single-family dwelling
units, except as herein provided. Sewage service bills shall be rendered once
each month (or period equaling a month). The schedule on which the rates and
charges shall be determined is as follows:



 

 
Monthly Rate


Residential
 
User charge
 
Debt service
 
Total


Single-family residence/unit
 
$12.55
 
$6
 
$18.55



 



         (b)   Unmetered non “Residential Single-Family
Dwelling Units” shall be charged a rate to be determined by the town on an
individual basis by applying the above metered rates to estimated usage and
meter size.



      (3)   For the service rendered to the town, the town shall be
subject to the same rates and charges hereinabove provided, or to charges and
rates established in harmony therewith.



      (4)   In order to recover the cost of monitoring industrial
wastes the town shall charge the user the actual cost of monitoring but not
less than $25 per sampling event. This charge will be reviewed on the same
basis as all other rates and charges in the chapter.



      (5)   Summer sewer rates.



         (a)   Single-family residential customers shall be
eligible for summer sewer rate relief.  Single-family residential sewage
services, as applicable to the sprinkling rate, shall apply to each lot,
parcel of real estate or building which is used as a single- family
residence.  The sprinkle rates shall not apply to any premises used wholly
or in part as a commercial, industrial or multi-family (two units or more).



         (b)   The summer value will be the unmetered sewer rate
of $45.95 per month.



         (c)   The summer sewer rate will begin with the July
billing and end with the November billing.



         (d)   The summer sewer rates, single-family residential
customers shall be required to pay a $25 non-refundable application fee at
the Danville Town Hall, 49 N. Wayne Street, Danville, no later than April
15.  New customers will be allowed to apply until July 1.



         (e)   The summer sewer rate shall remain in effect until
rescinded by the customer, in writing, to the Town of Danville Town Hall, 49
N. Wayne Street, Danville, Indiana.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 18- 2012, passed 7-16-12)



§ 52.04  SEWAGE BILL ALLOWANCES.



   (A)   The quantity of water discharged into the sewage system and
obtained from sources other than the utility that serves the town shall be
determined by the town in such manner as the town shall reasonably elect, and
the sewage service shall be billed at the above appropriate rates; except, as
is hereinafter provided in this section, the town may make proper allowances
in determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records
to be consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the town that
such quantities do not enter the sewage system.



   (B)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into
the town’s sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a user of
water supplied by the water utility serving the town and the water used
thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter, or is measured by a
water meter not acceptable to the town then the amount of water used shall be
otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to ascertain the rate
or charge provided in this chapter, the owner or other interested party shall
at his or her expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the town for the determining of sewage discharge.



   (C)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or their liquids into
the town’s sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the town, and in addition, is a user of
water from another resource which is not measured by a water meter or is
measured by a meter not acceptable to the town, then the amount of water used
shall be otherwise measured or determined by the town. In order to ascertain
the rates or charges, the owner or other interested parties shall, at his or
her expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices
or any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the town for
the determination of sewage discharge.



   (D)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water or other liquids into
the town’s sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of water
and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in each
such case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be averaged
for each user and the base charge and the flow rates and charges shall apply
to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate or
buildings served through the single water meter.



   (E)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water or other liquids into the
town’s sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in
excess of 10,000 gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction
of the town that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters
does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other
interested party shall, at his or her expense, install and maintain meters,
weirs, volumetric measuring devices or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the town for the determination of sewage discharge.



   (F)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as
well as for other uses not entering the sewer system, the town may, in its
discretion, make adjustments in the user charge as may be equitable.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.05  CHARGES BASED ON STRENGTH AND CHARACTER.



   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and
equitably adjusted to the service rendered to users, the town shall base its
charges not only on the volume, but also on strength and character of the
stronger-than-normal domestic sewage and shall require the user to determine
the strength and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly
or indirectly into the sewage system, in such manner and by such method as
the town may deem practicable in the light of the conditions and attending
circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge. The user
shall furnish a sampling point, as defined in the Sewer Use Ordinance,
available to the town at all times.



   (B)   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed a
biochemical oxygen demand of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid or suspended
solids in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid. Additional charges for
treating stronger-than-normal domestic waste shall be made on the following
basis:



      (1)   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids.  There
shall be an additional charge of $.22 per pound of suspended solids for
suspended solids received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      (2)   Rate surcharge based upon BOD.  There shall be an
additional charge of $.15 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for BOD
received in excess of 250 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      (3)   Rate surcharge based upon ammonia.  There shall be an
additional charge of $.68 per pound of ammonia for ammonia received in excess
of 45 milligrams per liter of fluid.



   (C)   The determination of suspended solids and five-day Biochemical
Oxygen Demand contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the current
addition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and
Industrial Wastes, as written by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 8-1994, passed 4-4-94)



§ 52.06  BILLING.



   (A)   Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected
by the town in the manner provided by law and ordinance.



   (B)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and
billed monthly. At the end of each year, each user shall be given a notice of
the rates charged and the basis for the charges for operation, maintenance
and replacement.



   (C)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties
served, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the town for the purpose of determining
whether bills have been paid by such tenant or tenants, provided that such
examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept and
during the hours that such office is open for business.



   (D)   As in provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when
due are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount
of the rates or charges shall thereupon attach thereto. The time at which
such rates or charges shall be paid is now fixed at 15 days after the date of
mailing of the bill.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.07  OPERATIONAL STUDIES.



   (A)   In order that the rates and charges for sewage services may
remain proportional to the cost of providing services to the various uses of
user classes and that the charges may remain sufficient to adequately fund
the necessary replacement costs and other revenue and reserve requirements,
the town shall cause a study to be made annually for the first five years of
operation, following the date on which this chapter goes into effect. Such
study shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the costs
associated with the treatment of excessive strength effluents from industrial
users, volume and delivery flow rate characteristics attributed to the
various users or user classes, the financial position of the sewage works and
the adequacy of its revenue to provide adequate funds, for the operation and
maintenance, replacements, debt service requirements and capital improvements
to the waste treatment systems. Thereafter, on a biennial basis, within a
reasonable period of time following the normal accounting period, the town
shall cause a study to be made for the purpose of (a) reviewing the
sufficiency of the revenues to properly operate the wastewater treatment
facility and all appurtenances attached thereto; and (b) maintaining
proportionality among the user classes of the rates and charges for sewage
services.



   (B)   The studies shall be conducted by officers or employees of the
town, or by a firm of certified public accountants, or a firm of consulting
engineers which firms shall have experience in such studies, or by such
combination of officers, employees, certified public accountants or engineers
as the town shall determine to be best under the circumstances.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.08  LAWS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The town shall make and enforce such by- laws and regulations
as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical and efficient management
of the town’s sewage system, pumping stations and sewage treatment works,
for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage
treatment works, for the construction and use of house sewers and connection
to the sewerage system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating and
refunding of such rates and charges. No free service shall be provided to any
user of the waste water treatment facility.



   (B)   The town is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes
into the town’s sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful
to the operation of the sewage treatment works of the town, or to require
methods affecting pretreatment of the wastes to comply with the pretreatment
standards included in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit issued to the sewage works.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.09  SPECIAL CONTRACTS.



   The Board is hereby further authorized to enter into special rate
contracts with users of the sewage works where clearly definable cost to the
sewage works can be determined, and such special rates shall be based on such
costs.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



§ 52.10  APPEALS.



   That the rules and regulations promulgated by the town, after approved
by the Board of Trustees shall, among other things, provide for an appeal
procedure whereby a user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the
administrator of the sewage system and user charge system to the Board of
Trustees and that any decision concerning the sewage system or user charges
of the Board of Trustees may be appealed to the circuit court of the county
under the appeal



procedures provided for in the Indiana Administrative Adjudication Act.



(Ord. 16-1986, passed 11-3-86)



CHAPTER 53:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Adopted by reference



Stormwater Utility and Stormwater User Fees



   53.10   Authority



   53.11   Policies and procedures



   53.12   Compliance with other ordinances, statutes, and regulations



   53.13   Stormwater utility user fee



   53.14   Stormwater Utility Fee Fund



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The Stormwater Management Ordinance, being Ordinance 2-2005, consisting
of a title page, a four- page table of contents, seven chapters of 34 pages,
eleven pages of abbreviations and definitions, and a one-page map, is adopted
and incorporated by reference as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 2-2005, passed 4-18-05)



STORMWATER UTILITY AND STORMWATER USER FEES



§ 53.10  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The town establishes a Stormwater Utility under the authority
of I.C. 36-9-23.



   (B)   The Stormwater Utility shall be responsible for the management
of the Danville stormwater system.



   (C)   The Stormwater Utility’s stormwater management activities
shall be funded by user fees to be paid by persons and entities owning and
using real property in the town that receive and transmit stormwaters.



   (D)   The determining feature used to identify real properties
transmitting stormwaters shall be the existence of impervious surface area.



(Ord. 20-2009, passed 11-2-09)



§ 53.11  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.



   A Policies and Procedures Manual, attached to Ord. 20-2009, has been
developed and is incorporated herein by reference and is hereby approved.
This Manual is to be used by the Danville Stormwater Utility and includes
definitions, a description of how the stormwater user fee shall be determined
and policies/procedures for billing and collection of the stormwater user fee.



(Ord. 20-2009, passed 11-2-09)



§ 53.12  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES, STATUTES, AND REGULATIONS.



   The town’s imposition of these stormwater user fees does not relieve
any person or entity from their responsibilities for compliance with the Town
of Danville and/or Hendricks County ordinances and/or other applicable state
and/or federal laws/regulations.



(Ord. 20-2009, passed 11-2-09)



§ 53.13  STORMWATER UTILITY USER FEE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a monthly stormwater utility fee
for the use of and services provided by the Stormwater Utility of the town.
The stormwater utility fee shall be charged either the owner or tenant of
each property in the town with impervious surface area depending on which is
being billed by the town for water or sanitary sewer service (i.e., the
responsible person or entity shall be the same). In addition to a fixed fee,
each bill shall include a variable fee based on the town’s determination of
the Equivalent Residential Units (“ERUs”) for the property. An ERU equals
3,700 square feet of impervious surface area. One ERU shall be attributed to
each and every property with impervious surface area and a charge will be
imposed for that ERU. Each non-residential property with greater than 3,700
square feet of impervious surface area shall be charged for one ERU plus
additional ERUs in increments of one-tenth of an ERU for every 370 square
feet of impervious surface area beyond 3,700 square feet. Government,
not-for-profit and tax-exempt organizations shall not be exempt from this fee.



   (B)   The monthly user fee shall consist of two charges: a fixed fee
that is the same for all properties with an impervious surface area and a
variable fee that is multiplied by the number of ERUs attributed to a
property. The monthly charge for each property shall be the sum of the
variable fee times the number of ERUs attributed to the property plus the
fixed fee. The fees shall be as follows:



 

 
Fixed Fee
 

Variable fee (multiplied by # of ERUs)



Beginning in January 2010
 
$2.00
 
$2.00


Beginning in January 2011
 
$2.50
 
$2.50


Beginning in January 2012
 
$3.00
 
$3.00



 



   (C)   The monthly stormwater utility fees as herein set forth shall
be effective on Town of Danville utility bills first payable in each period
set forth above.



(Ord. 20-2009, passed 11-2-09)



§ 53.14  STORMWATER UTILITY FEE FUND.



   There shall be created a Stormwater Utility Fee Fund. This Fund shall
be comprised of fees paid by users under this subchapter, penalties and
assessments imposed in the collection of fees under this subchapter, and
other income generated from the operation of the Stormwater Utility. This
shall be a non-reverting fund, and it shall be used to construct,
reconstruct, repair and maintain stormwater facilities, to pay for the
operation of the Stormwater Utility and stormwater management activities, and
to otherwise further the purposes of improving drainage and water quality in
the town.



(Ord. 20-2009, passed 11-2-09)



Cross-reference:



   For other funds, see Ch. 34



CHAPTER 54:  WATER CONSERVATION



Section



   54.01   Application



   54.02   Definitions



   54.03   Voluntary conservation



   54.04   Declaration of need; notice



   54.05   Mandatory water conservation; exemptions



   54.06   Enforcement



   54.07   Violations subject to admission and payment



§ 54.01  APPLICATION.



   This chapter applies to the use of water from the Department of
Waterworks public water system that occurs within the town.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVISORY CONDITIONS.  Conditions under which voluntary conservation
measures are appropriate due to decreased supplies in the  Department of
Waterworks, or other circumstances have reduced the amount of treated water
available to customers as determined by the Department of Waterworks.



   CUSTOMER.  An individual, firm, corporation, government agency or
other entity being supplied with water utility service by the Department of
Waterworks at a location within the town.



   MANDATORY CONSERVATION.  Compliance with town imposition of
requirements that are designed to reduce certain kinds and types of water use
are as set forth herein.



   NORMAL CONDITIONS.  Conditions under which water supply and treatment
capacity are adequate to meet demand.



   TOWN WATERWORKS or TOWN WATER.  The Town of Danville Department of
Waterworks.



   TREATED WATER.  Water treated in a manner that it is suitable for
human consumption or for another designated use.



   VEGETABLE GARDEN.  A garden where substantially all of the plants are
suitable and grown primarily for human consumption.



   VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.  Compliance with the town request to reduce
water use.



   WATER EMERGENCY.  An occurrence wherein mandatory conservation
measures are appropriate due to the levels in either of the Department of
Waterworks reservoirs having been reduced to less than their design
capacities, groundwater wells not functioning properly due to reduced
groundwater levels or the existence of other circumstances that have reduced
the amount of treated water available to customers as determined by the Town
Waterworks.



   WATER USER.  A customer or other individual, firm, corporation,
government agency, or other entity using water from the Town Waterworks
public water system within the town.



   WATER WARNING.  An occurrence wherein mandatory conservation measures
are appropriate due to the levels in either of the Town Waterworks having
been reduced to less than their designed drawdown curves or less than an
estimated 50% of their annual drawdown design capacities, groundwater wells
not functioning properly due to reduced groundwater levels, or the existence
of other circumstances that have reduced the amount of treated water
available to customers, as determined by Town Waterworks.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.03  VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of mandatory water conservation the Town
Manager in consultation with the water utility will issue a notice for
residents to voluntarily conserve water in order to avoid the mandatory
conservation.



   (B)   Measures are:



      (1)   Watering of lawns allowed as follows:



         (a)   Residents south of U.S. 36 odd numbered days.



         (b)   Residents north of U.S. 36 even numbered days.



      (2)   Use a broom to clean your driveway.



      (3)   Use a shut off nozzle on your hose.



      (4)   Do full loads of dishes and/or laundry.



      (5)   Check faucets, pipes, and toilets for leaks.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.04  DECLARATION OF NEED; NOTICE.



   (A)   Upon determining that the Town Waterworks public water system
is in a condition of water shortage, the Town Manager or the town may declare
the existence of a water warning or water emergency, whereupon the respective
water conservation measures described in § 54.05 shall apply until the water
warning or emergency is terminated.  Whenever the Town Manager finds that
some or all of the conditions that gave rise to thedeclaration of a water
warning or water emergency no longer exist, he or she may declare the water
warning or water emergency terminated.



   (B)   Notice of the declaration or termination of a water warning or
water emergency shall be made by  publication in a newspaper of general
circulation.  Notice shall be deemed effective upon publication.



   (C)   Criteria for declaration of need:



      (1)   Maintaining an adequate supply of water to meet demand;



      (2)   Existing and projected customer demand;



      (3)   Weather forecasts;



      (4)   Ability to maintain fire protection flows;



      (5)   Catastrophic loss of supply;



      (6)   Estimated duration of emergency.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.05  MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   During a water warning or a water emergency, it shall be
unlawful for a water user to cause, permit, allow, do, or engage in any of
the following actions:



      (1)   Sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of grass;



      (2)   Washing cars, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, railroad
cars or any other type of mobile equipment, except as required by applicable
local, state, or federal law for health or safety reasons;



      (3)   Using water to clean sidewalks, driveways, paved areas,
structures, buildings, or other outdoor surfaces;



      (4)   Filling empty swimming pools;



      (5)   Installing new landscaping or new lawn by using sod
until return to normal conditions are declared by Town Water;



      (6)   Using hydrants except for fire suppression or as
otherwise directed by Town Water; and



      (7)   Operating water fountains that are non-recycling.



   (B)   In addition to the prohibitions listed in division (A), it
shall be unlawful during a water emergency for a water user to cause, permit,
allow, do, or engage in any outdoor watering, provided however, that
vegetable gardens may be watered every other day by container or hand-held
hose equipped with shut-off nozzle.



   (C)   (1)   The following water users and water uses shall be
exempt from the prohibitions contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section:



      (2)   Nurseries, provided water use is limited to the amount
essential to preserve inventories.



   (D)   The following water users and water uses may be exempted by
the Town Manager from the prohibitions contained in divisions (A) and (B) of
this section:



      (1)   Automatic commercial car washes, provided a majority of
the water used is recycled;



      (2)   Manual commercial car washes, provided only a handheld
hose equipped with a shut-off nozzle is utilized;



      (3)   Golf courses, provided tee boxes and greens are watered
only on an every other day schedule that begins on Monday of each week and
fairways are watered only once per week on Thursday; and



      (4)   Any watering of property owned or controlled by the town
as directed by the Town Manager or Town Manager's designee where the watering
is necessary or appropriate for assets preservation.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the town and any other designee at
the direction of the Town Manager.  Any user who is found to violate may be
punished by a fine of not more than $250.  Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.  In addition to, or in the alternative to a
fine, water service may be terminated for any user who violates. The
violation will fall under the jurisdiction of the Ordinance Violations Bureau
(see § 31.03).



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



§ 54.07  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO ADMISSION AND PAYMENT.



   Violations of the chapter provisions set forth herein are designed as
subject to admission of violation and payment of the designated civil penalty
through the Ordinance Violations Bureau of the town in an amount not
exceeding any limitations under I.C. 33-36-2-3 in accordance with the
procedures of this chapter.



(Ord. 14-2012, passed 7-2-12)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         72.   BICYCLES





         73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         74.   PARKING SCHEDULES





         75.   SKATEBOARDS




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance; exceptions



   70.03   Traffic-control devices; damage, injury and the like



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



      (1)   Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles and
ambulances and other emergency vehicles operated by or for hospitals or
health and hospital corporations under I.C. 16-22;



      (2)   Vehicles other than ambulances which are owned by
persons, firms, corporations other than hospitals and are used in emergency
services, may be designated as emergency if the vehicles are authorized to
operate as such by the Department of Highways;



      (3)   Motor vehicles that are approved by the State Emergency
Medical Services Commission that are:



         (a)   Ambulances that are owned by persons, firms or
corporations other than hospitals; or



         (b)   Not ambulances and provide emergency medical
service.



      (4)   Vehicles of the Department of Correction that are:



         (a)   Designated by the Department of Correction as
emergency vehicles; and/or



         (b)   Responding to an emergency.



   CRASH. A collision of vehicles or a vehicle and an object on a public
street, highway, right-of-way or publicly-owned property.



   IMPOUNDMENT. The act of taking temporary custody of a vehicle and
towing it from a public street, highway or right-of-way to an authorized
secured area.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAGE.  All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals not inconsistent with this traffic code, placed or erected by
authority of the Town Council or Street Commissioner for the purpose of
guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.



   PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a
public highway, otherwise than temporarily for the reasonable expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise, provided the loading or
unloading of passengers or merchandise shall not consume more than five
minutes.



   PERSON. All natural persons, firms, partnerships and corporations.



   POLICE HOLD. An order from the Danville Police Department to impound a
vehicle because of its suspected involvement in criminal activity.



   POLICE OFFICER.  The Chief of Police, all deputies of the Chief of
Police or any police officer or person having police power under any law of
the state with authority or jurisdiction to enforce this traffic code.



   PUBLIC SQUARE.  The block or square marked and denoted “public
square” on the original plat of the town and occupied by the County Court
House.



   STORAGE FEE. That certain sum of money charged the owner, operator, or
authorized representative of same, for the safekeeping of the impounded
vehicle.



   TOW. The act of lifting, pushing, pulling or removing a vehicle.



   TOWING FEE. That certain sum of money charged the owner, operator, or
authorized representative of same, of a towed vehicle.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by
human power and shall include anything attached to the front or the rear of
every device.



   WRECKER. Any person engaged in the business of offering the services of
a towing vehicle for use in removing, pulling, lifting or pushing another
vehicle which is disabled, and shall include the employees, agents and towing
vehicles used in the business of providing towing services.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to
comply with any lawful order, sign or direction of a police officer.



   (B)   The provisions of this traffic code regulating the movement,
parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, as defined herein, while the operator of the vehicle is operating
the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. 
This exemption shall not, however, protect the operator of any vehicle from
the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; DAMAGE, INJURY AND THE LIKE



   It shall be unlawful for any person to unlawfully deface, injure,
remove, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   71.01   General restricted parking



   71.02   Military recruiters; special privileges



Impoundment and Removal of Vehicles



   71.20   Purpose



   71.21   Certain vehicles declared a public nuisance



   71.22   Removal of vehicles constituting a nuisance



   71.23   Removal of vehicles; release



   71.24   Procedure for selecting wreckers



   71.25   Procedure for removing and impounding vehicles



   71.26   Liability of town and wrecker



   71.27   Notice of motor vehicle removal



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  GENERAL RESTRICTED PARKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or
park at any time for any purpose in any of the following places, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or traffic sign or signal:



   (A)   Within a street intersection;



   (B)   In a crosswalk;



   (C)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (D)   In front of a public or private drive;



   (E)   On a sidewalk;



   (F)   In any alley;



   (G)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or
on the side of the street opposite the driveway entrance to any fire station
with 75 feet each direction of the entrance;



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic-control signal;



   (I)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone;



   (J)   Wrong side of a curb;



   (K)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge of a curb or street (double parking);



   (L)   At any place where official signs are posted; and



   (M)   In an area marked as a fire lane in accordance with I.C.
9-21-16-5.5.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



§ 71.02  MILITARY RECRUITERS; SPECIAL PRIVILEGES.



   There shall be authorized, for the use of military recruiters, the
right to park at any space without being in violation of this traffic code,
provided that the vehicles are U.S. Government vehicles as evidenced by a
duly authorized U.S. Government license plate.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)



IMPOUNDMENT AND REMOVAL OF VEHICLES



§ 71.20  PURPOSE.



   It shall be the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the
impoundment of vehicles which, due to their location and/or condition,
constitute a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the members of this
community, and vehicles which have been involved in violations of law
warranting temporary police custody of such vehicles.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.21  CERTAIN VEHICLES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   The following vehicles hereby are declared to be a public nuisance:



   (A)   Any vehicle illegally parked in any place where the parked
vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire
hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle;



   (B)   Any vehicle left unattended in a Town of Danville park at a
time when that park is closed to public use;



   (C)   Any vehicle parked or left standing unattended upon any street
or public place in the town in violation of any of the provisions of this
Code or of any statute of the state;



   (D)   Any vehicle known to have been stolen or wrecked and left
standing on any street or public place, or any vehicle the operator of which
is unable to move such vehicle by reason of his or her incapacity from injury
or arrest;



   (E)   Any inoperable vehicle that is stored, maintained, or kept in
violation of § 71.01 and Chapter 74 of this Code; and



   (F)   Any vehicle upon which there is a police force hold or which
has been involved in four or more violations of traffic or parking ordinances
of the town for which notices of traffic or parking violations have been
issued, which notices of traffic or parking violations have not been paid,
presented for compromise payment or slated into court.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.22  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES CONSTITUTING A NUISANCE.



   Any police officer, upon discovering a vehicle parked or left standing
so as to constitute a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, shall cause the vehicle to be removed to an authorized storage
place where it shall be impounded and detained as provided in this
subchapter. Such vehicles shall be released only upon order of the Chief of
the Danville Police Department, or upon an order of the judge of any court
having jurisdiction over the vehicle.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.23  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; RELEASE.



   (A)   Any police officer, upon discovering a vehicle parked or left
standing so as to constitute a public nuisance, may cause the vehicle to be
impounded. Impounded vehicles shall be released either upon payment by the
owner, operator or authorized representative of same of the fees charged for
impoundment and storage, or upon order of the Chief of the Danville Police
Department, or upon order of any court having jurisdiction over the vehicle.



   (B)   All vehicles impounded by reason of being wrecked or stolen
and all vehicles otherwise coming into the custody or control of such agency,
and those impounded for parking violations, may be impounded in lots
maintained for such purposes by on-call wreckers or in a lot authorized by
the Chief of the Danville Police Department.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.24 PROCEDURE FOR SELECTING WRECKERS.



   The Chief of the Danville Police Department shall invite and receive
applications from wreckers for providing on-call towing services for the
Danville Police Department. The Chief of the Danville Police Department shall
establish specifications which shall include but not be limited to the
wrecker’s towing vehicles, equipment, storage lot, response times and
insurance, and shall include same in all invitations for applications. The
Chief of the Danville Police Department shall authorize wreckers meeting the
established specifications to provide on-call towing services for the town as
needed by the Police Department, provided the wrecker operator executes a
written agreement to abide by the town’s rules for on-call towing services.
If more than one wrecker is authorized to provide on-call towing services,
Police Department calls for towing services shall be directed to the on-call
wreckers on a rotating basis as prescribed by the Chief of the Danville
Police Department. If a police officer determines that wrecker authorized to
provide on-call towing services is not adequately available to tow a vehicle
in a particular situation, the officer may call another wrecker operator
which shall tow and impound vehicles in accordance with the procedures of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.25  PROCEDURE FOR REMOVING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles involved in any crash may be towed by any wrecker of
the owner’s or operator’s choosing, provided that such wrecker may be
summoned promptly to avoid creating a traffic hazard. If the police officer
on the scene of the crash determines a traffic hazard has been created by the
delay in the arrival of the owner’s or operator’s chosen wrecker, or if
the owner or operator does not care to select a wrecker of his or her own
choice, the police officer may declare the vehicle a traffic hazard, and it
shall become subject to the police officer’s order to the contractor or
other authorized wrecker to remove it from the scene. However, the vehicle
shall not be subject to impoundment, but shall be towed to the destination
selected by the owner or operator. If the owner or operator is under a
disability by reason of injury or arrest, the vehicle shall be subject to
impoundment upon order of the police officer on the scene.



   (B)   Vehicles recovered as stolen or which come into the custody of
the Danville Police Department for other reasons shall be subject to
impoundment upon order of the police officer having control of the vehicle.



   (C)   All other vehicles subject to removal under this subchapter,
including those in violation of parking ordinances, may be towed by the
on-call wrecker, upon notification and order by an police officer, and may be
impounded and stored pursuant to the provisions of § 71.23.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.26  LIABILITY OF TOWN AND WRECKER.



   The town shall not be liable for any loss or damage which may occur to
any vehicle which is removed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
The wrecker shall indemnify and hold harmless the town its police officers,
agents and employees, from any loss, claim, judgment or damages arising from
the removal and storage of vehicles pursuant to this subchapter. The wrecker
shall have sole responsibility for any articles of personal property which
may be contained in any vehicle at the time of its removal; such articles of
personal property shall not be held by the contract wrecker in lieu of the
service charges authorized herein but shall be returned by him or her or his
or her agents to the owner thereof upon sufficient identification and proof
of ownership. The police officer directing the removal of a vehicle shall
cause an inventory of each vehicle as per Danville Police Department rules
and regulations. Inventoried items shall be listed and filed with the
officer’s reports. All items, except those deemed and identified in the
officer’s report as contraband, shall be left with the vehicle and will be
the responsibility of the towing service.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



§ 71.27  NOTICE OF MOTOR VEHICLE REMOVAL.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle has been removed, the wrecker who
moved the vehicle shall, within two hours, give or cause to be given notice
to the Danville Police Department of the fact of such removal and the reasons
therefor and of the manner in which such vehicle may be reclaimed. Any such
notice shall also be given to the proprietor of the storage lot or garage to
which such vehicle is removed.



   (B)   Such notice shall include:



      (1)   A description of the vehicle;



      (2)   Its license number;



      (3)   The date and time of its removal;



      (4)   Location from where it was removed;



      (5)   Its present location;



      (6)   The name and address of its owner and last operator, if
known;



      (7)   Its final disposition; and



      (8)   The reason for its removal.



   (C)   Notice is not required in the event:



      (1)   The owner or person in charge of such vehicle signs a
release from such notice at the scene of the tow;



      (2)   The reason for the motor vehicle’s removal was not an
alleged violation of law; and



      (3)   The wrecker agrees and keeps such release on file for a
period of 30 days.



      (4)   The wrecker has been called to the location where the
vehicle is being removed by a police officer, an emergency services
dispatcher or other representative of the Danville Police Department.



(Ord. 17-2009, passed 9-21-09)



CHAPTER 72:  BICYCLES



Section



   72.01   Effect of regulations



   72.02   License required; application; issuance



   72.03   License plate



   72.04   Inspection



   72.05   Transfer of ownership



   72.06   Applicable traffic laws; obedience



   72.07   Riding on roadways



   72.08   Speed



   72.09   Parking



   72.10   Riding on sidewalks



   72.11   Equipment requirements



§ 72.01  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act
forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter.



   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   These regulations, applicable to bicycles, shall apply
whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street, roadway or upon any public
path set aide for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions
stated herein.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   No person, who resides within the town, shall ride or propel a
bicycle on any street, roadway or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles unless the bicycle has been licensed and a license
plate is attached thereto, as provided herein.



   (B)   Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be
made upon a form provided by the town and shall be made to the Town Board of
Police Commissioners.



   (C)   (1)   The Town Board of Police Commissioners, upon
receiving proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a bicycle
license.



      (2)   The Town Board of Police Commissioners shall not issue a
license for any bicycle when it knows or has reasonable ground to believe
that the applicant is not the owner or entitled to the possession of the
bicycle.



      (3)   The Town Board of Police Commissioners shall keep a
record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address
of the person to whom issued and the number on the frame of the bicycle for
which issued.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)



§ 72.03  LICENSE PLATE.



   (A)   (1)   The Town Board of Police Commissioners, upon issuing
a bicycle license, shall also issue a license plate bearing the license
number assigned to the bicycle.



      (2)   The Town Board of Police Commissioners shall cause the
license plate to be firmly attached to the rear mudguard or frame of the
bicycle for which issued in a position as to be plainly visible from the rear.



   (B)   No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during
the time the bicycle is to be operated upon any street, roadway or bicycle
path in the town.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  INSPECTION.



   The Town Board of Police Commissioners or an officer assigned the
responsibility shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall
refuse a license for any bicycle determined to be in unsafe mechanical
condition.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)



§ 72.05  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee
shall remove the license plate from the bicycle.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)



§ 72.06  APPLICABLE TRAFFIC LAWS; OBEDIENCE.



   (A)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or roadway shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring
rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the
town applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations
herein and except as to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by
their nature can have no application.



   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  RIDING ON ROADWAYS.



   Every person operating a bicycle upon a street or a roadway shall ride
as near to the right-hand side thereof as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the  conditions then existing.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or roadway other than by
standing it against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a bicycle rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or in a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.  No person 15 years of age or more shall ride a bicycle upon any
sidewalk in any district.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime on any street, roadway
or bicycle path, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit
a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and
with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the rear.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
bell, not a siren, capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least 100 feet.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel to skid on dry, level, clear pavement.



(Ord. 3-1950, passed 7-3-50)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   Weight and length restrictions



   III.   One-way streets



   IV.   Stop intersections



   V.   Yield intersections



   VI.   Traffic-control signal intersections



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle on
any of the streets or highways in the town at a speed greater than the
maximum limit authorized in an urban district, which is established as 30 mph
unless specified otherwise.



   (A)   General provisions.  No person shall drive a vehicle on the
following streets in the town at a speed greater than that posted.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit
 
Special Provisions




Barryknoll Street
 
 
20 mph
 


Cheeseman Avenue
 
 
20 mph
 


Columbia Street
 
Intersection of Gibson Street to its intersection with 50 North Road
 
20 mph
 


East Main Street
 
Intersection with 200 East to the limited access located just prior to the
County Highway garage
 
40 mph
 


 
Ellis Park
 
20 mph
 


Fisher Lane
 
 
20 mph
 


Helton Drive
 
 
20 mph
 


Leedy Drive
 
 
20 mph
 


Knoll Street
 
 
20 mph
 


Main Street
 
From Old Farm Road to CR 300 East
 
40 mph
 


Midland Drive
 
Western Heights Subdivision
 
20 mph
 


Midland Court
 
Western Heights Subdivision
 
20 mph
 


Sunset Drive
 
Western Heights Subdivision
 
20 mph
 


West Mill Street
 
Intersection of Mackey Road east to the intersection of South Jefferson Street
 
20 mph
 
When children are present


Western Drive
 
Western Heights Subdivision
 
20 mph
 


Westview Drive
 
Intersection with Mackey Road to its intersection with the Danville Community
High School property line
 
20 mph
 




 



   (B)   School zones.  A restrictive speed limit of 25 mph, at all
times when children are present, shall be as set below.



 

School
 
Location




South Elementary School
 
Beginning at the intersection of South Tennessee Street and Blake Street and
continuing in a northwesterly direction on Blake Street terminating at the
intersection of Blake Street and South Jefferson Street


Beginning at the intersection of Blake Street and Washington Street and
continuing north on Washington Street to the intersection of Washington
Street and Broadway Street


Beginning at the intersection of Indiana Street and Mill Street and
continuing north on Indiana Street to Broadway Street


Beginning at the intersection of Indiana Street and Mill Street and
continuing east to Mill Street and Tennessee Street


North Elementary School
 
Beginning at the intersection of Gill Drive and Urban Street (also known as
State Road 39) and continuing north on Urban Street to the corporation line
of the town


Beginning at the intersection of Northview Drive and its intersection with
Old North Salem Road continuing in a northwesterly direction to Urban Street
(also known as State Road 39)


Danville Junior High School
 
Beginning at the intersection of East Main Street and Tennessee Street and
continuing east to a point 750 feet east of the intersection of East Main
Street and Wayne Street


Beginning at the intersection of East Main Street and Wayne Street and
continuing north on Wayne Street to its intersection with Columbia Street


Beginning at the intersection of Clinton Street and Tennessee Street and
continuing east on Clinton Street to its intersection of Wayne Street


Danville Community High School
 
Beginning at the west corporation line of the town on Main Street (also
designated at U.S. 36) and continuing in an easterly direction to the
intersection of Main Street and Urban Street (also known as State Road 39)


Beginning at the intersection of Mackey Road and Main Street (also known as
U.S. 36) and continuing south on and along Mackey Road to a point where
Mackey Road intersects with Lincoln Street




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 6-1996, passed 4-15-96; Am. Ord.
16-1997, passed 5-5-97)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  WEIGHT AND LENGTH RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle weighing over the amount set below
or being longer than the length set below to travel the streets in the town.



 

Street
 
Restriction


Local streets in residential areas
 
Over 12 tons in weight or 38 feet in length, except for the moving of
household goods, the delivery of construction equipment and materials and
school buses



 



(Ord. 12-1999, passed 8-16-99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a roadway designated and
signposted for one-way traffic shall drive the vehicle only in the direction
designated.



   (B)   It is hereby ordered and ordained that the Town Manager or any
other persons designated by the Town Council shall cause directional signs to
be posted in the areas indicating that all vehicular traffic shall move in
only one direction.



   (C)   It is hereby ordered and ordained that the following streets
in the town shall be and are hereby designated as one-way streets.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Traffic Direction




Hamilton Way
 
Intersection of Leedy Drive to its intersection with Columbia Street
 
South to north


Helton Drive
 
Intersection with Leedy Drive North to its intersection with Leedy Drive South
 
North to south


Leedy Drive
 
Intersection with East Main Street to its intersection with Helton Drive North
 
South to north


Marion Street
 
Intersection of South Cross Street to the intersection of South Indiana Street
 
West to east


North Jefferson Street
 
Intersection of Columbia Street to the intersection of U.S. 36
 
North to south


North Washington Street
 
Intersection of U.S. 36 to the intersection of Columbia Street
 
South to north


North Wayne Street
 
Intersection of East Main Street to the intersection of East Columbia Street
 
South to north


South Washington Street
 
Intersection of Blake Street and South Washington Street to the intersection
of Washington Street and Main Street
 
South to north


South Jefferson Street
 
Intersection of Marion to Broadway
 
North to south


South Jefferson Street
 
Intersection of West Main Street to its intersection with Marion Street
 
North to south




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 8-2001, passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 8-2013,
passed 6-17-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   A stop sign shall be an octagonal sign with a white message
and border with a red background requiring traffic to stop.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign
as required at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more
entrances and shall proceed cautiously into the intersection after first
coming to a full stop unless traffic at the intersection is being controlled
by a police officer.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Type of Stop




10th Street
 
Intersection with Old Pittsboro Road
 
Three-way stop


10th Street
 
Intersection with Sycamore Lane
 
Three-way stop


Adams Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Adams Street
 
Intersection with Jefferson Street
 
Two-way stop


Aspen Court
 
Intersection with Sherwood Drive
 
“T” intersection


Backwater Drive
 
Intersection with Clear Creek Drive
 
“T” intersection


Barrett Street
 
Intersection with Bosstick Street
 
“T” intersection


Barrett Street
 
Intersection with Scearce Street
 
“T” intersection


Barry Knoll Street
 
Intersection with Lincoln Street
 
“T” intersection


Blake Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
Two-way stop


Bosstick Street
 
Intersection with Wilson Street
 
“T” intersection


Bowen Street
 
Intersection with Broadway Street
 
“T” intersection


Bowen Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Brenda Court
 
Intersection with East Street
 
“T” intersection


Broadway Street
 
Intersection with Kentucky Street
 
Two-way stop


Broadway Street
 
Intersection with Cook Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Broadway Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
Two-way stop


Brookwood Circle
 
Intersection with Clear Creek Drive
 
“T” intersection


Butternut Court
 
Intersection with Sherwood Drive
 
“T” intersection


Charing Crossing
 
Intersection with Woodfield Green
 
“T” intersection


Cheeseman Avenue
 
Intersection with Barryknoll Street
 
“T” intersection


Chestnut Street
 
Intersection with Kentucky Street
 
“T” intersection


Chestnut Street
 
Intersection with Cross Street
 
“T” intersection


Clearcreek Drive
 
Intersection with W. Main Street
 
“T” intersection


Clinton Court
 
Intersection with Spring Street
 
“T” intersection


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Jefferson Street
 
Two-way stop


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Tennessee Street
 
Two-way stop


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Indiana Street
 
Two-way stop


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Spring Street
 
“T” intersection


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Cross Street
 
Two-way stop


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Wayne Street
 
“T” intersection


Colonial Lane
 
Intersection with Heritage Drive
 
“T” intersection


Colonial Lane
 
Intersection with Meadow Drive
 
Four-way stop


Columbia Street
 
Intersection with Cross Street
 
“T” intersection


Concord Drive
 
Intersection with Tradition Lane
 
Two-way stop


Concord Drive
 
Intersection with Tradition Lane
 
“T” intersection


Cook Avenue
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Copperfield Crossing
 
Intersection with Woodfield Place
 
Two-way stop


Copperfield Crossing
 
Intersection with Woodfield Green
 
Two-way stop


Copperfield Lane
 
Intersection with Copperfield Crossing
 
“T” intersection


Coventry Ridge
 
Intersection with Woodfield Green
 
“T” intersection


East Street
 
Intersection of Clinton Street
 
Two-way stop


Elizabeth Drive
 
Intersection with Stratford Drive
 
“T” intersection


Elm Street
 
Intersection with Tennessee Street
 
“T” intersection


Elm Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Elm Street
 
Intersection of Indiana Street
 
Two-way stop


Fairlane Court
 
Intersection with Cook Avenue
 
“T” intersection


George Court
 
Intersection with Stratford Drive
 
“T” intersection


Gibson Street
 
Intersection with Columbia Street
 
“T” intersection


Gill Drive
 
Intersection with Old North Salem Road
 
“T” intersection


Harrison Street
 
Intersection with Tennessee Street
 
“T” intersection


Hawley Drive
 
Intersection with Old North Salem Road
 
“T” intersection


Helton Drive
 
Intersection with Columbia Street
 
“T” intersection


Helton Drive
 
Intersection with Leedy Drive
 
“T” intersection


Heritage
 
Intersection with Old Farm Road
 
“T” intersection


Hickory Drive
 
Intersection with Sycamore Lane
 
“T” intersection


High Street
 
Intersection with Clinton Street
 
Two-way stop


High Street
 
Intersection with Old North Salem Road
 
“T” intersection


Indiana Street
 
Intersection of Columbia Street
 
Two-way stop


Indiana Street
 
Intersection of Broadway Street
 
Two-way stop


Indiana Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
Three-way stop


Indiana Street
 
Intersection with Lawton Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Indiana Street
 
Intersection with Mulberry Street
 
Four-way stop


James Court
 
Intersection with Stratford Drive
 
“T” intersection


Janetta Drive
 
Intersection with Virginia Drive
 
“T” intersection


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection with Blake Street
 
“T” intersection


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection of Broadway Street
 
Two-way stop


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection of Columbia Street
 
Two-way stop


John Court
 
Intersection with Stratford Drive
 
“T” intersection


Kentucky Street
 
Intersection of Clinton Street
 
Two-way stop


Kentucky Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
Four-way stop


Knoll Street
 
Intersection with Cheeseman Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Lawton Avenue
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Leatherwood Drive
 
Intersection with Millet and Harvest Courts
 
“T” intersection


Leatherwood Drive
 
Intersection with Old Farm Road
 
“T” intersection


Leedy Drive
 
Intersection with Helton Drive
 
Three-way stop


Lincoln Street
 
Intersection with Blake Street
 
“T” intersection


Magnolia Court
 
Intersection with Sherwood Drive
 
“T” intersection


Maple Street
 
Intersection with Clinton Street
 
“T” intersection


Marion Street
 
Intersection of Kentucky Street
 
Two-way stop


Marion Street
 
Intersection of Tennessee Street
 
Two-way stop


Marion Street
 
Intersection with Indiana Street
 
Four-way stop


Marion Street
 
Intersection with Wayne Street
 
“T” intersection


McCormicks Circle
 
Intersection with Clear Creek Drive
 
“T” intersection


Meadow Street
 
Intersection with E. Main Street
 
“T” intersection


Meadow Manor
 
Intersection with Tradition Lane
 
Two-way stop


Meadow Street
 
Intersection with Raintree Drive
 
“T” intersection


Meadowbank Road
 
Intersection with Tradition Lane
 
“T” intersection


Meadowood
 
Intersection with Mackey Road
 
“T” intersection


Midland Drive
 
Intersection with Sunset Drive South
 
“T” intersection


Midland Court
 
Intersection with Sunset Drive
 
“T” intersection


Mill Street
 
Intersection with Broadway Street
 
“T” intersection


Mill Street
 
Intersection with Mackey Road
 
“T” intersection


Mill Street
 
Intersection with Jefferson Street
 
“T” intersection


Morel Court
 
Intersection with Sassafras
 
“T” intersection


Mulberry Street
 
Intersection of Wayne Street
 
Two-way stop


Mulberry Street
 
Intersection with Bowen Street
 
“T” intersection


Mulberry Street
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Mulberry Street
 
Intersection of Tennessee Street
 
Two-way stop


N. Morgan
 
Intersection with Clinton Street
 
“T” intersection


North Street
 
Intersection of Wayne Street
 
Two-way stop


North Street
 
Intersection of Tennessee Street
 
Two-way stop


North Street
 
Intersection with Indiana Street
 
“T” intersection


Northview Drive
 
Intersection with Old North Salem Road
 
“T” intersection


Orchard Boulevard
 
Intersection with old North Salem Road
 
“T” intersection


Orchard Lane
 
Intersection with Washington Street
 
“T” intersection


Paddlebrook
 
Intersection with Clear Creek Drive
 
“T” intersection


Parkridge Drive
 
Intersection with Danridge Drive
 
“T” intersection


Parkridge Drive
 
Intersection with Hilltop Drive
 
“T” intersection


Peachtree
 
Intersection with Orchard Boulevard
 
Two-way stop


Poplar Street
 
Intersection of Wayne Street
 
“T” intersection


Poplar Street
 
Intersection of Tennessee Street
 
“T” intersection


Poplar Street
 
Intersection of Kentucky Street
 
“T” intersection


Pritchett Lane
 
Intersection with Hawley Drive
 
“T” intersection


Raintree Drive
 
Intersection with Old Farm Road
 
“T” intersection


Ripplewood Drive
 
Intersection with Clear Creek Drive
 
“T” intersection


S. Morgan Street
 
Intersection with Marion Street
 
“T” intersection


Sassafras Drive
 
Intersection with Tradition Lane
 
“T” intersection


Scearce Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Sherwood Drive
 
Intersection with CR 100 N
 
“T” intersection


Stratford Drive
 
Intersection with Main Street
 
“T” intersection


Sunset Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Sunset Street
 
Intersection with Mackey Road
 
“T” intersection


Sycamore Lane
 
Intersection with Meadow Drive
 
“T” intersection


Temple Drive
 
Intersection with CR 100N
 
“T” intersection


Temple Court
 
Intersection with Temple Drive
 
“T” intersection


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
Four-way stop


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection of Lincoln Street
 
Two-way stop


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection with Broadway Street
 
Four-way stop


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection of Blake Street
 
Two-way stop


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection with Columbia Street
 
Four-way stop


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection with Lawton Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Tradition Lane
 
Intersection with Old Farm Road
 
“T” intersection


Tradition Lane
 
Intersection with Woodside Drive
 
“T” intersection


Tradition Lane
 
Intersection with Meadow Drive
 
“T” intersection


Virginia Drive
 
Intersection with CR 100N
 
“T” intersection


Virginia Drive
 
Intersection with Temple Drive
 
“T” intersection


Walnut Street
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Washington Street
 
Intersection with Clinton Street
 
Four-way stop


Washington Street
 
Intersection with Columbia Street
 
Four-way stop


Washington Street
 
Intersection with Marion Street
 
“T” intersection


Waterford Way
 
Intersection with Paddlebrook Drive
 
“T” intersection


Wayne Street
 
Intersection with Harrison Street
 
“T” intersection


Wayne Street
 
Intersection of Columbia Street
 
Two-way stop


Wayne Street
 
Intersection of Mill Street
 
Two-way stop


Wayne Street
 
Intersection of Broadway Street
 
Two-way stop


Wayne Street
 
Intersection with Lawton Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Western Drive
 
Intersection with Sunset Drive
 
“T” intersection


Western Drive
 
Intersection with Mill Street
 
“T” intersection


Westview Drive
 
Intersection with Mackey Road
 
“T” intersection


Willow Drive
 
Intersection with Sycamore Lane
 
“T” intersection


Willow Drive
 
Intersection with Sherwood Drive
 
“T” intersection


Wilson Street
 
Intersection with Cook Avenue
 
“T” intersection


Wilson Street
 
Intersection with Scearce Street
 
“T” intersection


Woodside Drive
 
Intersection with Old Farm Road
 
“T” intersection




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 3-1995, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord. 4-1995,
passed 5-1-95; Am. Ord. 11- 1997, passed 3-3-97)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V.  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in
obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for existing
conditions or shall stop if necessary and shall yield right-of-way to any
pedestrian crossing or to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching so
close to constitute an immediate hazard.



   (B)   (1)   It is hereby ordered and ordained that the Town
Manager or any other person designated by the Town Council shall put or cause
to be posted signs at the aforesaid intersections controlling the traffic
entering the intersections.



      (2)   A yield sign shall be a sign which shall be a downward
pointing equilateral triangle having a red border and a white interior with
the word yield in red.  This sign assigns right-of-way to traffic on certain
approaches to an intersection.



   (C)   It is hereby ordered and ordained that the following
intersections in the town shall be and are hereby established as yield
intersections.



 

Street
 
Location




Hickory Court
 
Intersection with Hickory Drive


Martin Drive
 
Intersection with Martin Drive


Orchard Court
 
Intersection with Orchard Lane


Parkridge Drive
 
Intersection with Danridge


Round Hill Court
 
Intersection with Round Hill Road


Todd Terrace
 
Intersection with Mark Manor


Woodland Place
 
Intersection with Round Hill Court




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI.  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   A traffic-control signal shall be a device, which is manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and proceed.



   (B)   No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any
official traffic-control signal unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.  All traffic shall observe and obey all traffic-control
devices.  It is hereby ordered and ordained that the following intersections
in the town be and are hereby established as traffic- control signal
intersections.



 

Street
 
Location


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection with U.S. 36


Old Farm Road
 
Intersection with E. Main Street


Washington Street
 
Intersection with U.S. 36



 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Snow emergency routes



   II.   No parking zones



   III.   Parking restrictions



   IV.   Downtown regulations



   V.   Length, weight and distance from curb restrictions



   VI.   Handicapped parking spaces



   VII.   Parking passes and reserved spaces



SCHEDULE I.  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   (A)   No driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the same on
any street in the town designated and sign posted as a “snow emergency
route” when such an emergency is declared by the Street Commissioner or the
Chief of Police.



   (B)   Any vehicle found to be stopped or parked in violation of this
schedule shall be subject to tow-in and removal and towed away by a
commercial towing service.  The vehicle shall be stored in a safe place and
shall be returned to the owner of the vehicle upon payment of a reasonable
commercial tow-in fee and storage fee under the circumstances, plus the owner
shall pay the parking fine assessed for the violation hereof.



   (C)   The following streets in the town shall be and are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes.



 

Street
 
Location




 
The public square and the roads comprising the east, south and west sides of
the public square


Blake Street
 
Intersection with the south corporate limits to the intersection with
Washington Street


Broadway Street
 
Intersection with east corporate limits to its intersection with Cross Street


Columbia Street
 
Intersection with CR 50N to its intersection with North Cross Street


Jefferson Street
 
Intersection with Marion Street to its intersection with Blake Street


Lincoln Street
 
Intersection with Mackey Road to its intersection with Kentucky Street


Mackey Road
 
Intersection with Lincoln Street to its intersection with W. Main Street


Meadow Drive
 
Intersection with Main Street to its intersection with Sycamore Drive


Mill Street
 
Intersection with Mackey Road to Cross Street


North Cross Street
 
Intersection with Old North Salem Road to its intersection with West Main
Street


Old North Salem Road
 
Intersection with Urban to its intersection with N. Cross Street


Sycamore Lane
 
Intersection with Meadow Drive to its intersection with CR 100N


Washington Street
 
Intersection with Blake Street to its intersection with town limits north




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  NO PARKING ZONES.



   No driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the same at any time
on the following streets in the town.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Special Provisions




Adams
 
 


Blake Street
 
From Jefferson Street to Lincoln Street
 


Bosstick Street
 
 


Chestnut
 
 


Clinton Street
 
Intersection with Spring Street in an easterly direction to Maple
 


Columbia Street
 
From Gibson Street to CR 50N
 


Cook Avenue
 
 


Copperfield Crossing
 
Intersection with Woodfield Place
 


Copperfield Crossing
 
Intersection with Woodfield Green
 


East Street
 
 


Elm Street
 
 


Gibson Street
 
 


Gill Drive
 
 


Harrison Street
 
 


Hawley Drive
 
 


Helton Drive
 
 


High Street
 
From Main Street to Clinton Street
 


High Street
 
From Main Street to Old North Salem Road
 


Kentucky Street
 
From Mill Street to Lincoln Street
 


Lawton Avenue
 
 


Leedy Drive
 
 
Only where posted


Mackey Road
 
 


Marion Street
 
Intersection with Tennessee Street to Wayne Street
 


Martin Drive
 
 


Midland Drive
 
 


Mill Street
 
Intersection with Jefferson Street to Kentucky Street and Walnut Street to
Mackey Road
 


North Morgan Street
 
 


North Street
 
Intersection with Indiana Street to Tennessee Street
 


Old Farm Road
 
At a point 145 feet north of Tradition Lane to a point 140 feet south of
Raintree Drive
 


Old North Salem Road
 
 


Pritchett Lane
 
 


SR 39
 
From Main Street to Old North Salem Road and Lincoln Street
 


Scearce Street
 
 


South Cross Street
 
 


South Morgan Street
 
 


Spring
 
 


Sunset Drive
 
 


Sycamore Lane
 
 


Tennessee Street
 
Intersection with Poplar Street to Blake Street
 


Tennessee Street
 
From Poplar Street to Lincoln Street
 


Tradition Lane
 
From Old Farm Road to Sassafras Drive, except for the portion of the north
side of the roadway from a point beginning at 30 feet east of Old Farm Road
to 144 feet east of Old Farm Road
 


Washington Street
 
Intersection with Elm to city limits
 


Wayne Street
 
Intersection with North Street to Lawton Avenue and Mill Street to Poplar
Street
 


Western Drive
 
 


Wilson Street
 
 




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 11-1997, passed 3-3-97; Am. Ord.
18-1997, passed 8-4-97; Am. Ord. 12-1999, passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 18-2013,
passed 11-18-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   No driver of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the same at any time
contrary to the following.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side(s)




Bowen Street
 
 
West


Broadway Street
 
From Cross Street to Cook Avenue
 
North


Broadway Street
 
From Cross Street to East Mill Street
 
South


Clinton Street
 
From Maple to Wayne Street
 
North


Columbia Street
 
From Cross Street to Gibson Street
 
North


E. Main Street
 
From Indiana Street to Tennessee Street
 
North


E. Mill Street
 
From Indiana Street to Broadway Street
 
North


E. Poplar Street
 
From Tennessee Street to Wayne Street
 
South


Kentucky Street
 
From Mill Street to Main Street
 
West


Kentucky Street
 
145 feet south of Main Street
 
East


Meadow Drive
 
From Main Street to Raintree Street
 
West


Mulberry
 
From Washington Street to Wayne Street
 
North


Mulberry
 
From Wayne Street to Bowen Street
 
South


Myers Road
 
East Main Street to Gale Road
 
East


N. Cross Street
 
From Main Street to Columbia Street
 
West


N. Indiana Street
 
From Columbia Street to Lawton Avenue
 
West


N. Indiana Street
 
From Main Street to Columbia Street
 
East


N. Jefferson Street
 
From Washington to Clinton Street
 
West


N. Tennessee Street
 
From Lawton to Main Street
 
West


N. Washington Street
 
From alley north of Clinton Street to Columbia Street
 
West


N. Washington Street
 
From Columbia Street to Elm Street
 
East


N. Wayne Street
 
From Main Street to North Street
 
East


North Street
 
From Tennessee Street east 121 feet
 
North


Roundhill Road
 
At a beginning point of Spring Street to a point 210 feet north
 
East


S. Indiana Street
 
From Main Street to Mill Street
 
West


S. Jefferson Street
 
From Broadway to dead end
 
East


S. Tennessee Street
 
From Main Street to Poplar Street
 
East


S. Washington Street
 
From Blake to alley south of Marion Street
 
East


S. Wayne Street
 
From Main Street to Mill Street
 
East


S. Wayne Street
 
From Poplar Street to dead end
 
East


W. Marion Street
 
From Cross Street to Cook Avenue
 
South


W. Mill Street
 
From Kentucky Street to Walnut Street
 
North


W. Poplar Street
 
From Kentucky Street to Walnut Street
 
North




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 2-1998, passed - -98; Am. Ord. 12-1999,
passed 8-16-99; Am. Ord. 25-2001, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 27-2006, passed
11-20-06; Am. Ord. 6-2012A, passed 3-19-12; Am. Ord. 18-2013, passed
11-18-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV.  DOWNTOWN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor
vehicle for a time longer than two hours in a designated parking space in the
downtown traffic area.



      (2)   Handicap parking in the downtown area shall be limited
to four hours.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move, re-park or
otherwise relocate a motor vehicle to the same position or another position
on the same side of the street within the same block within the downtown
traffic area for two or more consecutive two-hour periods.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, hide or
vandalize, in any way, any markers or indicators showing the length of time a
vehicle has been parked in a specific parking space or block where time
restrictions are in effect.



   (D)   The downtown traffic area is hereby declared to be the
following streets or parts of streets.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Side(s)


Jefferson Street
 
Between U.S. 36 and Marion Street
 


Main Street
 
Between Cross Street and Indiana Street
 


Marion Street
 
Between Cross Street and Jefferson Street east of the north/south alleyway
 
North and South


Marion Street
 
Between Jefferson Street to the first north/south alleyway east of Washington
Street
 


Washington Street
 
Between Clinton Street and the first east/west alleyway south of Marion Street
 



 



   (E)   The Town Council hereby establishes additional parking spaces
by setting the following minimum distances from the corners of streets in the
downtown parking area.



 


Street

 
Minimum Distance from the Corner(s)




Jefferson Street
 
20 feet from NE and NW corners at Broadway Street intersection


Jefferson Street
 
15 feet from SE and SW corners at Clinton Street intersection


Jefferson Street
 
17 feet from SE corner at Main Street intersection


Jefferson Street
 
15 feet from SE corner at Marion Street intersection


Main Street
 
15 feet from NE corner at Jefferson Street intersection


Marion Street
 
18 feet from NW and SW corners at Jefferson Street intersection


Marion Street
 
20 feet from NE and SE corners at Washington Street intersection


Marion Street
 
18 feet from SW corner at Washington Street intersection


Washington Street
 
15 feet from NW corner at Main Street intersection


Washington Street
 
27 feet from NE corner at Marion Street intersection




 



   (F)   Reverse-angle parking.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Special Provisions

 

Side(s)



North Washington Street
 
Between U.S. 36 and Clinton Street
 
Reverse-angle parking (optional)
 
East



 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 14-2001, passed 7-2-01; Am. Ord.
24-2001, passed 12-3-01; Am. Ord. 7-2003, passed 6-2-03; Am.  Ord. 10-2009,
passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 02-2011, passed 4-4-11; Am. Ord. 11-2012, passed
4-16-12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V.  LENGTH, WEIGHT AND DISTANCE FROM CURB RESTRICTIONS .



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle which itself, or with an
attached trailer, has a length of over 19 feet or any trailer by itself, to
be parked on any street in a location that is within one-half block (i.e. 50
feet) of any section of street that borders the Hendricks County Court House.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle which itself,
or with an attached trailer, has a weight of over 7,000 pounds or a length of
over 20 feet, or any commercial trailer by itself, to be parked on any street
in an area zoned residential.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle and/or trailer, parked on
any street, to extend more than nine feet into any street from the closest
curb or edge of the street's pavement.



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 3-1999, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord.
7-2005, passed 5-16-05)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI.  HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.



   No driver of any motor vehicle shall stop, stand or park same in any
designated and sign posted space designating same for handicapped parking not
having displayed a handicapped person’s decal, placard or registration
plate in the following places in the town.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Special Provisions
 
Side(s)
 
Number of Spaces




 
 
Swinging bridge in Ellis Park
 
 
 
North and south
 
Two


 
 
178.1 feet east of Helton Drive in Ellis Park, adjacent to the Danville
Little League Diamond
 
 
 
North
 
Two


 
 
South Jefferson Mid-State Bank and U.S. 36
 
 
 
Northeast
 
One


Indiana Street
 
First full space north of Marion Street
 
 
 
East
 
One


Jefferson Street
 
First full parking space on the south of the east/west alleyway which is the
first alleyway north of U.S. 36
 
Loading and unloading between 9 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and 3 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.
 
West
 
One


Jefferson Street
 
Mid-block between Main Street and Marion Street
 
 
 
East and west
 
Four


Jefferson Street
 
Courthouse, as marked
 
 
 
West
 
Two


Jefferson Street
 
At Courthouse ramp
 
 
 
East
 
Two


Marion Street
 
Mid-block between Jefferson Street and Washington Street
 
 
 
North
 
One


Marion Street
 
At Jefferson Street
 
 
 
Northwest
 
One


Marion Street
 
At Jefferson Street
 
 
 
Southeast
 
One


North Washington Street
 
Mid-block between Main Street and Clinton Street
 
 
 
West
 
One


North Wayne Street
 
Directly west of Danville Middle School and north of the east/west alleyway
 
 
 
 
One


South Washington Street
 
At Marion Street
 
 
 
Northwest
 
One


South Washington Street
 
At Marion Street
 
 
 
Northeast
 
One


Washington Street
 
Mid-block between Main Street and Marion Street
 
 
 
West
 
One


West Marion
 
Mid-block between Jefferson and Cross Street
 
 
 
South
 
One




 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 17-1997, passed 7-21-97; Am. Ord.
3-1999, passed 2-16-99; Am. Ord. 8-2001, passed 6-4-01; Am.  Ord. 12-2009,
passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 18-2016, passed 8-1-16)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII.  PARKING PASSES AND RESERVED SPACES.



   (A)   There shall be passes allocated to the elected and appointed
county officials who are on daily duty. The passes shall be allocated as
follows.



   (B)   The Town Council is hereby authorized to issue passes and set
regulations for their use.  The passes are to be obtained at the office of
the Town Manager. The Town Council may assign additional passes or eliminate
them as it finds necessary.



 


Officials/Town Personnel

 

Number of Reserved Spaces and Passes

 

Special Provisions





Circuit Court
 

One pass

 




Superior Court I
 

One pass

 




Superior Court II
 

One pass

 




Superior Court III
 

One pass

 




Superior Court IV
 

One pass

 




Superior Court V
 

One pass

 




Clerk
 

One pass

 




Sheriff’s Department
 

Two passes

 

For loading and unloading prisoners



Magistrate
 

Two passes

 




Court Administrator
 

One pass

 







 



(Ord. 1-1989, passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 8-2014, passed 6-16-14)  Penalty, see
§ 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  SKATEBOARDS



Section



   75.01   Definitions



   75.02   Compliance required



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SCOOTER. A wheeled device, a child’s toy, consisting of handlebars
attached by a long rod to a footboard on two wheels allowing one foot to be
placed on the board and the other pushes against the ground to propel the
scooter along.



   SKATEBOARD. A non-motorized device designed for a person to stand on
that consists of a board with a pair of small wheels used for movement on
hard surfaces such as floors, sidewalks, and other paved surfaces.



(Ord. 10-2014, passed 7-21-14)



§ 75.02  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall ride, or otherwise use, a skateboard within
the town without complying with this section and any and all applicable
ordinances of the Town of Danville and Indiana statutes.



   (B)   Yielding to pedestrians. Whenever any person is riding a
skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for use by
pedestrians, such person shall yield the right- of-way to any pedestrian and
shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a reckless or
careless manner, nor pass such pedestrian except in single file, if such
person riding a skateboard is with other such riders.



   (C)   Riding on certain devices or structures. No person shall use a
skateboard on any public bench, table, planter wall, retaining wall,
playground equipment, picnic tables, or other object or structure which is
not intended for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or jump or step on or off
such objects or structures in the process of using a skateboard. No person
shall use a skateboard on any public stairs, steps, or ramps designed to
serve persons with physical disabilities.



   (D)   Riding while attached to vehicles. No person shall ride a
skateboard while either the skateboard or the person is connected or attached
to any vehicle.



   (E)   (1)   Restrictions in park and on safety risks. No person
shall ride a skateboard on or upon Leedy Drive in Ellis Park from Gibson
Street to Helton Drive.



      (2)   No person shall engage in skateboarding which creates an
endangerment to the general public safety of themselves and/or others.
Persons using skateboards shall adhere to all traffic controlled devices and
statutes.



   (F)   Restrictions on use. No person shall ride a skateboard on
public property or right-of-way in any position other than standing on the
skateboard.



   (G)   Prohibition of ramps and incline devices. No person shall
place, construct, establish, maintain, or use a ramp or other object or
structure that creates a hard surface incline for skateboarding upon any
public property or right- of-way.



(Ord. 10-2014, passed 7-21-14)



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   Persons violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties set forth in Chapter 31 administered by the Danville Ordinance
Violations Bureau, which shall be $25 for the first violation and $50 for the
second and each subsequent violation.



(Ord. 10-2014, passed 7-21-14)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ALARM SYSTEMS, SMOKE DETECTORS AND THE LIKE





         91.   LITTERING





         92.   RECREATION





         93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES





         94.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS





         95.   ANIMALS





         96.   ABANDONED VEHICLES





         97.   TREES





         98.   FAIR HOUSING





         99.   BROADBAND CABLE SYSTEM




CHAPTER 90:  ALARM SYSTEMS, SMOKE DETECTORS AND THE LIKE



Section



Alarm Systems



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Definitions



   90.03   Exemptions



   90.04   Registration



   90.05   Violations; fines and penalties



   90.06   Citations and tickets; responsibility



Smoke Detectors



   90.20   Definitions



   90.21   Basic requirements



   90.22   Installation; location



   90.23   Maintenance; testing



   90.24   Duty of owner, manager or rental agent



   90.25   Enforcement



Key and Data Storage Boxes



   90.35   Installation and maintenance



   90.36   Buildings subject to requirements



   90.37   Responsibility



   90.38   Application



   90.39   Approval by Fire Department



   90.40   Number of boxes



ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish required fees, encourage
registration of alarm systems and to provide penalties for violations of this
subchapter and to encourage security alarm users and businesses that sell,
install, service and/or monitoring alarm systems to maintain the operational
reliability and the proper use of alarm systems, limiting of unnecessary
responses to alarms by the public safety agencies.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM NOTIFICATION.  A notification intended to summon a Public Safety
Agency, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or by
an alarm system that responds to an unlawful entry, attempted entry or any
other unauthorized intrusion.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any device used for the detection of an unauthorized
entry or attempted entry into a building, structure, facility or grounds or
for alerting others of the commission of a notification to be made directly
or indirectly to a public safety agency.



   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION.  Any alarm notification, whether direct or
indirect, to a public safety agency, when the responding officer finds no
evidence of a criminal offense or attempted offense.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   An alarm system or an alarm broadcast shall be considered
exempt from the requirements of this subchapter if:



      (1)   The alarm system is installed on a motor vehicle;



      (2)   The alarm system is installed upon premises occupied by
an agency of the United States, the state or any political subdivision
thereof;



      (3)   The alarm system signals or alerts only the occupants of
the premises protected by the alarm system;



      (4)   The alarm broadcast occurs during an electrical storms,
tornado, blizzards or other extreme weather condition that cause the alarm to
broadcast; and



      (5)   Circumstances not reasonably under the control of the
alarm user, installer or maintainer.



   (B)   The responsibility to show causation is that of the alarm
system owner, user, installer or maintainer.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.04  REGISTRATION.



   All alarm systems in use within the town shall be registered with the
Police Department in accordance with the following rules.



   (A)   Registrations shall be on the form provided by the Police
Department and registration shall remain on file with the Department only.



   (B)   There is no fee for the issuance of an alarm registration.



   (C)   An alarm system registration shall be valid for a term of two
years commencing from the date of issuance.



   (D)   An alarm system registration shall be personal to the
registration holder for a specific location and is not transferable.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.05  VIOLATIONS; FINES AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a person who
owns or controls property on which an alarm system is installed to broadcast,
cause to be broadcast, false alarm notifications.  This section shall not
apply to an alarm system which broadcasts a false alarm within 30 days after
installation of the alarm system.



   (B)   (1)   Fines and penalties will be based on the number of
violations in a calendar year as follows:



 

 
Registered
 
Unregistered


First two non-exempt false alarms
 
Written warning
 
Written warning


Third non-exempt false alarm
 
$15
 
$25


Fourth non-exempt false alarm
 
$30
 
$50


Fifth non-exempt false alarm
 
$60
 
$80


Sixth or greater non- exempt false alarm
 
$90
 
$100



 



      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided for in this
section, any act or any person, firm or corporation who continuously,
knowingly and intentionally violates any provisions of this subchapter is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and all remedies applicable to a nuisance,
both public and private, including, but not limited to injunctions and
damages, are hereby preserved.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  CITATIONS AND TICKETS; RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to
issue citations/tickets for violations of this subchapter.



   (B)   Citations or tickets that are issued for violations of this
subchapter shall be administered through the Ordinance Violations Bureau,
subject to the rules that apply to the Bureau.



(Ord. 44-1998, passed 4-6-98)



SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 90.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SIGNAL.  An audible signal indicating the detection of visible
or invisible particles or products of combustion other than heat.



   APPROVED.  Approval by the Fire Chief or Building Inspector.



   FAMILY DWELLING UNIT.



      (1)   Any building area, room or combination of rooms in which
a family or individual lives.



      (2)   This is meant to cover living area only and not common
usage areas in multi-family buildings such as corridors, lobbies, basements
and the like.



   LABELED.  When pertaining to equipment or materials, an attached
label, symbol or other identifying mark of an approved organization.



   LISTED.  When pertaining to equipment or materials, inclusion on a
list, published by an approved organization, indicating that a product meets
appropriate standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a
specified manner.



   NFPA 74.  Standard 74, Household Fire Warning Equipment-1989,
published by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park,
Quincy, MA 02269.



   RENTAL AGENT.  Any person, partnership or corporation, who rents,
subleases, lets or otherwise grants, for a consideration, the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.  This term shall not be construed to
mean a real estate agent who is employed for the sole purpose of selling
residential units.



   SEPARATE SLEEPING AREA.  Any area within a family dwelling unit in
which bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located.



   SMOKE DETECTOR.  A device which detects visible or invisible particles
or products of combustion.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)



§ 90.21  BASIC REQUIREMENTS.



   All family dwelling units within the corporate limits of the town shall
be equipped with a minimum of one functional, properly located, labeled and
listed smoke detector or its equivalent or better, as described in NFPA 74.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)



§ 90.22  INSTALLATION; LOCATION.



   (A)   All smoke detectors shall be installed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and subject to the approval of the Fire Chief
or Building Inspector.



   (B)   A smoke detector shall be installed outside of each sleeping
area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms.



   (C)   All smoke detectors shall be installed on or near the ceiling,
not less than four inches from any wall, or on a wall not less than four
inches nor more than 12 inches from the ceiling.  Any installation shall be
subject to approval by the Fire Chief or Building Inspector.



   (D)   All smoke detectors shall be accessible for servicing and
testing.



   (E)   Smoke detectors may receive their primary power from the
building wiring system or batteries as described in NFPA 74.  Connection to
a building wire shall be in compliance with the electrical code in effect in
the state.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)



§ 90.23  MAINTENANCE; TESTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or remove
any smoke detector, except when it is necessary for maintenance or inspection
purposes.



   (B)   Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement shall be
reinstalled or replaced so that it is operable and in place during normal
sleeping hours.



      (1)   Rented family dwelling units.  Each smoke detector may
be tested in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations, but shall be
tested at not more than six-month intervals in every rented family dwelling
unit, and maintained as necessary, to ensure it is in operable condition. 
At any change of tenancy, smoke detectors shall be tested and be in operable
condition before the unit is re-occupied.



      (2)   Owner-occupied family dwelling units. Each smoke
detector may be tested in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations,
but shall be tested at not more than six-month intervals, and maintained as
necessary, to ensure it is in operable condition.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.24  DUTY OF OWNER, MANAGER OR RENTAL AGENT.



   Every owner, or the manager or rental agent of the owner, of any family
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of
required smoke detectors.  It is the responsibility of the tenant to
maintain in good working order, to include replacement of batteries as
needed, any battery powered smoke detector provided by the owner.  The
maintenance of any smoke detector connected to the building wiring system
shall be the responsibility of the owner, manager or rental agent of the
property.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)



§ 90.25  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Chief or Building Inspector is authorized and is hereby
directed to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1-1992, passed 1-20-92)



KEY AND DATA STORAGE BOXES



§ 90.35  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   Subject to provisions of § 90.36, a key box and/or data storage box
designed for emergency access, compatible with the emergency access system
utilized by the Fire Department, must be properly installed and maintained on
any building, that:



   (A)   Is protected by an automatic sprinkler system equipped with a
local or transmitted water-flow, valve tamper or pumper running alarms;



   (B)   Has any fire alarm system equipped with an outside
audible/visual signaling devise; or



   (C)   Is provided with any fire alarm system where the alarm is
transmitted to an off-site location or to the fire alarm center servicing the
Fire Department.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.36  BUILDING SUBJECT TO REQUIREMENTS.



   Buildings subject to the requirements of § 90.35 include:



   (A)   All newly constructed commercial and industrial buildings;



   (B)   All existing commercial and industrial buildings when:



      (1)   There is a change in building use or occupancy requiring
a construction design release from the state; or



      (2)   Remodeling that requires a building permit from the town
is done to the building.



   (C)   Any building where the owners, tenants or agents of either,
cannot be expected to be available on site within a few minutes of any alarm
sounding or emergency occurring at the building site; and



   (D)   Any building where the owners, tenants or agents of either
have requested that the Fire Department hold keys or maintain information on
the building to use in emergency situations.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.37  RESPONSIBILITY.



   The acquisition, installation and maintenance of key boxes and data
storage boxes is the joint responsibility of the owners and tenants of
buildings, the failure of any owner or tenant to fulfill its responsibility
does not relieve others of that responsibility.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.38  APPLICATION.



   An application for the installation of a key box and/or data storage
box, on the form provided by the Fire Department, shall be completed and
submitted to the Department before its installation.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.39  APPROVAL BY FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   All key boxes and/or data storage boxes shall be installed at a
location on the building that has been approved by the Fire Department.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



§ 90.40  NUMBER OF BOXES.



   (A)   Key boxes shall contain keys necessary to access all protected
areas of the building.



   (B)   One key box may be sufficient for a building with more than
one tenant, as long as the building owner or one tenant, specifically
identified, assumes responsibility for insuring that all keys required for
building access are kept in the box.



(Ord. 8-1998, passed 4-6-98)



CHAPTER 91:  LITTERING



Section



   91.01   Unlawful littering



   91.02   Unlawful permission



   91.03   Unsheltered storage



   91.04   Violation



   91.05   Abandonment by town



   91.06   Placement of sign



   91.07   Enforcement



§ 91.01  UNLAWFUL LITTERING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in person or
by his or her agent, employee or invitee to cast, throw, sweep, sift or
deposit in any manner in or upon any public way or other public places within
the jurisdiction of the town any kind of object, thing or substance
whatsoever, whether liquid or solid.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.02  UNLAWFUL PERMISSION.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation, or any legal entity of any kind whatsoever, that is an owner of
real estate located within the town to permit others to litter, deposit any
thing or object upon the public way or other public places in the town. 
Each owner of real estate shall be responsible for the sidewalks and public
ways that adjoin their property and to keep the same free from all deposits
of litter, objects of any kind whatsoever.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter any deposits of litter,
objects or items left upon the public way or other public places adjoining
private property of the citizens of the town for more than six hours the
owners of the real estate shall then be guilty of violating this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any occupant of real property whether
their occupancy is by ownership as a tenant, guest, invitee or any other
legal claim to the right of possession of the real property to permit in any
manner in or upon any public way or other public place in the town any
debris, objects or things for more than six hours without removal and failing
to so remove shall be guilty of violating of this chapter.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  UNSHELTERED STORAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner of real property, in person or by
its agent, employee or servant or any occupant of real property to allow
unsheltered storage of any item or object upon any public way or other public
places in the town and any storage for a period of more than six hours is
hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter and dangerous to the public
welfare and safety.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.04  VIOLATION.



   (A)   The owners of the real estate or occupants in possession,
tenants, lessees of real property within the corporate limits of the town
upon which the litter items or objects are placed in any manner in or upon
any public way or other public place adjoining their real estate fail to
abate the violation of this chapter by the prompt removal of the items within
the six hours allowed by this chapter they shall be guilty of violation of
this chapter.  Upon a finding of guilt by the Court of competent
jurisdiction, they shall be fined and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which the item or object is allowed to
remain upon the public way or other public place in the town adjoining the
property.



   (B)   Any person or entity found depositing items or objects in or
upon the public way or other public place in the town and found guilty of the
violation of this subchapter, upon conviction by a court of competent
jurisdiction, shall be fined and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which the item or object is permitted to remain upon
any public way or other public place in the town.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.05  ABANDONMENT BY TOWN.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever owners of real property adjoining any public
way or other public place in the town fail to abate and remove items or
objects placed thereon, then the town shall remove the items to a location of
its selection.  The expenses therefore to be billed to the owners, jointly
and severally, the bill to be recoverable in a suit at law.



      (2)   In the event a suit is necessary to recover the costs of
removal of items or objects the town shall recover all costs of litigation
including reasonable attorney fees.



   (B)   (1)   When any items or objects have been removed by the
town and placed in storage by the town, as provided for herein, the items and
objects shall be sold by the town after the lapse of two days.



      (2)   If the proceeds for the sale are insufficient to pay the
cost of abatement, the owners, occupants or persons responsible for placing
the items or objects upon any public way or other public place or removal of
the items or objects shall be liable to the town for the balance of the
costs, also to be recoverable in a suit at law, including cost of litigation
and reasonable attorney fees.



      (3)   Any litter of items or objects upon any public way or
other public place in the town shall be considered abandoned and the town by
its duly authorized representative shall have the option to declare and
consider items and objects left upon any public way or other public place as
valueless and abandoned and can be disposed.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)



§ 91.06  PLACEMENT OF SIGN.



   The town, by its duly authorized representative, has the option to
place appropriate signs to alert the citizens of the town and others that
littering of items and objects upon any public way or other public places in
the town is a violation of this chapter and can result in fine.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   Enforcement of this chapter may be accomplished by the town, in any
manner prescribed herein, and in addition, any person who, by reason of
another violation of any provision of this chapter, suffers special damage to
himself or herself different from that suffered by property owners throughout
the city generally, may bring any action to enjoin or otherwise abate an
existing violation.



(Ord. 11-1991, passed 8-27-91)



CHAPTER 92:  RECREATION



Section



   92.01   Operation of businesses



   92.02   Rental of shelter houses and other facilities in Ellis Park



   92.03   Ellis Park Hours of operation



Cross-reference:



   Park and Recreation Department; Board, see § 32.01



   Park and recreational infrastructure impact fee, see § 35.03



§ 92.01  OPERATION OF BUSINESSES.



   (A)   No business for profit will be allowed to operate within the
confines of the town’s park.



   (B)   (1)   The only not-for-profit vendors allowed to conduct
business within the town park are those businesses that are being operated in
conjunction with the not-for-profit organization’s activities.  In
addition, any not-for-profit organization that desires to operate a
concession business must comport to the following rules and regulations prior
to being issued a permit from the Town Council to operate their respective
concession stands in conjunction with the activity of their organization
being enjoyed by a not- for-profit organization.



      (2)   The permit to operate a concession stand shall be
granted conditioned upon the following:



         (a)   The application for a concession permit shall be
submitted in writing to the Town Council indicating the organization’s
authority for the request and that it has been approved by the organization
requesting the permit.



         (b)   The application shall show those parties that are
responsible for the operation of the particular concession business.



         (c)   The not-for-profit organization shall submit a
schedule of times they intend to operate their concession business within the
town’s park.



         (d)   The organization and its principal sponsors or
officers will execute an indemnity agreement holding the town harmless from
any liability caused by the operation of the not-for-profit concession
business.  The hold harmless agreement must be signed on behalf of the
organization and individually by its sponsors or officers.



         (e)   The concession business shall be the sole
responsibility of the not-for-profit organization operating the same
including the necessity of obtaining any and all food permits from the county
and state, retail sales permit or any other license necessary to legally
operate.



         (f)   The town is not endorsing the quality or safety of
the not-for-profit concession business, but rather is disavowing any
responsibility for the organizations’ businesses.  However, the town
retains the right to cancel a permit to operate a not- for-profit concession
business at any time without notice to the organization or its officers or
sponsors. Any party seeking a right to operate a not-for-profit concession
business is specifically waiving the right to any notice of hearing or
hearing on cancellation of its permit to operate within the Ellis Park.



         (g)   The right to operate a not-for-profit business
concession in conjunction with the use of the facilities in the Ellis Park is
the sole and absolute responsibility of the organization operating the
business the same as any other citizen using the Ellis Park with the
exception that the Town Council retains the right to require not-for-profit
organizations to respect the park, its citizens, and the right of others to
enjoy the facilities in the park of the town.



(Ord. 7-1982, passed 9-7-82)



   (C)   (1)   Alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed or
distributed in the Blanton House and on the grounds of the Blanton House in
accordance with the Alcohol Policy for the Blanton House adopted by the Park
Board on June 12, 2001.  If the Park Board discontinues the policy it
adopted on June 12, 2001 or if it changes the policy to substantially reduce
the level of restrictions on the use of alcohol at this location, the
prohibition against the sale, consumption and distribution of alcoholic
beverages shall again be applicable to that park property.



      (2)   The prohibition against for-profit businesses operating
within the confines of the town parks shall not prohibit for profit catering
businesses from providing services for functions held at the Blanton House.



   (D)   Alcoholic beverages are prohibited in Ellis Park.



(Ord. 15-2001, passed 7-16-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.02  RENTAL OF SHELTER HOUSES AND OTHER FACILITIES IN ELLIS PARK.



   (A)   No reservations for shelter houses can be made before January
l of any year.



   (B)   Reservations for shelter houses cannot be made on a standing
basis from year to year.



   (C)   (1)   Persons who reside outside the town corporate limits
cannot reserve a shelter house more than two weeks in advance.



      (2)   Town residents may reserve any time between January l
through March 1.



      (3)   After March 1, park facilities will be rented on a
first-come, first-serve basis.



   (D)   Reservations for shelter houses must be made in person at the
Town Hall and full payment made at the time of the reservation.



   (E)   (1)   Priority for shelter house reservations is:



         (a)   Residents of the town; then



         (b)   All others in order of request.



      (2)   However, reservations cannot be “bumped” if made in
proper manner.



   (F)   Shelter house reservation fees are as set out in § 35.02.



   (G)   (1)   Organizations must follow the above set out
reservations for the rental of the shelter house in Ellis Park.



      (2)   Those organizations pre-imminently considered town
organizations (such as Tri Kappa, Optimist Club, Rotary, Little League and
the like) will pay the same fee and have the same rights for reservations as
any town resident would have; and organizations based outside the town will
be required to pay the same fees and will have the same rights and
reservations as set out above for non-town residents.



      (3)   (a)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town will provide
written authorization when a shelter house has been reserved in the period
that the reservation is to be in full force and effect.



         (b)   The written authorization of reservation issued by
the Clerk-Treasurer of the town or his or her duly authorized representatives
shall be displayed at the shelter house on the day of the reservation.



(Ord. 11-1983, passed 12-27-83; Am. Ord. 14-1999, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord.
15-2003, passed 12-15-03)



§ 92.03  ELLIS PARK HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Park hours.  Park hours of operation will be posted at the
entrances of Ellis Park as established by the Danville Park and Recreation
Board.



   (B)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any vehicles, motorized or otherwise, left unattended in
the park during the “closed period” or after 11 p.m. shall be towed to a
storage or impound area at the owner’s expense.



      (2)   Any persons or entities or their vehicles in the park
after the designated closed period, as aforesaid, shall be guilty of an
infraction and can be prosecuted under the criminal statute of the state as a
trespasser or can be found guilty of an infraction and upon conviction
thereof to be fined in an amount up to and including either the statutory
amount provided for trespassing as a violation of the Criminal Code of the
state or, if prosecuted under this section as an infraction, to be fined.



      (3)   Those persons, vehicles and the like which are in the
park on official business and with due authorization from town officials are
not included in the above restrictions and penalties.



(Ord. 12-1983, passed 12-27-83)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 93:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Maintenance of nuisances



   93.03   Building nuisances



   93.04   Leaving unused refrigerators and the like



   93.05   Failure to maintain premises



   93.06   Environmental nuisances



   93.07   Grass clippings, tree limbs and the like



   93.08   Abatement by town



   93.09   Preparation and mailing of notices



Outdoor Burning



   93.20   Application



   93.21   Exceptions



   93.22   Enforcement



Noise Regulations



   93.35   Definitions



   93.36   Octave bank breakdowns



   93.37   Noise generally prohibited



   93.38   Operation of audio equipment and the like



   93.39   Yelling, shouting and the like



   93.40   Animals



   93.41   Excessive noise levels



   93.42   Audible signaling devices



   93.43   Horns; warning devices



   93.44   Screeching of tires



   93.45   Quantitative limits on motor vehicles



   93.46   Exemptions and permits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE.  Accumulation of waste, refuse, trash and
other deleterious substances on the premises of private residences,
commercial institutions and in the streets and alleys of the boundaries of
the town.



   GARBAGE.  All waste, animal or vegetable, such as, but not limited to
waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery stores, butcher
shops, restaurants, cafés, hotels, rooming houses and boarding houses and
all other deleterious substances.



   IMPROVEMENTS.



      (1)   Any structure, residential or otherwise, constructed on
real estate located in the boundaries of the town.



      (2)   Whether the appurtenant real estate is occupied or
unoccupied.



   INSPECTIONS.  The Superintendent of Public Works, any authorized town
police officer and/or the Town Manager shall make, or cause to be made,
inspections at regular intervals in the town to determine that refuse,
garbage and trash are being properly stored, collected and removed.



   REFUSE.  Waste, rubbish, garbage, trash or any other material of any
kind that has been discarded, rejected, cast aside or thrown away as
worthless, except body waste.



   TRASH.  Rubbish, such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans,
paper, boxes, glass, wood, shrubs, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings and
similar matter.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



§ 93.02  MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCES.



   Any person, company, corporation or entity shall not violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter as follows.  Maintaining a common nuisance is
making, using or operating any building, vehicle, structure, receptacle,
yard, lot or premises so as to cause a nuisance or be dangerous or
detrimental to public health and safety.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



§ 93.03  BUILDING NUISANCES.



   A building or place is a nuisance if it is perilous to life or property
by reason of its construction or age; the condition, kind or quantity of its
contents; the building’s use or the use of its contents; the overcrowding
at any time of persons therein or overloading of its floors; deficiencies in
its fire alarm, prevention or arresting equipment; conditions of its
construction or use that are likely to cause fire; conditions that would
hamper the Fire Department; the weakened condition of walls, floors or roof
so that it is likely to collapse, the condition of water, plumbing and
sanitary systems; or the overcrowding of sleeping rooms and other moral
conditions so as to encourage juvenile delinquency or other offenses
affecting the morals of any person.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



§ 93.04  LEAVING UNUSED REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to leave refrigerators, freezers and the like
unless the door is locked and key removed or all catches and locks on doors
are rendered completely inoperable or the door is removed.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.05  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PREMISES.



   It is a violation to:



   (A)   Allow the accumulation of litter, waste, boxes, lumber, metal,
disused or inoperable motor vehicles, appliances, furniture and the like; or



   (B)   Allow a rank growth of grass, weeds or other vegetation to
become unsightly, unsanitary, obnoxious, a fire hazard or a blight to the
senses.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.06  ENVIRONMENTAL NUISANCES.



   The following shall be environmental nuisances:



   (A)   Vegetation on private or governmental property that is
abandoned, neglected, disregarded or not cut and which has attained height of
12 inches;



   (B)   Vegetation, trees or woody growth on private property that
interferes with public safety or lawful use of governmental property; and/or



   (C)   Property that has been allowed to become a health or safety
hazard or which has accumulated litter or waste products.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



§ 93.07  GRASS CLIPPINGS, TREE LIMBS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall discharge or permit the discharge of
grass clippings, tree limbs or other vegetation upon any public street or
alley in the town.



      (2)   The grass clippings, tree limbs or vegetation which may
be so discharged shall be immediately removed by the person causing or
permitting the discharge.



   (B)   (1)   Since grass clippings, tree limbs and vegetation are
left unremoved for more than one day on any town street might cause clogging
of the town’s sewer system, the grass clippings shall be deemed to be
abandoned.  The town employees are hereby empowered to pick up the abandoned
grass clippings, tree limbs and other vegetation and the cost shall be paid
by the owner of the property.



      (2)   The cost for removing of grass clippings, tree limbs and
other vegetation shall be based on the time consumed by the pick-up crew, the
cost of disposal and expense of enforcement of this subchapter, including,
but not limited to reasonable attorney fees for the necessity thereof.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.08  ABATEMENT BY TOWN.



   (A)   (1)   In the event of a failure, refusal or neglect of the
owner or occupant of any premises or property because the above set out
nuisances to be removed are abated in the manner and within the time provided
herein, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works, any
authorized law enforcement officer of the town or the Town Manager to cause
the weeds, brush, rubbish, garbage, refuse, trash or other unsanitary matter
or condition constituting a nuisance to be promptly and summarily abated in a
reasonable and prudent manner at the expense of the town.



      (2)   The Town Manager of the town shall compile the cost of
the work done and the improvements made in abating the nuisance and shall
charge the same against the owner of the premises.



      (3)   It is hereby provided that the general overhead of
administration expenses of inspection, locating the owner or occupant,
issuing notices, reinspection and ordering work done, together with all the
necessary instance of same, shall require that the Town Manager figure the
cost at the cost of labor to the town and the minimum charge is hereby
established and declared to be an expense of the work and improvement.



      (4)   Notwithstanding, therefore, any tabulation of recorded
cost, minimum charge of $250 shall be assessed against each lot so improved
under the terms of this section, that set sum of $250 is hereby expressly
stated to be a minimum charge only, and shall have no application if the
tabulated cost of work done shall exceed the minimum charge.



      (5)   (a)   The Town Manager, after compiling the cost of
the work and after charging the same against the owner or occupant of the
premises, shall certify a statement of the expenses to the Clerk- Treasurer,
who shall file the same with the County Clerk.



         (b)   Upon filing the statement with the County Clerk,
the town shall have a lien upon the land described therein and upon which the
improvements have been made, second only to real estate tax liens and liens
for street improvements, to secure the expenditures so made, and 10% interest
on the amount from the date of the payment.



      (6)   For any expenditure and interest, as aforesaid, suit may
be instituted by the Town Attorney or the prosecuting attorney for the county
and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the town; and the statement
so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof
of the amount expended for any work or improvements.



      (7)   On payment of the full charges assessed against any
property, pursuant to the procedure herein above set forth, the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall be authorized to execute for and on behalf
of the town a written release of the lien heretofore mentioned.



      (8)   The written release to be on a form prepared and
approved by the Town Attorney.



   (B)   The town shall have the right to award any quantity of work
authorized herein to a general contractor whose bid shall be accepted by the
town’s counsel as the lowest and best secured bid for the doing work herein
mentioned during a stipulated time not to exceed one year.



   (C)   (1)   In addition to the remedies described herein and
cumulative thereof, if it shall be brought to the attention of the Town
Council and it shall be determined that the nuisance or nuisances are likely
to have an immediate adverse affect on the public health, comfort or safety
of the citizens of the town then and in that event, the Town Council may, by
appropriate resolution or motion, at a public meeting; order the nuisance or
nuisances summarily abated by the town, in a reasonably prudent manner to be
enforced by applying to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant an
injunction against the violator of this subchapter.



      (2)   Citizens of the town shall likewise have a right, under
this subchapter, to petition a court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction to abate any common nuisance herein above described.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



§ 93.09  PREPARATION AND MAILING OF NOTICES.



   (A)   All notices herein and all statements, evidence and cost to
the town shall be forwarded to the owner or occupant of the premises.



   (B)   For purposes of an address, the Clerk- Treasurer can utilize
the current given legal address for real estate tax purposes set out in the
County Auditor’s office.



(Ord. 7-1994, passed 3-21-94)



OUTDOOR BURNING



§ 93.20  APPLICATION.



   All outdoor burning of any material by residential persons is banned
within the municipal town limits, except as provided by 326 I.A.C. 4-1-3 or
326 I.A.C. 4-1-4.



(Ord. 5-1991, passed 3-18-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.21  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted subject to the
limitations found below in division (B)(2) below:



      (1)   Fires used for celebrating Twelfth Night Ceremonies;



      (2)   Fires used for celebrating school pep rallies;



      (3)   Fires used for celebrating scouting activities;



      (4)   Fires used for recreational and cooking purposes, such
as camp fires;



      (5)   Residential burning where residence contains four or
fewer units;  (Burning shall be in a non-combustible container sufficiently
vented to induce adequate primary combustion air with enclosed sides, a
bottom and a mesh covering with opening no larger than  inch square. 
Burning is prohibited in apartment complexes and mobile home parks.)



      (6)   Farm burning and burning by the Department of Natural
Resources as allowed by 326 I.A.C. 4-1-3; and



      (7)   Burning with prior receipt of a variance application and
approval of the State Air Pollution Control Board or its designated agent, as
allowed by 326 I.A.C. 4-1-1.



   (B)   All permitted type of fires shall be subject to the following.



      (1)   Only untreated wood products shall be burned unless
otherwise stated.



      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely
extinguished.



      (3)   (a)   If fires create an air pollution problem, a
nuisance, a health hazard or a fire hazard, they shall be extinguished.



         (b)   A nuisance shall be defined so as to include a
complaint regarding the burning from any downwind property owner or occupant.



      (4)   All residential burning shall occur between the hours of
9 a.m. and 6 p.m., during which times the fires may be replenished, but only
in a manner that all of the burning material is consumed by 6 p.m.



      (5)   No burning shall be conducted unless the wind is at
least five mph and no more than 15 mph.



      (6)   No burning shall be conducted on property owned by
another party, including publically- owned streets, roads and highways.



      (7)   No burning shall be conducted within 100 feet of a
structure owned by another party.



      (8)   No burning shall be conducted within 100 feet of a power
line.



(Ord. 5-1991, passed 3-18-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.22  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any persons convicted of violation of this subchapter shall be
fined by a court of competent jurisdiction, plus cost for each violation.



   (B)   The Fire Department shall extinguish every fire that is in
violation of this subchapter in the town.



   (C)   Any persons convicted of rekindling a fire extinguished by the
Fire Department shall be considered as a separate offense and, upon
conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of rekindling a fire
extinguished by the Fire Department, the fine shall be in an amount as set by
the Council, plus costs for each violation.



(Ord. 5-1991, passed 3-18-91)



NOISE REGULATIONS



§ 93.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.  The loudness of a sound measured through a
filtering devise intended to simulate human hearing.  The level is
designated DB(A) or DBA.



   COMMERCIAL ZONE.  Zones designated as general business or commercial
use as established in the Zoning Ordinance for the town.



   DECIBEL or DB.  A unit for measuring the sound pressure level of a
sound.



   FREQUENCY.  An objective way to describe the pitch of a sound.



   HERTZ or HZ.  A unit for measuring the frequency of a sound, sometimes
called CYCLES PER SECOND.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONE.  Zones designated as industrial use as established in
the Zoning Ordinance for the town.



   LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE.



      (1)   Any motorized vehicle with gross vehicular weight less
than 8,000 pounds, including automobiles, vans, motorcycles, motor-driven
cycles, motor scooters, dune buggies, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles,
go-karts, minibikes, trail bikes and light trucks.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicles heavier than 8,000 pounds are
currently regulated by the ICC.



         (b)   The regulations are pre-emptive.



      (3)   The regulations may be lifted in the near future.  If
they are, this subchapter will be amended to include an enforcement procedure
for trucks that local governments can use.



   MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEM.  Any exhaust system in which the original
noise abatement devices have been removed, altered or replaced to produce
more noise.



   NOISE.  Any unwanted sound.



   OCTAVE BANK.  A way to divide the entire frequency range of sound into
sections for more accurate measurements.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PLAINLY AUDIBLE.  Any noise for which the information content is
unambiguously communicated to the listener, including understandable spoken
speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised (agitated) or normal or
comprehensible musical rhythms.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONES.  Zones designated residential, R-1, R-2 and R-3, as
established in the Zoning Ordinance for the town.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument designed to measure sound pressure
levels.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  An objective way to describe the loudness of a
sound; 20 times the logarithm (Base 10) of the ratio of the measured sound
pressure to a reference pressure of 20 micropascals, the SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL
is expressed in decibels (DB):



   SPL = 20 Log10   SOUND PRESS A
            SOUND PRESSURE B



      (1)   SOUND PRESSURE A.  Measured sound pressure.



      (2)   SOUND PRESSURE B.  Measured sound pressure; 20
Micropascals.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)



§ 93.36  OCTAVE BANK BREAKDOWNS.



   The octave-bank breakdowns in the DBA limits used in this subchapter
shall be:



   (A)   For a residential zone:  (55 DBA).



 

Octave-Band Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (nB)




31.5
 
72


63
 
71


125
 
65


250
 
57


500
 
51


1,000
 
45


2,000
 
39


4,000
 
34


8,000
 
32




 



   (B)   For a commercial zone:  (64 DBA).



 

Octave-Bank Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (nB)




31.5
 
79


63
 
78


125
 
73


250
 
67


500
 
61


1,000
 
55


2,000
 
50


4,000
 
46


8,000
 
43




 



   (C)   For an industrial zone:  (66 DBA).



 

Octave-Band Center Frequency (HZ)
 
Maximum Boundary SPL (nB)




31.5
 
80


63
 
79


125
 
74


250
 
69


500
 
63


1,000
 
57


2,000
 
52


4,000
 
48


8,000
 
45




 



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)



§ 93.37  NOISE GENERALLY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others, within the city.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.38  OPERATION OF AUDIO EQUIPMENT AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated,
any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument or other machine
or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or
device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   The operation of any set, instrument, audio equipment, machine
or device between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. in a manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.



   (C)   Playing instruments, loud speakers, amplifiers and the like on
public street to attract attention or advertise, thereby disturbing others,
shall be unlawful.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.39  YELLING, SHOUTING AND THE LIKE.



   Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets,
particularly between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m., or at any time or place
so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office, or in any dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.40  ANIMALS.



   Harboring or keeping any animal which, by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall disturb or annoy any reasonable person nearby shall be
unlawful.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.41  EXCESSIVE NOISE LEVELS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the sound:



      (1)   Pressure level to exceed the limits listed below at any
point on the boundary of the property where the person is located.



         (a)   If the person is located within an R-1, R-2 and
R-3 residential zone:  55 DBA between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.



         (b)   If the person is located within a GB or C
commercial zone:  64 DBA at all times.



         (c)   If the person is located within an I or NH
industrial zone:  66 DBA at all times.



      (2)   If the property boundary lies between two zones, the
lower limit shall apply regardless of the zone in which the person creating
the noise is located.



      (3)   In addition to the above, no person within a residential
or a commercial zone shall make or cause to be made any earth-shaking
vibrations perceptible without the aid of instruments beyond the property
boundary of the vibration source.  No person within an industrial zone shall
make or cause to be made any earth-shaking vibrations perceptible without the
aid of instruments beyond the zone boundary of the zone in which the
vibration source is located.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
light motor vehicle which causes excessive noise levels as a result of a
defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of an unnecessary rapid
acceleration, deceleration, revving or tire squeal.



      (2)   At the request of the operator of the light motor
vehicle, the officer can administer a stationary motor vehicle noise test as
outlined in the Code of Recommended Practices on file with the Town
Clerk-Treasurer.



      (3)   The stationary motor vehicle noise test can provide
information as to the extent of defectiveness of the exhaust system or as to
whether excessive noise levels were caused by improper operation of the light
motor vehicles.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.42  AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any horn or other
audible signaling device on any motor vehicle, except in an emergency or when
required by law.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.43  HORNS; WARNING DEVICES.



   The sounding of any horn or other warning device on any automobile or
other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger
warning, the creating by means of any warning device of any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound; the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; and the use of the warning device when traffic
for any reason is held up shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.44  SCREECHING OF TIRES.



   The operation of any motor vehicle in a way as to cause the tires
thereof to screech, except where the same is necessary caused in an emergency
in an attempt by the operator to avoid an accident or the causing of damage
or injury shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.45  QUANTITATIVE LIMITS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the
sound pressure level of the noise emitted during the operation of a light
motor vehicle to exceed 80 DBA in speed zones of 40 mph or less within the
corporate limits of the town.



      (2)   The sound pressure level measurement shall be made at a
distance of not less than 15 feet from the edge of the lane of travel of the
violator.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a light motor
vehicle which causes excessive noise as a result of a defective or modified
exhaust system or as a result of any unnecessary rapid acceleration, de-
acceleration, engine revving or tire squealing.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.46  EXEMPTIONS AND PERMITS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the
emission of sound for the purpose of alerting person to the existence of an
emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of work to prevent or
alleviate physical or property damage threatened or caused by a public
calamity or other emergency.



   (B)   The Town Council shall have the authority to issue permits for:



      (1)   Holidays, celebrations, concerts, parades or other
special events, public or personal;



      (2)   Persons who demonstrate that bringing the source of
sound or activity for which the permit is sought into compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on
the applicant, the community or other persons and that the adverse impact on
the health, safety and welfare of persons affected by the permit has been
outweighed by the hardship.  Permits may contain any conditions, including a
time limit, that are necessary to limit the adverse impact of the activity.



   (C)   Noncompliance with any condition of the permit shall terminate
and subject the person holding it to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   The Town Council may issue guidelines defining the procedure
to be following in applying for a permit and the specific criteria to be
considered in deciding whether to issue a permit.



(Ord. 4-1994, passed 2-7-94)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS



Section



Construction, Reconstruction or Alteration



   94.01   Supervision



   94.02   Permit required; application; fee



   94.03   Duration of permit; emergency repair



   94.04   Specifications



   94.05   Responsibility for maintenance



   94.06   Completion notice



   94.07   Marking off excavations and the like; safety



   94.08   Violation assessment schedule



   94.09   Compliance; bond



   94.10   Performance bond; failure to post



   94.11   Enforcement



   94.12   Waivers



Driveway Regulations



   94.20   Definitions



   94.21   Driveway permit application and review



   94.22   Specifications for residential districts



   94.23   Specifications for commercial districts



   94.24   Specifications for industrial districts



   94.25   Variances



CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION OR ALTERATION



§ 94.01  SUPERVISION.



   All maintenance, repair, alteration, cutting of, construction and
reconstruction of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and all other
public ways, shall be under the supervision of the Council of the town and/or
the Town Manager.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to cut, construct, reconstruct
or lay any pavement on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other
public way, or to repair the same, or alter the same, without having first
secured a permit therefor.



      (2)   Applications for permits shall be made to the
Clerk-Treasurer.  No permits shall be issued, except where the work will
conform to the specifications of the Town Council.



   (B)   (1)   All persons working in, on, under or over the public
right-of-way shall be required to obtain a permit from the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office of the town.  This shall include, but is not
limited to pavement, curbs, sidewalks, driveways, alleys, grass, stone or
earth.  The Street Department, Water Department, Sewer Department and Park
Department shall be exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   Application for permits, as required by this subchapter,
shall describe the location of the intended cut, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair or opening on or across any public way,
the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the person, the company or
corporation doing the actual work, and the application shall contain an
agreement that the applicant shall comply with all ordinances and laws
relating to the work to be accomplished.  Complete plans and specifications
may be requested by the Town Council through its Town Manager before the
permits are issued.



   (C)   (1)   Before any intended work is started, the applicant
shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town a permit fee of $50 for
inspection and for each street cut.



      (2)   In addition, there shall be an inspection fee in the
amount of $50 per each additional inspection and each additional street cut.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.03  DURATION OF PERMIT; EMERGENCY REPAIR.



   (A)   (1)   Work on all permits approved under the terms of this
subchapter shall commence within five days of activation of the permit and
repairs shall be completed within 30 days of commencement unless a longer
time period is requested by the applicant at the time of application.  Under
these circumstances, no applicant shall be given more than 60 days total time
to complete the repairs.



      (2)   If, after construction has commenced, it becomes evident
that the proposed work cannot be completed within the prescribed permit
period, the permit holder, upon his or her written request, which shall be
filed at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office, shall receive one 30-day extension
of time permitted to complete the required construction or repairs.



      (3)   (a)   If, during the extension period, it becomes
evident that the proposed work cannot be completed with the 30-day extension
period, the permit holder, may request an additional 30-day extension.  The
extension request shall be made in writing prior to the expiration of the
permit and must be filed at the Clerk-Treasurer’s office and shall be
directed to the attention of the Town Manager for the Town Council.  The
request shall state the reasons for the additional time needed and the
extension shall be granted at the discretion of the Town Manager.



         (b)   Time is of the essence in the filing of the
extension request and it must be filed prior to the expiration of the
existing extension permit, and if the extension is denied the violation shall
relate back to the date the existing extension permit expired.  In this
instance, where the new extension is not granted, any work performed without
the required extension being granted shall be deemed work performed without
the required permit, and shall be treated as such for the purpose of
assessing fines and penalties all relating back to the expiration date of the
first 30-day extension of the original permit.



         (c)   To avoid additional fines and penalties set out
hereunder, the applicant should obtain a new permit before proceeding with
uncompleted portions of the project.



         (d)   If the permit is allowed to expire with work
remaining to be performed and a new permit is not obtained, a claim will be
filed with the permit holder’s bonding company immediately.  Forfeiture
will be demanded after two weeks in addition a fine and penalty to cover all
costs the town may incur as a result of the expiration will be assessed to
the permit holder.  There will be a fine as set by the Council and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during, or which a
violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   In the event that it becomes necessary to make an emergency
repair which would require a permit under this subchapter at a time when the
Clerk- Treasurer’s office is not open, the applicant should pick up a
permit repair order form from the Police Department and after filling the
emergency repair order leaving same at the offices of the Police Department.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.04  SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All construction, cutting of, reconstruction, repairs or
alterations of public ways shall be made and conform with the specifications
laid down or approved from time to time by the Town Council.



   (B)   Specifications.



      (1)   Public ways; sod and grass.



         (a)   Six inches of top soil; and



         (b)   Seed with two and one-half parts perennial rye
grass and one part Kentucky blue grass seed at a rate equivalent to 110
pounds per acre.



      (2)   Sidewalks.



         (a)   To be replaced to minimum depth of four inches or
to depth of existing walk whichever is greater; and



         (b)   Four-thousand pound concrete to be used on all
sidewalk reconstruction and new construction.



      (3)   Curbs.



         (a)   To be replaced with curbs six inches wide and to
heights of existing curb with 12 inches of curb to extend below surface of
the road; and



         (b)   Four-thousand pound concrete to be used on all
curb reconstruction.



      (4)   Public streets and alleys.  The reconstruction used
shall be based upon the surface of the street or alley existing at the time
of the reconstruction.



         (a)   Concrete specifications.



            1.   Compacted granular fill to be used to within
18 inches of the final grade;



            2.   Compacted number 53 crushed stone to within
eight inches of final grade; and



            3.   Eight inches of 5,000-pound concrete to final
grade.



         (b)   Asphalt specifications.



            1.   Compacted granular fill to be used to within
22 inches of the final grade;



            2.   Fill to grade with compacted number 53
crushed stone to within 12 inches of final grade;



            3.   Twelve inches of hot asphalt compacted in
three lifts to final grade.



         (c)   Stone specifications.



            1.   Compacted granular fill to be used to within
18 inches of the final grade; and



            2.   Fill to grade with 18 inches of compacted
number 53 crushed stone.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to
maintain all cuts for a period of 60 days after completion and shall be
considered complete upon recommendation of the Town Manager or his or her
designated representative.



   (B)   (1)   There shall be no permits issued for routine work
under this subchapter affecting any street or roadway which has been
resurfaced within two years from the date of the permit application without
permission of the Town Manager or his or her delegate.



      (2)   This section shall not apply in the case of an emergency
which threatens the public safety or damage to property.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.06  COMPLETION NOTICE.



   (A)   All permit holders shall notify the town through its
Clerk-Treasurer’s office, in writing, upon completion of the work
encompassed by the permit.



   (B)   The letter shall be signed by the permit holder and sent to
the following address:



      Supt. of Public Works



      147 W. Main Street



      Danville, IN 46122



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.07  MARKING OFF EXCAVATIONS AND THE LIKE; SAFETY.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant to mark
all excavations and fence the same off if necessary for safety purposes.



   (B)   In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for the
protection and well-being of the general public from any excavations or
construction or reconstruction being done and shall properly police the same
from the general public along with providing all necessary safety markers,
barricades and lighting to provide for the safety of all forms of traffic.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.08  VIOLATION ASSESSMENT SCHEDULE.



   (A)   (1)   If a permit is not obtained and this fact is
discovered while the job is in progress, a fine as set per square foot of
disturbed surface, with a minimum of $30 shall be assessed.



      (2)   A permit is still required and its cost shall be in
addition to the fine.  The job shall be closed down until the required
permit is obtained.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any other provisions
of this subchapter shall be fined for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during, or on which a violation occurs
or continues.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.09  COMPLIANCE; BOND.



   (A)   Each public and/or private utility doing business within the
corporate limits of the town shall file with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town
a corporate surety bond in the principal sum of $10,000, as and for assurance
to the Town Council, that each of the utilities shall fully comply with the
provisions hereof regulating the maintenance, repair, cutting, construction,
reconstruction or alteration of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and
other public ways within the town.



   (B)   In the event that any utility shall fail to comply with the
provisions of division (A) above, permits are as provided for in §§ 94.01
through 94.08 shall not be issued until compliance is accomplished.



   (C)   Any person, business, corporation or other entity, other than
public or private utilities, which shall make application for a permit to
cut, construct, reconstruct or lay an pavement on any public street, alley,
curb, sidewalk or other public way, or to repair the same, or alter the same,
shall be obligated to make application and to pay the stated permit fee, as
set out in § 94.02(C) and the inspection fee of $50, as stated in §
94.02(C).  The person, business, corporation or other entity shall also be
obligated to file with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town a corporate surety
bond in the principal sum of $10,000, cash bond as assurance to the Town
Council that each of the persons, businesses, corporations or other entities
shall fully comply with the provisions hereof, as to construction,
maintenance, repair, alterations, cutting of, construction or reconstruction
of public streets and alleys within the town.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.10  PERFORMANCE BOND; FAILURE TO POST.



   (A)   In the event any person, business, corporation or other entity
shall fail to comply with the posting of the surety bond in the principal sum
of $10,000, to assure compliance herewith, permits, as are provided for
herein, shall not be issued until compliance is had.



   (B)   The permit holder will forfeit the performance bond under the
following conditions:



      (1)   The permit holder fails to complete the work within the
prescribed time and fails to acquire a new permit;



      (2)   The permit holder, after being duly notified, fails to
take remedial action within three working days and complete the repairs
within ten working days; and



      (3)   The permit holder fails to pay all charges and
assessments within 45 days.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.11  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Town Council does hereby delegate to the Town Manager the
power and authority, upon written request being made by any person, business,
corporation or other entity, to permit the issuance of a permit without the
posting of a $10,000 surety bond in the event that the Town Manager shall
determine that a sufficient cash bond can be posted to assure compliance with
§§ 94.01 through 94.08.



   (B)   The cash bond, as shall be determined and set by the Town
Manager, shall be posted with the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.  The cash
bond shall be retained by the Town Council until completion of the project by
applicant.



   (C)   (1)   The permit applicant shall replace and, at all times,
keep and leave the involved public way, public street, public alley, curb or
sidewalk or part of the same, in as good repair as it was before the permit
was issued.  After the completion of the project by applicant, but before
any of the deposit shall be returned and refunded to the permit applicant,
the town shall deduct from the deposit, any amount which is necessary to
compensate the town or any of its employees or agents, for replacing the
involved public way, public street, public alley, curb or sidewalk or part
thereof, in as good repair as the same was before the permit was issued and
the work completed by the permit applicant.



      (2)   The balance of the deposit, if any, shall thereafter be
refunded to the permit applicant.



(Ord. 2-1988, passed 2-1-88)



§ 94.12  WAIVERS.



   (A)   Upon written application by a person or entity subject to the
provisions of this subchapter, the Town Manager may, if determined that the
action is consistent with the public safety and interest, grant a waiver of
any requirement set out in this subchapter on projects or projects to be
performed by that person requesting the waiver.



   (B)   All waivers so granted shall be in writing and remain in
effect unless and until revoked in accordance with this subchapter.  All
applications for waiver shall be made directly to the Town Manager.



DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS



§ 94.20 DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISTRICT.  The zone districts as established by the Danville Zoning
Ordinance which for purposes of identifying the applicable driveway
specifications of this chapter have been grouped as follows:



      (1)   Residential Districts:



         RC1   Single Family Residential



         RE1   Single Family Residential



         R1   Single Family Residential



         R2C   Single Family Residential



         R2   Single Family Residential



         R3   Multi Family Residential



         R4   Multi Family Residential



         PUD   Planned Unit Development (Residential)



      (2)   Commercial Districts:



         LB   Local Business



         GB   General Business



         HS   Highway Service



         CB   Central Business (Primary and Secondary)



         OD   Office Development



         PUD   Planned Unit Development (Commercial)



      (3)   Industrial Districts:



         I   Industrial Development



   DRIVEWAY.  A roadway to provide access and egress primarily for the
travel of vehicles between private property and the traveled portion of a
public street, alley or other public thoroughfare.



   MODIFICATION.  Any change that would involve relocation or expansion
of an existing driveway. Reconstruction or replacement of an existing
driveway that affects the drainage culvert or pipe would also be considered a
modification.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04)



§ 94.21 DRIVEWAY PERMIT APPLICATION AND REVIEW.



   (A)   No new driveway construction shall be started nor shall any
existing driveway be subject to modification until an application for a
driveway addition or modification permit has been submitted to the town and
the town has issued a permit for the driveway to be constructed or
modified.  The requirement for a driveway addition or modification permit
under this section shall not be applicable to any planned new driveway
construction that has been subject to other town regulation and review
regarding the location of and specifications for the driveway.



   (B)   In reviewing an application to construct or modify a driveway,
the Town Planner and Public Works Superintendent shall apply AASHTO standards
of traffic safety engineering. In making a determination whether to approve a
driveway as proposed in an application, they may consider other relevant
factors including, but not limited to, the quantity or quality of traffic,
the existence of on-street parking, sight distance, adjacent land use,
development of access away from arterial streets and onto side streets,
anticipated development in the area and speed limits.  If after such review
the town approves the construction or modification of the driveway, the Town
Planner shall issue a driveway addition or modification permit.



   (C)   Any driveway so reviewed and approved shall meet the
applicable specifications of the following sections of this chapter.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 33-2004, passed 11-15-04



§ 94.22 SPECIFICATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 



   (A)   All driveways, curbs and gutters hereafter constructed shall
be of concrete or blacktop with a minimum compacted thickness of two
inches.  No driveway shall not be less than ten feet in width.  No driveway
width(s) shall exceed a combined total of one-third of the front lot width or
48 feet maximum, whichever is less, as measured at the property line. The
entire width of the opening shall be paved from the place of joining the
thoroughfare to the property line of the petitioner.  The place of joining
will be determined by the type of curb and gutter.  No curb shall be cut or
removed without prior approval of the Public Works Superintendent.  All
flares shall be curbed to a vanishing point at the street side of the
sidewalk, or if no sidewalk exists, to a point designated by the Public Works
Superintendent.



   (B)   The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work
done. The driveway shall be at the same grade as any existing sidewalk. All
new driveways shall provide for sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be constructed
of concrete unless otherwise specified by the Superintendent of Public Works.
All sidewalks shall be four feet wide with an expansion joint on each side
abutting the driveway. All sidewalks crossing a driveway shall have no more
than one-fourth inch per foot cross slope and shall be the same thickness as
the driveway to be constructed, but in no case less than five inches thick.



   (C)   No driveway shall be constructed within 40 feet of an
intersecting street, or within 30 feet of another driveway on the same
property, or less than one foot from the petitioner's property line extended.



   (D)   For lots with frontage on two streets, driveway access may
only be permitted from the minor street.



   (E)   If the petitioner contracts the driveway construction to a
contractor, the contractor must obtain approval from the town through the
issuance of a driveway construction permit.



   (F)   Drawings/sketches of the proposed driveway shall be submitted
with the driveway construction permit application and kept on file at the
Public Works Department.



   (G)   Driveways on non-curbed streets shall include piping approved
by the Public Works Superintendent with the following specifications:



      (1)   The driveway pipe shall be of a material acceptable to
the Public Works Superintendent.



      (2)   The minimum diameter is 12 inches and the length of the
pipe must be no less than three feet from the edge of the driveway on each
side.



      (3)   The driveway pipe shall be set so that the inlet end is
not so high as to block water flow in the ditch.



      (4)   The driveway pipe outlet shall no be lower than the
ditch beyond the driveway.



      (5)   Driveways with a positive slope shall install a trench
drain to divert all storm water into the driveway pipe.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 7-2008, passed 4-7-08)



§ 94.23 SPECIFICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All driveways hereafter constructed shall be of concrete and
shall be not less than 12 feet and not more than 24 feet in width, measured
at the property line, with an eight-foot radius on each side of the point of
joining with the traveled thoroughfare. The entire width of the opening shall
be paved from the place of joining the thoroughfare to the property line of
the petitioner. The place of joining will be determined by the type of curb
and gutter. No curb shall be cut or removed without prior approval of the
Public Works Superintendent. All radii shall be curbed to a vanishing point
at the street side of the sidewalk, or if no sidewalk exists, to a point
designated by the Public Works Superintendent.



   (B)   No driveway shall be constructed within 40 feet of an
intersecting street, or within 30 feet of another driveway on the same
property, or less than one foot from the petitioner's property line extended.



   (C)   The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work
done. The driveway shall be at the same grade as any existing sidewalk. All
new driveways shall provide for sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be four feet
wide with an expansion joint on each side abutting the driveway. All
sidewalks crossing a driveway shall have not more than one-fourth inch per
foot cross slope and shall be the same thickness as the driveway to be
constructed, but in no case less than five inches thick.



   (D)   If the petitioner contracts such construction to a
construction company, the contractor must obtain approval from the town
through the issuance of a driveway construction permit.



   (E)   Drawings/sketches of the proposed driveway shall be submitted
with the driveway construction permit application and kept on file at the
Public Works Department.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04)



§ 94.24 SPECIFICATIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All driveways hereafter constructed shall be of concrete and
shall be not less than 12 feet and not more than 30 feet in width, measured
at the property line. No curb shall be cut or removed without prior approval
of the Public Works Superintendent. The construction of any driveway(s) shall
not begin until a set of plans on all driveways is submitted and approved by
the Town Planner, Public Works Superintendent, and Town Engineer. Contents of
such plans shall include widths and locations of proposed driveways, type of
materials to be used and the width and type of thoroughfare to which such
driveways will be connected.



   (B)   The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work
done. The driveway shall be at the same grade as any existing sidewalk. All
new driveways shall provide for sidewalks. All sidewalks shall be four feet
wide with an expansion joint on each side abutting the driveway. All
sidewalks crossing a driveway shall have not more than one-fourth inch per
foot cross slope and shall be the same thickness as the driveway to be
constructed, but in no case less than five inches thick.



   (C)   No driveway shall be constructed within 40 feet of an
intersecting street, or within 30 feet of another driveway on the same
property, or less than one foot from the petitioner's property line extended.



   (D)   If the petitioner contracts such construction to a
construction company, the contractor must obtain approval from the town
through the issuance of a driveway construction permit.



   (E)   Drawings/sketches of the proposed driveways shall be submitted
with the driveway construction permit application and kept on file at the
Public Works Department.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04)



§ 94.25 VARIANCES.



   Variances from the requirements of §§ 94.21 though 94.24 of this
chapter may be sought by petitioning the Board of Zoning Appeals using the
procedures described in Section 18 of the Danville Zoning Ordinance. In
deciding upon such a petition, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply the
standards applicable to deciding on variances of development standards.



(Ord. 27-2004, passed 10-18-04)



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Keeping farm animals



Vicious Animals



   95.15   Definitions



   95.16   Notification of change of circumstances



   95.17   Control of vicious animals



   95.18   Exemptions



   95.19   Inquiry



   95.20   Determination of vicious animal status



   95.21   Costs of enforcement



   95.22   Burden of proof



   95.23   Inspection; right of entry



   95.24   Limitation; enforcement



   95.25   Restraints on domestic animals



   95.26   Domestic animal limits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  KEEPING FARM ANIMALS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, raise or stable
any cattle, bovine, horses, ponies, donkeys, burros, equine, swine, porcine,
sheep, goats, poultry or fowl of any kind within the town limits.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person who shall keep, harbor, raise or
stable any cattle, bovine, horses, ponies, donkeys, burros, equine, swine,
porcine, sheep, goats, poultry or fowl of any kind within the town limits to
allow their animals to run at large in the public places in the town.  The
at-large animals shall be impounded.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to picket or tie any animal in any of the
streets of the town for the purpose of grazing or feeding.



(Ord. 5-1973, passed 5-24-73)  Penalty, see § 10.99



VICIOUS ANIMALS



§ 95.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person or persons employed, contracted
for or appointed by the county or the town for the purpose of aiding in the
enforcement of this subchapter, including any officer of the Police
Department whose duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve
the enforcement of this subchapter.



   ENCLOSURE.  A fence or structure of at least six feet in height or
other structure suitable for preventing the entry of young children, and for
confining a vicious animal therein, in conjunction with other measures which
may be taken by the owner or approved by the Animal Control Officer.  An
ENCLOSURE shall be securely designed, constructed and locked so as to prevent
a vicious animal from escaping therefrom.  The ENCLOSURE shall conform to
the building codes and zoning requirements of the town.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
processing, harboring, keeping, possessing or having custody or control of a
vicious animal.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   Any one of the following:



         (a)   Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks or any other public grounds or places;



         (b)   Any animal with a propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked; (Evidence of the propensity, tendency or
disposition shall include, but not be limited to lunging at a fence in a
vicious or terrorizing manner in apparent attitude of attack when someone
walks by or by chasing any person.)



         (c)   Any animal which causes injury to or otherwise
endangers the safety of human beings or domestic animals;



         (d)   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults
or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation on
public or private property;



         (e)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part
for the purpose of fighting or any animal trained for animal fighting; or



         (f)   Any animal not licensed according to any
applicable federal law and/or any applicable state law other than I.C.
15-5-9-1.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above definition of VICIOUS ANIMAL,
no animal shall be declared vicious if:



         (a)   An injury or damage is sustained from the animal
by a person who, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime;



         (b)   Any injury or damage is sustained from the animal
by a domestic animal which at the time the injury or damage was sustained was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal at issue or was on the
property of the owner of the animal;



         (c)   The animal was protecting or defending a human
being within its immediate vicinity from an unjustified attack or assault; or



         (d)   The animal is a K-9 patrol dog or police dog owned
or kept by a law enforcement agency and is being used in the line of duty or
for law enforcement purposes.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.16  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   The owner of a vicious animal shall notify the Police
Department immediately upon becoming aware that the vicious animal is on the
loose, is unconfined or has attacked another animal or human being.



   (B)   The owner of a vicious animal shall notify the Police
Department within 24 hours if the vicious animal has died or has been sold or
given away.



   (C)   If a vicious animal has been sold or given away, the owner
shall also provide the Police Department with the name, address and telephone
number of the new owner of the vicious animal within 24 hours of the time the
action occurred.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.17  CONTROL OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   All vicious animals shall be confined in an enclosure.  It
shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain a vicious animal upon any
premises which does not have an enclosure.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal
to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of its enclosure unless
it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious
animal or to sell or give away the vicious animal, or to comply with commands
or directions of the Animal Control Officer or a Police Department officer. 
In such event, the vicious animal shall be restrained with a chain having a
minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in
length, or other appropriate device, and shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the owner of the vicious animal.  In addition, the
vicious animal shall be muzzled or otherwise restrained in a manner that will
prevent the animal from biting or otherwise inflicting injury on a person or
animal, but that will not cause injury to the vicious animal or interfere
with its vision or respiration.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.18  EXEMPTIONS.



   If an animal is ruled to be a vicious animal under and solely on
account of § 95.15, the ruling shall become null and void as of the date on
which the owner of the animal fully complies with all applicable federal
and/or state laws concerning the licensing of the animal.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.19  INQUIRY.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer is empowered to make whatever
investigation he or she deems necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter, including, but not limited to obtaining a
search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   Any person may file a complaint that a vicious animal is being
harbored within the town.  The complaint shall be filed with the Police
Department on a written form provided by the Police Department. The Animal
Control Officer shall conduct an investigation upon the receipt of a
complaint.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.20  DETERMINATION OF VICIOUS ANIMAL STATUS.



   (A)   In the event the Animal Control Officer reasonably believes
that an animal is a vicious animal, as that term is defined in this
subchapter, he or she is empowered to refer the matter to the County Circuit
or Superior Court or other court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of
determining whether or not the animal in question should be declared a
vicious animal for purposes of this subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   Pending the court hearing, the court decision and any
appeal thereof on the issue of whether an animal should be declared a vicious
animal, the Animal Control Officer is empowered to seize and impound the
animal.



      (2)   The owner of the animal shall be responsible for the
reasonable costs and expenses of the impoundment.



   (C)   Whenever the County Circuit or Superior Court or other court
of competent jurisdiction determines than an animal is a vicious animal, it
shall allow an appropriate time for the appeal of the decision and/or of any
penalty imposed by the court as a result of the decision, and, if the court
orders the animal to be destroyed, for any medical tests which may need to be
performed on the animal.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.21  COSTS OF ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   All costs associated with the enforcement of this subchapter
shall, to the maximum extent possible, be assessed to the owner of a vicious
animal in violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   The costs shall include, but not be limited to the costs of
investigating whether the animal is vicious, as well as the costs of
capturing, impounding and boarding the vicious animal.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.22  BURDEN OF PROOF.



   In any case arising under this subchapter, the burden of proof shall be
upon the owner of an animal to prove that any action by the animal was
“provoked.”



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.23  INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection of or enter
onto private property in order to enforce any of the provisions of, or
perform any duty imposed by, this subchapter, or an Animal Control Officer
has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of an animal
constitutes a public nuisance or is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to
require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or
safety, the Animal Control Officer shall, if time and circumstances permit,
first attempt to present proper credentials to the occupant of the property
on which the animal is located and request entry thereon, explaining the
reasons therefor.



   (B)   If entry is refused or cannot be obtained, or time and
circumstances do not reasonably allow the above procedures to be followed,
the Animal Control Officer shall have the power to secure lawful entry to and
inspect the property.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.24  LIMITATION; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit any
other rights or actions, criminal or civil, in law or equity.



   (B)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to in any way
limit any law enforcement officer from exercising his or her legal authority
to seize and/or destroy any animal as a public nuisance, in order to protect
person and property, or otherwise.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)



§ 95.25  RESTRAINTS ON DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   All domestic animals shall be prevented from running at large by their
owners, on property other than private property owned or lawfully occupied by
their owners, by means of a leash, chain or other appropriate physical
restraint.



(Ord. 4-2001, passed 5-7-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.26  DOMESTIC ANIMAL LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall maintain upon his or her premises such number
of household pets (animals) as will create a nuisance.



   (B)   No person shall keep or maintain upon any one premise in the
town more than four adult dogs or four adult cats. This provision shall not
apply to premises which are properly zoned and licensed as a kennel.



   (C)   Any person who lawfully owns more than four dogs or four cats
prior to the enactment of this section may retain the animals provided they
are not creating a nuisance, there is adequate waste disposal, and there is
no hazard to public safety, health, or welfare.



   (D)   Penalty. The owner of any animal found at large or violation
of any other provision of this section shall be punished by fines with
respect to each animal as follows: first offense: $25; second offense within
six months: $75; and subsequent offenses within six months: $150.



(Ord. 15-2015, passed 7-20-15)



CHAPTER 96:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Removal



   96.03   Storage



   96.04   Immediate impoundment



§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   I.C. 9-22-1-30 and 9-22-1-31 authorizes the town to enact provisions
concerning the disposition of abandoned vehicles. For the purposes of this
chapter, the term “abandoned vehicle” shall be defined as set forth by
I.C. 9-13-2-1.



§ 96.02  REMOVAL.



   Whenever any law enforcement officer finds a vehicle to be an abandoned
vehicle, he or she shall attach to it a notice to remove pursuant to I.C.
9-22-1-11. The law enforcement officer is authorized to order the removal of
any abandoned vehicle left at any place within the town which has not been
removed within the time provided by the above notice. Any vehicle removed
pursuant to this chapter may be removed by any law enforcement officer or by
a commercial towing firm. The town may enter into contracts with commercial
towing firms or with garages for necessary removal and storage services.



§ 96.03  STORAGE.



   Any vehicle removed pursuant to this chapter shall be impounded until
lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the Indiana Code. The
impounded vehicle shall be stored at a garage of the town, or in a privately
owned garage as designated by the town. Notice of the impoundment shall be
given in accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-25.



§ 96.04  IMMEDIATE IMPOUNDMENT.



   Whenever the presence of a vehicle in a public place constitutes an
immediate hazard to the public safety, any law enforcement officer may cause
the vehicle to be impounded immediately and within 24 hours shall send notice
of the impoundment by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle if known,
stating the fact that the vehicle has been impounded, the location thereof
and the right of the owner to secure possession of the vehicle upon payment
of the fees required.



CHAPTER 97:  TREES



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



Tree Advisory Committee



   97.10   Establishment, composition, compensation and operation of
Tree Advisory Committee



   97.11   Duties and responsibilities



   97.12   Jurisdiction and authority



Permitting



   97.20   Tree removal permits



   97.21   Tree planting permits



   97.22   Responsibility for trees in the public right-of-way



Maintenance and Care



   97.30   General rules for tree maintenance and care



   97.31   Trimming trees in the public right-of-way



   97.32   Placing injurious substances near trees



   97.33   Excavation



   97.34   Anchoring or attaching objects to trees



   97.35   Electrical wires and trees



   97.36   Tree topping



   97.37   Abuse



   97.38   Interference unlawful



   97.39   Tree inventory



Removal and Replacement



   97.50   Replacement of urban tree stock



   97.51   Notice of tree removal



   97.52   Appeal of tree removal



   97.53   Application to all town activities



   97.54   Tree and sidewalk improvements



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   The requirements specified herein are intended to encourage the
planting, care and preservation of trees in the public right-of-way.  The
policies and procedures contained herein are intended to establish the
responsibilities of the town and citizens towards trees in the public
right-of-way, to state a preference for specific types of trees along city
streets, to increase public awareness of the contribution of street trees to
the air quality, wildlife habitat, and aesthetics of the town, and to
establish urban forestry practice that enhances the gathering and
dissemination of information about trees, expands the number of street trees
in the town, and encourages proper maintenance techniques and accommodation
of street trees.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of clarity certain terms are defined in this
section.  Terms not defined in this section shall have meanings customarily
assigned to them.



   APPROVED STREET TREE LIST.  The list of trees approved by the town for
planting within the public right-of-way.



   COMMITTEE.  The Tree Advisory Committee established by this chapter.



   COUNCIL.  The Town Council of Danville, Indiana.



   DRIPLINE.  The width of a tree crown as measured by the lateral extent
of foliage.



   MAINTAINING. Includes trimming, care, pruning and preservation of trees.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel
of land in the town.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Property owned or controlled by the town.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, alley, boulevard, road, trail or other transportation facility that
is owned by the town or another public agency.



   STREET TREES.  Trees lying on the public right-of-way owned or
controlled by the town, including those located along roads and streets
between the pavement edge and private property line, and within any park or
other public facility.



   TOWN.  The Town of Danville.



   TREE.  A perennial woody plant with one main stem or, in clump form,
up to three main stems, which develops many branches and ordinarily grows to
a height of 20 feet or more.



   TREE LAWN.  Public property lying between the boundary of the edge of
pavement or curb and the property line, except such portion thereof as may be
covered by a sidewalk or used as a walkway.



   URBAN FOREST.  The collection of trees and shrubs located within the
town limits.



   UTILITIES.  Includes both private and public utility companies.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel
of land in the town.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 97.10  ESTABLISHMENT, COMPOSITION, COMPENSATION AND OPERATION OF TREE
ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Establishment.  There is created and established by this
chapter a Tree Advisory Committee for the Town of Danville, Indiana.



   (B)   Composition.  The Tree Advisory Committee shall consist of
three members residing within the town limits.



      (1)   Staff Project Coordinator.  One or more town staff
members shall serve as Project Coordinator and liaison to the Tree Advisory
Committee.



      (2)   Qualifications.



         (a)   The goals of this chapter will be furthered if at
least one of the three Tree Advisory Committee members possesses a degree in
forestry, horticulture, landscape architecture, or is a certified arborist or
a full-time professional in the tree care industry with a minimum of five
years experience.



         (b)   If none of the members are so qualified, then an
expert tree care consultant shall be utilized.



   (C)   Compensation.  Members of the Tree Advisory Committee shall
serve without compensation unless determined by the Town Council.



   (D)   Operation.



      (1)   The Tree Advisory Committee will select a chairperson in
January of each year.



      (2)   A majority of its members must be present to conduct
business.



      (3)   The Committee shall schedule its meetings and keep a
journal of and minutes of its proceedings.



      (4)   The Committee shall be advisory only and shall submit
its written recommendations to the Town Council for action and approval.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.11  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Committee and Staff Project Coordinator may prepare or
have made a written plan for the care, replacement, maintenance, and removal
or disposition on trees, shrubs and other existing vegetation within the
public right-of-way and on public property.



      (1)   The plan shall be presented annually to the Town Council.



      (2)   Upon its acceptance and approval, the plan shall
constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the town.



   (B)   The Committee shall develop and maintain a list of suitable
trees for planting, including the tree species, sizes and forms, to be
planted in public right-of-way and on public property for adoption by the
Town Council as the town's approved Street Tree List.



      (1)   The list shall be reviewed, updated and submitted for
approval by the Council as needed.



      (2)   The Committee shall also create a list of trees
unsuitable for planting.



   (C)   The Committee shall establish educational and informational
programs, pamphlets and literature for dissemination to the public, to assist
the public in proper protection, maintenance, removal and planting of trees
on public property.  The committee shall also from time to time make
recommendations on this topic for Town Council approval.



   (D)   The Committee shall study proposals for landscape
modifications within the public right-of-way or on public property, including
removal appeals referred to it for review by the Town Council, any
town-appointed board, town official, or member of the Tree Advisory
Committee.  The Committee shall make a recommendation for action, based on
its review findings, to the Town Council for approval.



   (E)   The Committee shall advise the Town Council as needed,
concerning amendments to this chapter or any other standards or documents
prepared by the Committee.



   (F)   The Committee shall meet at least four times annually, with no
less than one meeting held each quarter to conduct business and coordinate
the town's urban forestry program, grants and educational activities.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.12  JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   All actions or decisions taken or made by the Tree Advisory
Committee shall be subject to review by the Town Council.



      (1)   Any citizen may appeal any recommendations made by the
Committee to the Town Council.



      (2)   The Town Council shall hear the matter and make all
final decisions, and determine all final actions to be taken.



   (B)   The Committee shall have the exclusive jurisdiction and
authority to:



      (1)   Order, control and regulate the sodding, seeding and
maintenance of lawns, and maintaining, planting and removal of trees within
the limits of public streets and other public places.



      (2)   Order, control and regulate the removal of dead and
diseased trees, or portions thereof, that constitute a menace to public
safety, health and welfare wherever located in the town.



      (3)   Adopt and enforce rules, regulations and specifications
relative to division (1).



      (4)   Regulate and prescribe the terms and conditions upon
which permits for the maintaining and removal of trees shall be issued.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



PERMITTING



§ 97.20  TREE REMOVAL PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   Other than in emergency situations requiring
immediate action, no person shall trim more that one-fifth of or remove a
tree located within the public right-of-way, or employ or instruct another
person or firm to carry out such actions, without first obtaining written
permission of the  Committee and Staff Project Coordinator.



      (2)   Permits are not required for work done by departments of
the town or utilities and their agents or contractors.



   (B)   Permits shall be granted to property owners at no charge.



      (1)   The permit shall be effective for 30 days after approval
by the Staff Project Coordinator.



      (2)   The work shall be completed in the time allowed on the
permit and in a manner described therein.



      (3)   Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.



   (C)   The granting or denial of these permits by the Staff Project
Coordinator shall be made in accordance with the policies and principles set
forth in this chapter or as otherwise adopted.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.21  TREE PLANTING PERMITS.



   (A)   Citizens wishing to plant trees in the public right-of-way
shall submit to the Committee a plan indicating the location, size and
species of trees to be planted.



      (1)   This plan shall be consistent with the rules, regulation
and orders, including the Tree Planting Detail adopted by the Committee.



      (2)   The Committee shall review submitted plans and make
recommendation regarding approval of a permit to plant trees in the public
right-of-way.



   (B)   Whenever a tree is planted or set out in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the town or designated
municipal authority to remove or cause removal of the same, and the exact
cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of
assessments.



   (C)   Permits shall be granted to property owners at no charge.



      (1)   The permit shall be effective after approval by the 
Committee.



      (2)   The work shall be completed in the time allowed on the
permit and in a manner described therein.



      (3)   Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated.



   (D)   The granting or denial of these permits by the Staff Project
Coordinator shall be made in accordance with the policies and principles set
forth in this chapter or as otherwise adopted.



   (E)   Tree plantings will be done with the consent of the owner of
the property.



      (1)   The town will notify property owners by mail of tree
plantings.



      (2)   Property owners who do not wish to have a tree planted
on or adjacent to their property must respond to the town's notification
prior to plantings.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.22  RESPONSIBILITY FOR TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   (1)   The owner of property on which a public street is
located is ultimately responsible for the planting and removal of trees and
other vegetation in that public right-of-way, and for the maintenance of such
vegetation in a condition that does not pose a hazard to the public health
and safety, or inhibit passage along the public right-of-way.



      (2)   At any time such owner may be called upon by the Council
to carry out these responsibilities in accordance with the policies,
practices and procedures set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   The town, through the Committee and the Town Council, may also
engage in the planting, maintenance, protection, and where necessary, removal
of trees and other vegetation in the public right-of-way and on municipal
lands, in order to expand the urban forest by the principles and practices as
set forth in this chapter and as adopted by the Council.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



MAINTENANCE AND CARE



§ 97.30  GENERAL RULES FOR TREE MAINTENANCE AND CARE.



   (A)   The Council shall have all the right, power and authority
granted to municipalities under state law to require the owners of parcels of
land on any public street of the town to maintain and improve the tree lawn
area.  Further, the Council may, through other means or incentives,
encourage voluntary efforts to improve landscaping on the public streets.



   (B)   When working on trees within the public right-of-way and on
municipal property, priority shall be given to maintenance rather the
replacement of flawed trees. 



      (1)   Emphasis shall be placed on remedial practices such as
pruning, wound treatment and fertilization.



      (2)   Interference with signs, lights, lines of sight, walks,
structures and utilities shall first be addressed through selective pruning
of branches and roots.



   (C)   Only when the Staff Project Coordinator has determined that a
tree creates a dangerous, unsafe or hazardous condition, or poses a threat of
infestation to other trees, and that these conditions cannot adequately be
corrected through remedial measures, shall a tree within the public
right-of-way or municipal land be removed.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.31  TRIMMING OF TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Any tree or other vegetation that grows over the street or
obstructs the view of traffic control devices or traffic on a street within
the town, wherever located, shall be trimmed either by the town or by an
expert tree care company hired by the town.



   (B)   Such vegetation shall be trimmed so that there shall be clear
space of 14 feet above the surface of the curb, and in such a manner as to
not obstruct the view of any street light, sign, signal, device or
intersection.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.32  PLACING INJURIOUS SUBSTANCES NEAR TREES.



   No person shall place or keep any stone, cement, or other physical or
chemical substances around any tree within the limits of the public
right-of-way, which in any manner impedes the free entrance of water or air
to the roots of such tree or stunts its growth.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.33  EXCAVATION.



   (A)   In the event of any excavation or construction, the owner or
contractor shall place, or cause to be placed, around all trees within the
limits of any public right-of-way, such guards as will effectively prevent
injury to such trees.



   (B)   Wherever possible, such guard shall be placed no closer to the
trunk of such tree than the exterior limits of the drip line.



   (C)   Wherever possible, all building materials and debris and all
building activity shall be kept beyond the drip line limits of such trees,
and at no time shall such material or debris be permitted within three feet
of such trees.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.34  ANCHORING OR ATTACHING OBJECTS TO TREES.



   It is unlawful to fasten or attach anything to any tree located in the
public right-of-way or on town property that is likely to injure the tree. 
This includes fastening any wire, rope, chain or cable, or attaching any
nail, staple or tack to a tree for the purposes of anchoring any other
structure of object in, on or adjacent to a tree.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.35  ELECTRICAL WIRES AND TREES.



   Every person owning, installing or maintaining any wires charged with
electrical current shall, whenever possible, securely fasten such wires so
that same shall not come in contact with any tree in the public right-of-way
or on public land.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.36  TREE TOPPING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm
or town department to top a tree within the public right-of-way or on
municipal land.



   (B)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain
trees under utility wires or other obstructions where pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted form this chapter at the determination of the
Committee.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.37  ABUSE.



   No person shall intentionally damage, carve, transplant or remove any
municipal tree, or set fire to or permit any fire to burn when such fire or
the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree, including the root zone.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.38  INTERFERENCE UNLAWFUL.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall interfere with the Committee or
the town, or persons acting under their authority, while engaged in planting,
mulching, pruning otherwise maintaining, or removing any tree, shrub or plant
in any public right-of-way or public place within the town.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.39  TREE INVENTORY.



   The town, through the Committee and Staff Project Coordinator, shall
compile and maintain an inventory of all trees and tree lawns within the
public streets.



   (A)   This inventory should record the location, species, condition,
size and, if known, the planting and maintenance history of these trees.



   (B)   This inventory should be kept up-to-date, with updates
occurring annually at a minimum annually.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT



§ 97.50  REPLACEMENT OF URBAN TREE STOCK.



   (A)   (1)   It is the policy of the town to maintain and expand
tree cover in the town as a whole, and in individual streets and
neighborhoods. 



      (2)   The Town shall plant at least 20% more trees than it
removes in order to maintain a planting to removal ratio of at least 1.2 to 1.



   (B)   (1)   Once a tree has been removed, it shall be replaced,
wherever possible at or near its original location, as soon as the planting
season permits. 



      (2)   To facilitate tree replacement, stumps should be removed
promptly and thoroughly once a tree has been removed.



   (C)   In order to encourage large tree canopies and maximum overall
foliage, priority on planting trees shall be given to tall, shade-producing
species as listed in the Approved Street Tree List.



      (1)   Smaller trees and ornamental trees should only be used
in areas in which space constraints prevent the planting of larger shade
trees.



      (2)   Wherever possible, native species are to be preferred.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.51  NOTICE OF TREE REMOVAL.



   (A)   While no notice of any kind shall be necessary where the town
determines a tree should be removed because its current condition of location
constitutes a hazard, in all other cases the Town shall give notice to the
general public of proposed tree removal, through a clear visual
identification of targeted trees, at least two weeks in advance of the
proposed removal.



   (B)   Except where the property owner has requested a permit, the
town shall also give written notice of its intention to remove a tree in the
public right-of-way to the underlying property owner, at least two weeks in
advance of the proposed removal, and reasons why it will be removed, date of
removal, and the procedures to obtain further information or to file an
appeal.



   (C)   In absence of an emergency, utilities and their agents and
contractors should notify the town of their intent to remove trees within the
public right-of-way or on public property.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.52  APPEAL OF TREE REMOVAL.



   (A)   In cases where a notice of intent to remove a tree is
required, any town resident or owner of property within the town may appeal
the decision to allow or disallow the removal of a tree by the town or its
agents or contractors.



   (B)   In addition, any applicant for a removal permit may appeal a
denial of the permit to the  Committee.



   (C)   Appeals shall be made to the  Committee and shall be made in
sufficient time for the Committee to decide these matters in the normal
course of its business, within 30 days of the notice of tree removal or
denial of permit.



      (1)   Decisions of the Committee shall take into consideration
the principles and policies set forth in this chapter or otherwise adopted by
the Committee.



      (2)   Persons wishing to appeal an adverse decision by the
Committee may do so by filing with the Clerk-Treasurer a notice of appeal
within 30 days of the adverse decision.



   (D)   The Town Council shall conduct a hearing within 60 days of the
filing of the appeal.



      (1)   The Town Council shall enter written findings.



      (2)   Persons wishing to appeal the decision of the Town
Council may do so by filing with a court of competent jurisdiction in
Hendricks County a writ of certiorari within 30 days of the decision of the
Town Council.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.53  APPLICATION TO ALL TOWN ACTIVITIES.



   The principles and policies set forth in this chapter should guide the
activities of all town departments, including streets, utilities, sanitation
and parks.  Essential activities by any town department shall be done so as
to minimize damage to trees in the public right-of-way and on municipal
property.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 97.54  TREES AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Damage to sidewalks is in itself not sufficient reason to
remove a tree, if present damage can be adequately corrected and future
damage can be averted by selective pruning of roots, installation of tree
guards, or by sidewalk repair, replacement or realignment.



   (B)   Nor is convenience and efficiency during street or sidewalk
repair or placement sufficient reason in itself for tree removal.



   (C)   Wherever possible, the installation, repair and replacement of
sidewalks shall accommodate trees and shall be done in a manner that prevents
damage to their roots.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)  Penalty. see § 97.99



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The Council and its agents shall have authority to do all acts
to enforce this chapter, including issuing citations.



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is
subject to fines as follows:



 


Offense

 

Fine





Trimming
 
$100


Planting
 
$100


Removing
 
$500


Damaging
 
$100


Placing injurious substance on or near tree
 
$50


Anchoring or attaching objects to tree
 
$50


Other offenses
 
$50




 



   (C)   Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.



   (D)   In addition to any fine imposed, any person whose violation of
this chapter results in damage to trees may be liable for the cost of these
damages, up to $3,000 for each tree.



(Ord. 8-2009, passed 6-15-09)



CHAPTER 98:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   98.01   Policy statement



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Unlawful practice



   98.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   98.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   98.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service



   98.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   98.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   98.09   Exemptions



   98.10   Administrative enforcement



§ 98.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits, as provided for
under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the federal Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON.  Includes any person who under I.C. 22-9.5-2-2:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   COMMISSION.  The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.  (For a similar definition, see I.C. 22-9.5-2-3.)



   COMPLAINANT.  A person, including the Commission, who files a
complaint under I.C. 22-9.5-6.  (For a similar definition, see I.C.
22-9.5-2-4.)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE.  An act that is unlawful under §§
98.04, 98.05, 98.06, 98.07 or 98.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING. Any building or structure, or part of a building or
structure, that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families; or any vacant land that is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or
part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended
for occupancy as a residence by one or more families.  (For a similar
definition, see I.C. 22-9.5-2-8.)



   FAMILIAL STATUS.  One or more individuals, who have not attained the
age of 18 years, domiciled with a parent or another person having legal
custody of such individual, or the written permission of such parent or other
person.  The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the
age of 18 years.



   FAMILY.  Includes a single individual, with the status of such family
being further defined above under FAMILIAL STATUS of this section.  (For a
similar definition, see I.C. 22-9.5-2-9.)



   HANDICAP.  With respect to a person, means:



      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more of such person’s major life activities; or



      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or



      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment; or



      (4)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or



      (5)   Any other impairment defined under state law.



   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use of, or
addictions to, a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21
of the United States Code; nor does the term handicap include an individual
solely because that individual is a transvestite.



   PERSON.  Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under Title 11 of the United States Code, receivers and
fiduciaries.  (For a similar definition, see I.C. 22-9.5-2-11.)



   TO RENT.  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to
grant for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the
occupant.  (For a similar definition, see I.C. 22-9.5-2-13.)



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, § 98.09 of
this chapter and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in
the sale or rental of housing set forth I.C.22-9.5-5-1 and in § 98.04 of
this chapter shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) and I.C.
22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section,
nothing in § 98.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner,
where the private individual owner does not own more than three such
single-family houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such
single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house
at the time of sale or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any
24-month period.  The private individual owner may not own any interest in,
nor have owned or reserved on his behalf, title to or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family houses at any one time.  The sale or rental of any such
single-family house shall be excepted from application of this section only
if such house is sold or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman,
or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any
employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 98.04(C) of this
chapter, but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title; or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters,
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as the owner’s residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B), a person shall be deemed to
be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or



      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



      (3)    He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 98.03 and except as exempted by §§ 98.03(B)
and 98.09, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale
or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation
or discrimination.



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in fact so
available.



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That person; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (3)   For purposes of this division, DISCRIMINATION includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person, if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case
of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               b.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirement Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard for
Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for physically
handicapped people (commonly cited as “AANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy
the requirements of division (3)c.3.



      (5)   Nothing in this division requires that a dwelling be
made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health or safety of other individuals, or whose tenancy would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance;



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or
familial status.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or
participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 98.03, 98.04, 98.05 or 98.06 of this chapter.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force, willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with any of the following, shall be fined
according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or
both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of
years or for life:



   (A)   Any person because of his race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin, and because he or she is or
has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,  contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A); or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate; or



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A); or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C)of this
section.



   (B)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin.



      (2)   Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private
club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary
purpose or purposes provides lodgings it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to
its members or from giving preference to its members.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status
shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.



      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means
housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that
the Secretary of the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the state civil rights commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program) or;



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62
years of age or older; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person per unit who is 55 years of age or older.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



§ 98.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter, and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner, as
set forth in division (B) hereof, shall be vested in the chief elected
official of the town.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town, 
because of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under the
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
articles of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C 22-9.5-6,
and the chief elected official of the town shall refer all such complaints to
the Commission, as provided for under division (A) of this section, to the
Commission for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief
as provided for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall
administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter, and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the
Commission to further such purposes.



   (D)   The chief elected official of the town, or the chief elected
official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.



(Ord. 9-2009, passed 6-15-09)



CHAPTER 99:  BROADBAND CABLE SYSTEM



Section



   99.01   Purpose



   99.02   Definitions



   99.03   Prohibited acts



   99.04   Territorial application



   99.05   Jurisdiction



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit any activity that results in
damage to the facilities or interference with the proper functioning of the
facilities and to provide for fines for violation of this chapter and
restitution for damage to the facilities.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)



§ 99.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DAMAGE. Any loss, injury or deterioration to any of the facilities
caused by person, firm or corporation or any unauthorized access (physical or
electronic) to the facilities.



   FACILITIES.  The town’s broadband cable and internet system and
related facilities that provide voice, video, and data connectivity (wired
and wireless); including, but not limited to, all computers, cables
(including, without limitation, fiber optic and coaxial cables), ducts,
conduit, routers, switches, power supplies and systems, remote
site-monitoring and control hardware and software, climate-controlled
enclosures, cabinets, shelters, and towers and other associated equipment and
all associated appurtenances to all of the foregoing.



   INTERFERENCE. Any loss, injury or deterioration of the quality of the
bandwidth, throughput or signal (optical, radio frequency, or otherwise)
produced by the facilities.



   TOWN. The Town of Danville, Hendricks County, Indiana.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)



§ 99.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall do any act that results in damage
to the facilities or interference with the proper functioning of the
facilities.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to the entire Danville broadband cable and
internet system and its related facilities both inside and outside the
corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)



§ 99.05  JURISDICTION.



   The Circuit and Superior Courts of Hendricks County, Indian shall have
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this chapter and the determination of any
and all penalties and damages.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates this chapter by
interfering with the town’s broadband cable system or its related
facilities shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense. Each day that
the interference continues shall constitute a separate offense subjecting the
offending person, firm or corporation to an additional $500 fine for each day.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation that damages the facilities
shall be fined $2,500. Each day that the facilities remain unrepaired shall
constitute a separate violation and will subject the offending person, firm
or corporation responsible to an additional $2,500 fine for each day.



   (C)   In addition to the fines set forth in divisions (A) and (B)
above, any person, firm or corporation that damages the facilities or
interferes with the proper functioning of the facilities shall be responsible
for payment for all repairs to the facilities that were caused by their
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 6-2010, passed 6-7-10)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   DIRECT SELLERS





         111.   TAXICABS





         112.   FIREWORKS AND HAZARDOUS OR COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL





         113.   FOR-PROFIT PARTIES




CHAPTER 110:  DIRECT SELLERS



Section



   110.01   Registration required



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   Exemptions



   110.04   Registration



   110.05   Additional information



   110.06   License



   110.07   Identification



   110.08   Investigation



   110.09   Appeal



   110.10   Regulations



   110.11   Disclosure requirements



   110.12   Records



   110.13   Revocation of registration



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales
within the town without being registered for that purpose as provided herein.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation or
one purporting to be such.



   DIRECT SELLER. Any individual who, for himself or herself, or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods or takes sale orders for
the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the



permanent business place or residence of said individual, partnership,
association or corporation, and shall include but not be limited to,
peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes
donations required by the direct seller for the retention of goods by a donor
or prospective customer.



   GOODS. Includes personal property of any kind and shall include GOODS
provided incidental to services offered or sold.



   PERMANENT MERCHANT. A direct seller who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this chapter to said merchants, has
continuously operated an established place of business in this town or has
continuously resided in this town and now does business from his or her
residence.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or
bakery goods to regular customers on established routes;



   (B)   Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;



   (C)   Any person selling agricultural products which such person has
grown or produced in the town and is being sold by a resident of the town;



   (D)   A permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders away
from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for sale
by such merchant within the town and who delivers such goods in their regular
course of business;



   (E)   Any person who has an established place of business where the
goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis and in which the
buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by,
said person;



   (F)   Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which
has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;



   (G)   Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of
any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
and



   (H)   Any employee, officer or agent of a federally recognized
charitable organization.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.04  REGISTRATION.



   Applicants for registration must complete and return to the Danville
Police Department, at least three days before such applicant shall be
authorized to do business, a registration form furnished by the Danville
Police Department which shall require the following information:



   (A)   Name, permanent address, telephone number and temporary
address, if any;



   (B)   Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;



   (C)   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed
by, or whose merchandise is being sold;



   (D)   Nature of business to be conducted and a brief description of
the goods offered and any services offered;



   (E)   Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;



   (F)   Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used by
applicant in the conduct of his or her business;



   (G)   The last three previous cities, villages, and/or towns where
the applicant conducted similar business;



   (H)   Place where applicant can be contacted for at least seven days
after leaving the town;



   (I)   Statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of
any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant's transient merchant
business within the last five years, as well as the nature of the offense and
the place of conviction;



   (J)   Such application shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of
$250 executed by the surety company, or by two responsible freeholders
residing within Hendricks County, or a cash bond of equal amount, said bond
conditioned that all goods, wares, merchandise or articles sold by such
applicant will be as represented by him and he will refund the purchase price
of any goods, wares, merchandise or articles sold by him which are not as
represented; and



   (K)   Any person aggrieved by the action of a licensed direct seller
hereunder shall have a right of action on the bond or other surety for the
recovery of money or damages or both. In the event a cash bond is deposited,
the same shall be retained by the Town Clerk-Treasurer's office for 60 days
after the expiration of any license issued upon said bond or surety.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.05  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.



   Each applicant shall present to the Danville Police Department for
examination:



   (A)   A driver's license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required, a state certificate of examination and approval from the
sealer of weights and measures where applicant's business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities.



   (B)   A state health officer's certificate where applicant's
business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law. Such certificate is to state that applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more
than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.06  LICENSE.



   (A)   At the time the registration and surety are returned and the
bond approved by the Danville Police Department, a license shall be issued by
the Danville Police Department to such applicant to begin business not less
than three days after the date of filing such application and bond, upon
payment of the following fees:



 


Duration

 

Fee




One day

 

$20




One week

 

$50




One month

 

$100




 



   (B)   Upon payment of said fee, the Danville Police shall register
the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry and issue the license. If
any such licensee desires to continue in business after the expiration of
such license, a new license must be secured in the same manner and upon the
same terms as the original license, subject to subsequent refusal as provided
in § 110.08. Said funds shall be deposited in a fund so designated for the
benefit of the Danville Police Department for reimbursement of expenses
incurred.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.07  IDENTIFICATION.



   Each such person or entity to receive a permit shall have on their
person an identification card displaying their name and the organization they
represent.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.08  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the Danville Police
Department may make and complete an investigation of the statements made in
such registration.



   (B)   The Danville Police Department shall refuse to register the
applicant if it is determined pursuant to the investigation above, that:



      (1)   The application contains any material omission or
materially inaccurate statement;



      (2)   Complaints of a material nature have been received and
proven against the applicant by authorities in the three previous cities,
villages and towns, in which the applicant conducted similar business;



      (3)   The applicant was convicted of a crime, statutory
violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the nature of
which is directly related to the applicant's fitness to engage in direct
selling; or



      (4)   The applicant failed to comply with any applicable
provision of § 110.04.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.09  APPEAL.



   Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by the ordinance or resolution to the Town Council.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.10  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall govern the conduct of registrants
hereunder:



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to:



      (1)   Call at any dwelling or other place between the hours of
7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except by appointment;



      (2)   Call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the wording "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of
similar meaning;



      (3)   Call at the rear door of any place or dwelling; or



      (4)   Remain on the premises after being asked to leave by the
owner, occupant or other person having authority over such premises.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to misrepresent or
make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his or
her visit, his or her identity or the identity of the organization he or she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually
be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting.
Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
goods.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to impede the free
use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where the sales are
made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to make any loud
noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise
produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius or more.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to allow rubbish or
litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he or she is conducting
business.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.11  DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following requirements shall govern the conduct of registrants:



   (A)   After the initial greeting and before any other statement is
made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his
or her name, the name of the company or organization he or she is affiliated
with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he or she offers to sell.



   (B)   If any sales of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales
order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of
credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.



   (C)   If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later
delivery of goods, he or she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the
amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so,
the terms thereof.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.12  RECORDS.



   The Danville Police Department shall keep record of all violations
pertaining to this chapter. The Chief of Police shall report to the Town
Council all convictions for violations of this chapter and shall note any
such violation on the record of the registrant convicted.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.13  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.



   The registration of a direct seller may be revoked by the Danville
Police Department for any violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm of corporation violating this chapter shall be fined
not less than $5 nor more than $100 for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues.



(Ord. 7-2011, passed 10-3-11)



CHAPTER 111:  TAXICABS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Location of stands



   111.03   Permit required; limit



   111.04   Renewal of permit



   111.05   Safety inspection



   111.06   Public liability insurance



   111.07   Submission of rate schedule



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAB STAND.  Any space which is set aside by the proper officers of the
town for the standing, stopping and parking of any taxicab.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle operated by any person or his or her duly
authorized agent in the town for hire, which is properly licensed as a cab in
the town.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)



§ 111.02  LOCATION OF STANDS.



   The location of all taxicab stands shall be established by the Street
Commissioner, with the approval of the Town Council.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)



§ 111.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; LIMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab in
the town, as a regular carrier for hire, without having first obtained a
taxicab permit and paid to the town a $10 per month fee in advance.



   (B)   The number of taxicab permits which may be issued by the town
shall be limited to one permit for each 2,500 of town population or fraction
thereof.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.04  RENEWAL OF PERMIT.



   Any person holding a taxicab permit to operate a taxicab in the town
shall be permitted to renew the permit annually, so long as the holder
complies with all laws and ordinances controlling same, and so long as the
holder meets the approval of the Town Council.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)



§ 111.05  SAFETY INSPECTION.



   (A)   (1)   Every person holding a taxicab permit in the town
shall have a safety inspection of the taxicab once each month at his or her
own expense, by some person or corporation designated by the Town Council,
which safety inspection shall cover the condition of the brakes, lights,
horn, tires, steering mechanism, windshield wipers, muffler and exhaust
system and the condition of all glass in the vehicle.



      (2)   Any taxicab failing to pass the monthly inspection must
immediately repair the same to the satisfaction of the inspection officer or
other agent of the town or forfeit the taxicab permit.



   (B)   No taxicab shall be permitted to regularly operate without a
certificate for safety inspection which shall be publicly displayed in each
cab.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.06  PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   No person shall operate a taxicab in the town, without having on file a
copy of public liability insurance on the vehicle as well as any passengers
thereof in the amount of at least $25,000 or $50,000, which insurance must be
carried by some responsible insurance company authorized to do business in
the state.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.07  SUBMISSION OF RATE SCHEDULE.



   No taxicab shall regularly operated in the town until a rate schedule
has been submitted to and approved by the Town Council, which rate schedule
shall be resubmitted each year at the time of renewing of the taxicab permit.



(Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-27-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  FIREWORKS AND HAZARDOUS OR COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Restrictions on where certain activities may occur



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS.  Those types of fireworks defined by the State
Fire Marshal as type 1.4G.



   FIREWORKS MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, WHOLESALER, OR RETAILER. Any
person, firm, or corporation engaged in the manufacture, storage,
distribution or sale of consumer or special fireworks.



   SPECIAL FIREWORKS.  Those types of fireworks defined by the State Fire
Marshal as type 1.3G.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 12-28-06)



§ 112.02  RESTRICTIONS ON WHERE CERTAIN ACTIVITIES MAY OCCUR.



   (A)   (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the
manufacture, distribution, or sale of consumer or special fireworks within
500 feet of any existing business that manufactures, stores, distributes, or
sells hazardous or combustible materials, such as flammable liquids, gases,
or other potentially explosive materials.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation seeking to engage in the
manufacture, distribution or sale of consumer or special fireworks shall
contact the Town Manager's office prior to engaging in such activities if
they cannot confirm that there is not any existing business that
manufactures, stores, distributes, or sells hazardous or combustible
materials, such as flammable liquids, gases, or other potentially explosive
materials within 500 feet of where they intend to engage in the manufacture,
distribution or sale of consumer or special fireworks.



   (B)   (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the
manufacture, storage, distribution or sale of hazardous or combustible
materials, such as flammable liquids, gases or other potentially explosive
materials within 500 feet of any existing business that manufactures,
distributes or sells consumer or special fireworks.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation seeking to engage in the
manufacture, storage, distribution or sale of hazardous or combustible
materials such as flammable liquids, gases or other potentially explosive
materials shall contact the Town Manager's office prior to engaging in such
activities if they cannot confirm that there is not any existing business
that manufactures, distributes or sells consumer or special fireworks.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 12-28-06; Am. Ord. 11-2008, passed 6-16-08)



CHAPTER 113: FOR-PROFIT PARTIES



Section



   113.01   Permit required



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Exceptions



   113.04   Application for permit



   113.05   Contents of permit application



   113.06   Permit fee



   113.07   Procedure for consideration of permit application



   113.08   Notice of granting or denial of permit



   113.09   Hearing before Town Council for appeal



   113.10   Appeal of Town Council decision



   113.11   Posting of permit



   113.12   Inspection



 



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to operate, conduct or host a party at which
admission is charged and at which either 25 or more people are expected to
attend or 25 or more people attend, without a permit issued by the Danville
Town Manager.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ADMISSION. Any charge, fee, donation, cover charge or other money or
consideration which is required prior to admittance.



   CONDUCT. To organize, carry out, promote, advertise, hold, direct,
manage or sponsor.



   HOST. To allow the use of a facility, structure, improvement, location
or site, regardless of whether the person hosting the event owns or teases
the site.



   OPERATE. Manage, supervise or direct an event.



   PARTY. A social gathering which involves the provision of music and
space for gathering and/or dancing.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   Small parties. Parties at which less than 25 people are either
in attendance or expected to be in attendance;



   (B)   No admission. Parties at which no admission is charged;



   (C)   Commercial parties. Gatherings of patrons of bars,
restaurants, hotels and other hospitality businesses which operate 12 months
a year;



   (D)   School events. School events and functions which could be
construed as parties regulated by this chapter; and



   (E)   Town-sponsored events. Events and social gatherings sponsored
solely or in conjunction with other organizations by the town.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person or entity seeking to operate, conduct or host a party at
which admission is charged and at which 25 or more people are expected to
attend in the Town of Danville must apply for and obtain a permit from the
Town Manager office.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.05  CONTENTS OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   The applicant for a permit under this chapter must provide to the Town
Manager all information requested including but not limited to the following
information:



   (A)   Date on which the party will occur;



   (B)   Location at which the party will occur;



   (C)   Number of persons expected to attend the party;



   (D)   Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
owner of the location at which the party will occur;



   (E)   Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the
applicant;



   (F)   If the applicant is not a natural person, the name, address,
telephone number and e-mail address of the principal officer and registered
agent of the entity;



   (G)   A narrative describing the security plan for the event;



   (H)   A narrative describing the parking and traffic control plan
for the event;



   (I)   A certification from the Danville Zoning Administrator that
the location of the event is allowed under the Danville zoning and land use
regulations and ordinances;



   (J)   A narrative describing the emergency evacuation plan for the
event;



   (K)   The amount of admission charge;



   (L)   The hours of the event;



   (M)   A floor plan of the facility, structure or improvements to be
used for the event; and



   (N)   Any and all other information required for the Town Manager to
reasonably evaluate the application.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.06  PERMIT FEE.



   The applicant will also deliver to the Town Manager at the time of the
application submission a non-refundable permit fee in the amount of $250.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.07  PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   Upon receiving a complete permit application and permit fee, the Town
Manager shall evaluate:



   (A)   Whether the event can be conducted and held without violation
of the Danville zoning and land use regulations and ordinances;



   (B)   Whether the event can be conducted without violation of any
other local, state or Federal law, regulation or rule;



   (C)   Whether the event can be conducted without a substantial
likelihood of criminal or illegal activity, based upon past events held by
the applicant or operator of the event in the Town of Danville or other
jurisdictions in Indiana;



   (D)   Whether there is an adequate security plan;



   (E)   Whether there is an adequate parking and traffic control plan;



   (F)   Whether there is an adequate emergency evacuation plan; and



   (G)   Any other legitimate reason the event should not be conducted
in the Town of Danville.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.08  NOTICE OF GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Within seven days of receiving a complete application and fee,
the Town Manager must notify the applicant in writing of his decision to
grant or deny the permit;



   (B)   A permit granted under this chapter is valid only for the
dates and under the circumstances noted in the permit. No deviations are
allowed;



   (C)   If the Town Manager denies the permit, the applicant may
appeal the denial to the Town Council by submitting to the Town
Clerk-Treasurer a written appeal, stating the reasons for the appeal. This
appeal must be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer within ten days of the
receipt by the applicant of the notice of the denial.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.09  HEARING BEFORE TOWN COUNCIL FOR APPEAL.



   (A)   If the applicant files a timely appeal, the Town Council will
schedule a hearing on the appeal within 15 days of the receipt of the appeal
by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer will provide notice to the applicant of
the date and time of the hearing at least seven days prior to the hearing;



   (C)   The hearing must be held within 30 days of the filing of the
appeal;



   (D)   At the hearing, the applicant will be allowed to present
evidence regarding the application and the reasons why the applicant believes
the permit should be granted. The applicant will have the right to call
witnesses, ask questions of any witness for the Town Manager and present
evidence relevant to the appeal.



   (E)   At the hearing, the Town Manager will be allowed to present
evidence regarding the application and the reasons for the denial. The Town
Manager will have the right to call witnesses, ask questions of any witness
of the applicant and present evidence relevant to the appeal.



   (F)   Within seven days of the hearing, the Town Council will make
findings of fact and either affirm the denial or reverse the denial and order
the permit to be granted. These findings and the decision will he in writing
and will be mailed to the applicant.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.10  APPEAL OF TOWN COUNCIL DECISION.



   The Applicant may appeal the decision of the Town Council by filing
with a Court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the decision a
request for judicial review.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.11  POSTING OF PERMIT.



   The applicant must post the permit at the event and make the permit
available to Danville town officials upon request.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.12  INSPECTION.



   As a condition of any permit granted under this chapter, the applicant
must allow the inspection of the site of the event both prior to and during
the event by officials from the town.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Fines.



      (1)   Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to
the following fines:



         (a)   First violation: $2,500;



         (b)   Second violation during a 12 month period: $5,000;



         (c)   Third violation during 12 month period $7,500; and



         (d)   All subsequent violations during 12 month period
$10,000.



      (2)   All fines are payable within 30 days of the receipt of
the fine citation. If the violator fails to pay the fine, the town may
collect the fine by way of a legal action against the violator. In the event
that the town must file an action to collect a fine, the violator will be
obligated to pay the reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs incurred by
the town in collecting the fines.



   (B)   Other remedies for violations. In addition to the fines
provided for in this chapter, the town will have the following additional
remedies to enforce this chapter:



      (1)   Closing the party. The Danville Police Department may
close any party which either does not have a permit or which violates any
provision of this chapter.



   (2)   Injunctive relief. The Town of Danville shall have the right
to obtain an injunction, including but not limited to a preliminary
injunction without a hearing, enjoining the violation of this chapter.



   (3)   Other. The Town of Danville shall also have the right to
pursue any other remedies, either in equity or law, to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 13-2015, passed 6-1-15)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Open alcoholic beverage containers



   130.02   Reserved



   130.03   Fastening horses upon sidewalks



   130.04   Tampering with fire hydrants



   130.05   Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings



   130.06   Public right-of-way obstructions



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the community by prohibiting open alcoholic beverage
containers in motor vehicles being operated on public streets and highways
within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  The meaning set forth in I.C. 7.1-1-3-5.



      CONTAINER.  The meaning set forth in I.C. 7.1-1-3-13.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  The meaning set forth in I.C. 9-13-2-105 except
that MOTOR VEHICLE, as used in this section, shall exclude recreational
vehicles, commercially chartered passenger limousine and any chartered
passenger vehicle licensed to operate within the state which is designed to
transport more than ten passengers including the operator.



   (C)   A person who knowingly performs any of the following acts,
while in a motor vehicle, as defined herein, that is being operated upon a
public street or highway within the town corporate limits commits a violation
of this section:



      (1)   Consumes an alcoholic beverage; or



      (2)   Possesses a container:



         (a)   That has been opened;



         (b)   That has a broken seal; or



         (c)   From which some of the contents have been removed.



   (D)   The operator or owner of a motor vehicle, as defined herein,
who, while the motor vehicle is in operation upon a public street or highway,
knowingly keeps or allows to be kept in the area of the motor vehicle that is
accessible to the operator or a passenger, a container as follows commits a
violation of this section:



      (1)   That has been opened;



      (2)   That has a broken seal; or



      (3)   From which some of the contents have been removed.



(Ord. 6-1992, passed 6-1-92)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  RESERVED.



§ 130.03  FASTENING HORSES UPON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or leave fastened
horses or ponies upon the town’s sidewalks and in the town’s parks.



(Ord. passed 5-4-71)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.



   It shall be an unlawful offense for any persons to conspire to, assist
or in any way be responsible for fire hydrants being tampered with, opened,
let drain or in any way to maliciously or mischievously injure or cause to be
injured any fire hydrant owned by the town or located within the town limits.



(Ord. 3-1973, passed 2-12-73)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   No person shall have in his or her possession any lighted
tobacco product, tobacco derivative, including, but not limited to pipes,
cigars, cigarettes or other devices used for the smoking of tobacco or
tobacco derivatives, while within any building owned by the town.



   (B)   Any person who defaces or removes a posted sign indicating
that smoking is prohibited from a building owned by the town without proper
authorization may be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50
for each violation.



(Ord. 24-1997, passed 11-3-97)



§ 130.06  PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS.



   No person shall cause or permit any structure or obstruction to be
placed in, hang over, or otherwise encroach on a public right-of- way
(street, sidewalks, alley, or other right-of- way), whether the obstruction
be a permanent structure, or temporary obstruction, including, but not
limited to, basketball and/or other sport goals, signs, mulch, dirt, or other
piles of landscaping or other materials.



(Ord. 12-2012, passed 5-7-12)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,500.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION





         151.   FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION





         152.   ZONING




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



General Provisions; Building Codes



   150.01   Title



   150.02   Purpose



   150.03   Authority



   150.04   Scope



   150.05   Adoption of rules by reference



   150.06   Permits; application; fee



   150.07   Inspections; right of entry



   150.08   Stop orders



   150.09   Certificate of occupancy



   150.10   Workmanship



   150.11   Administration; violations; appeals and remedies



Unsafe Buildings and Structures



   150.25   Establishment of law



   150.26   Adoption of rules by reference; definition



   150.27   Public nuisances



   150.28   Administration



   150.29   Compliance



   150.30   Workmanship



   150.31   Violations



GENERAL PROVISIONS; BUILDING CODES



§ 150.01  TITLE.



   This subchapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Building Code of the town,” may be cited as such
and will be referred to herein as “this code.”



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare
and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.03  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Whenever in this code, it is provided that anything must be
done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Inspector
or the Town Manager, this shall be construed to give the officer only the
discretion of determining whether this code has been complied with.



   (C)   No provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what this code shall be, or power to require
conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce this code in an
arbitrary or discriminatory manner.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.04  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations,
repair, use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings and
structures, other than fences, in the town.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.05  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission, as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code, are hereby incorporated by reference in this
subchapter and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same
are published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed:



      (1)   Article 13, Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;



         (b)   Indiana Building Code;



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards; and



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.



      (2)   Article 14, One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code:



         (a)   Council of American Building Officials one and Two
Family Dwelling Code;



         (b)   CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code;
Amendments; and



         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes.



      (3)   Article 16, Plumbing Code:  Indiana Plumbing Code.



      (4)   Article 17, Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code; and



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.



      (5)   Article 18, Mechanical Code:  Indiana Mechanical Code.



      (6)   Article 19, Energy Conservation Code:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code; and



         (b)   Modification to the Model Energy Code.



      (7)   Article 20, Swimming Pool Code:  Indiana Swimming Pool
Code.



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the office of Town Manager.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.06  PERMITS; APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes
unless the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.  In addition, if there is to be constructed a
public building, then a copy of a design release, issued by the State
Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-1,
shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before issuance of a permit
for construction covered by the design release.



   (B)   (1)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning
construction, alteration or repair, other than ordinary repairs, using
application forms furnished by the building official.



      (2)   Ordinary repairs are nonstructural repairs and do not
include addition to, alteration of or replacement or relocation of water
supply, sewer, drainage, drain lead, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar
piping, electrical wiring or mechanical or other work for which a permit is
required by the building official.



   (C)   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance
with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for
permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in the ordinances.



   (D)   Fees and required inspection. Permits required by division (B)
above shall be issued upon prior payment of inspection fees according to the
schedule set out in § 35.02.



   (E)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Inspector shall:



      (1)   Review all building permit applications to determine
full compliance with the provisions of this code;



      (2)   Review all building permit applications for new
construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed
building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;



      (3)   Review building permit applications for major repairs
within the flood plain area having special flood hazards to determine that
the proposed repair:



         (a)   Uses construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage; and



         (b)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



      (4)   Review building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements within the flood plain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction, including prefabricated and
mobile homes:



         (a)   Is protected against flood damage;



         (b)   Is designed or modified and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, flood damage; and



         (c)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



      (5)   Review building permit application for compliance with
zoning code.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.07  INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Inspector shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work
being done as are necessary to insure full compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter and the terms of the permit.  Reinspections of work found to
be incomplete or not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of
reinspection fees as prescribed herein.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designated
representative shall assist the Building Inspector in the inspection of fire
suppression, detection and alarm systems and shall provide reports of the
inspection to the Building Inspector.



   (C)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building
Inspector or his or her duly authorized representatives may enter at
reasonable times any building, structure or premises in the town to perform
any duty imposed upon him or her by this code.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.08  STOP ORDERS.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice, in
writing, served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing the work to be
done and any persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
Building Inspector to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.09  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected,
altered or repaired after the adoption of this subchapter shall be issued
unless the building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.  It shall be unlawful to
occupy any building or structure unless a full, partial or temporary
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.10  WORKMANSHIP.



   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)



§ 150.11  ADMINISTRATION; VIOLATIONS; APPEALS AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation,
whether as owner, lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure, other than fences, in the town
or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the
provisions of this code.



   (B)   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building
Inspector’s decision first through the Planning Commission and then to the
courts and if it is a public building, then to the State Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission in accordance with the provisions of I.C.
22-13-2-7 and I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.



   (C)   The Building Inspector or Town Manager shall, in the name of
the town, bring actions in the courts of the county, for mandatory and
injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any
order or orders made by the Building Inspector, and any action for mandatory
or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the penalties
provided for in this subchapter.



(Ord. 4-1988, passed 5-2-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES



§ 150.25  ESTABLISHMENT OF LAW.



   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is hereby established the
town’s “Unsafe Building Law.”



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.26  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE; DEFINITION.



   (A)   (1)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 is hereby incorporated by reference in
the town’s Unsafe Building Law.



      (2)   All proceedings within the town for the inspection,
repair and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by the law and the
provisions of this subchapter.



      (3)   In the event the provisions of this subchapter conflict
with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-8-9-28, then the provisions
of the state statute shall control.



   (B)   The description of an unsafe building contained in I.C.
36-7-9-4 is hereby supplemented to provide minimum standards for building
condition or maintenance in the town by adding the following definition.



      UNSAFE BUILDING.  Any building or structure which has any or all
of the conditions or defects hereinafter described, provided that the
conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property or
safety of the public or its occupants are endangered:



         (a)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other
means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;



         (b)   Whenever the walking surface of any aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn
or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case
of fire or panic;



         (c)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or
portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and
one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location;



         (d)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before the catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



         (e)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance
thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse
and thereby injure persons or damage property;



         (f)   Whenever any portion of a building or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one- half of that specified
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without
exceeding the working stresses permitted for the buildings;



         (g)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to an extent that walls or other structural portions have
materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the
case of similar new construction;



         (h)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:



            1.   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;



            2.   Faulty construction;



            3.   The removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting the building;



            4.   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or



            5.   Any other cause is likely to partially or
completely collapse.



         (i)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or
structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used;



         (j)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical
structural members list, lean or buckle to an extent that a plumb line
passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle
one-third of the base;



         (k)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of
the foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



         (l)   Whenever the building or structure has been so
damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated so as to become:



            1.   An attractive nuisance to children; or



            2.   Freely accessible to persons for the purpose
of committing unlawful acts.



         (m)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibition applicable to the building or structure provided by the
building regulations of the town or of any law or ordinance of the state
relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;



         (n)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether
or rot erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in
any non- supporting part, member or portion less than 50% or in any support
part, member or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location;



         (o)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the County
Health Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in a condition
that is likely to cause sickness or disease;



         (p)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction is determined by the Town Fire
Chief to be a fire hazard; and/or



         (q)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or
structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in
excess of six months so as to constitute a building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



   (C)   The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST, set forth in
I.C. 36-7-9-2, is hereby incorporated by reference herein as if copied in
full.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.27  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   All buildings or portions thereof within the town limits which are
determined after inspection by the Building Inspector to be unsafe, as
defined in this subchapter, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.28  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Building Inspector or Town Manager and his or her designated
assigns shall be authorized to administer and to proceed under the provisions
of the law in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings found to be
unsafe as specified therein or as specified hereafter.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.29  COMPLIANCE.



   Wherever in the building regulations of the town or the town’s unsafe
building law, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Inspector or Town Manager, this
shall be construed to give the officer only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied
with; and no provisions shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what the regulations or standards shall be, power
to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or to enforce ordinance
provisions in an arbitrary or discretionary manner.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.30  WORKMANSHIP.



   (A)   All work for the reconstruction, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in good workmanlike manner
according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade.



   (B)   The provisions of the building laws, as defined in I.C.
22-12-1-3, adopted as rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission, shall be considered standard and acceptable practice for all
matters covered by this subchapter or orders issued pursuant to this
subchapter by the Building Inspector of the town.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)



§ 150.31  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee,
sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, maintain any building or
premises or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this subchapter or any order issued by the
Building Inspector.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter or I.C.
36-7-9-28 shall commit a Class C infraction for each day the violation
continues.



(Ord. 5-1988, passed - -88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Findings of fact



   151.03   Statement of purpose



   151.04   Objectives



   151.05   Definitions



   151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.07   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   151.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   151.09   Compliance



   151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.11   Discrepancy between mapped flooplain and actual ground
elevations



   151.12   Interpretation



   151.13   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   151.14   Increased cost of compliance (ICC)



Administration



   151.25   Designation of Administrator



   151.26   Permit procedures



   151.27   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   151.40   General standards



   151.41   Specific standards



   151.42   Standards for subdivision proposals



   151.43   Critical facility



   151.44   Standards for identified floodways



   151.45   Standards for identified fringe



   151.46   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes



Variance Procedures



   151.60   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board



   151.61   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   151.62   Variance procedures



   151.63   Conditions for variances



   151.64   Variance notification



   151.65   Historic structure



   151.66   Special conditions



 



   151.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Unsafe Buildings and Structures, see §§ 150.25through 150.31



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 and I.C. 14-23-4 granted the
power to local government units to control land use within their
jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Danville does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Danville are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands; and



   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the Town of Danville by fulfilling the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are;



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in floodplains;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property
is in a flood area.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.05  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The
definitions are presented below:



      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject, to inundation by the
1% annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      (4)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are one to
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory food
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure that is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used
for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance
flood. Basement means that portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate
including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of reads, or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or
the construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers),



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s
first floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 0.2%t
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS, FLOODPLAIN
ORDINANCE, FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE, and FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REQUIREMENTS.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOOD PROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management, it is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP. As related to variances of this chapter, means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is
exceptional unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local
flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal
and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after
June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective
FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFlP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.,



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the first floor of a structure constructed
with a crawl space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is
at or above the BFE and construction meets requirements of division (6)(a) of
this definition; or



      (6)   The lop of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total net area of one square inch for every
one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of all such openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade; and



         (b)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map
panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is
the first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929 (NGVD). As corrected in 1929
is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is
a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter “A” is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See
REGULATORY FLOOD.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter “A” is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY
FLOOD.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs,



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 151.07. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known
by the term BASE FLOOD, 1% ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100-YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event
for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.



   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in floodprone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdictions
(including extraterritorial jurisdictions) of the Town of Danville subject to
inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the Town of Danville are
generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Hendricks
County and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated September 25, 2009. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone
A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO.)



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation, on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank; a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
“substantial damage” or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as
a “historic structure.”



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(NGVD), or other datum where specified of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
SHADED X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). UNSHADED X ZONES (C zones on older FiRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C, AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the
Town of Danville.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees
with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed engineering
study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for the studied SFHAs of the Town of Danville shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Hendricks County and
Incorporated Areas and the corresponding FIRM prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated September 25, 2009.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for each of the unstudied SFHAs of the Town of Danville delineated as an “A
Zone” on the FIRM of Hendricks County and Incorporated Areas shall be
according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.11  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner
should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.12  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.13  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the Town of Danville, the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that,
results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.14  INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



   In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC
coverage as a “repetitive loss structure,” the National Reform Act of
1994 requires that the building be covered by a contract for flood insurance
and incur flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period
ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which
the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded
25% of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



ADMINISTRATION.



§ 151.25  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Town Council of the Town of Danville hereby appoints the Town
Manager or an appointee to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.26  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:



   (A)   Application stage.



      (1)   A description of the proposed development;



      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



      (3)   A legal description of the property site;



      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



      (5)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;



      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed;



      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or related as a result of proposed development; and



   (B)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor, or
floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of
the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure said certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of
the certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation
survey data submitted.) The permit holder shall correct deficiencies detected
by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 151.44 and 151.46(A), and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
locai permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment
(LOMA), Letters of Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter;



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Revision (LOMR)
or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community.



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 151.26;



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 151.26;



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (12)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed;



      (13)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where
there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs the following provisions are required:



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG;



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;



   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter;
and



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further, extended, or
replaced.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   (A)   In addition to the requirements of § 151.40, all structures
to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG.
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet;



      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:



         (a)   Where the cost of the addition or improvement
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the
value of the land);



         (b)   With a previous addition or improvement
constructed since the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days;



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure.



   (B)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shail be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (D) below.



   (C)   Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Structures
located in all “A Zones” may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if
done in accordance with the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 151.27(B)(10).



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   (D)   Elevated structures.



      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other
exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.



      (2)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either
be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area; and



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation
or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and



         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the
Standard Proctor Test method.



      (2)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



   (F)   Standards for structures constructed with a crawlspace. A
residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed with a crawlspace
located below the flood protection grade provided that the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
and



      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Provide a minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area. The bottom of the openings shall be no more than one
foot above grade; and



      (3)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet at any point; and



      (4)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection grade.



      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and



      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection
grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



      (7)   The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or above
the base flood elevation.



   (G)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:



      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood.



      (2)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes”
as stated earlier in this section.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.42  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.43  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.44  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 151.07, are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing, paving, and the like, undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
additions/ improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway
without obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in
a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.)



   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources granting approval for construction in a floodway. Once a
permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
this subchapter  have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be
less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence;



   (C)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory
flood more than 0.14 of one foot; and



   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the town shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.45  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in this subchapter have been met. The key provision is
that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved
structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.46  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood elevation and the
recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in this subchapter have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile.



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodway, fringe and 100-year
flood elevation for the site.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
this subchapter have been met.



   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with ail other existing and anticipated development, wiil not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



VARIANCE PROCEDURES



§ 151.60  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by Town Council of the Town
of Danville shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.61  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
Hendricks County Circuit Court, as provided by statute.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.62  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area:



   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (I)   The expected height velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.63  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to pubfic safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
§ 151.44 or 151.46(A) may be granted.



   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to § 151.44 or
151.46(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
151.41 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of
one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration
of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.



   (G)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and
the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the
cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See § 151.44.)



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
151.64.)



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)  Penalty,
see § 151.99



§ 151.64  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall by recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.65  HISTORIC STRUCTURES.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.66  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in this subchapter, and
the purposes of this entire chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such
in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. All violations
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500.



   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 1-1993, passed 1-18-93; Am. Ord. 15-2009, passed 8-17-09)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING



Section



   152.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 152.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The town’s zoning regulations are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Am. Ord. 24-2005, passed 12-19-05; Am. Ord. 6-2006, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord.
22-2006, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 3-2009, passed 3-16-09; Am. Ord. 4-2009,
passed 3-16-09; Am. Ord. 28-2012, passed 12-17-12; Am. Ord. 4-2013, passed
4-15-13)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ANNEXATIONS





         II.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS





         III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS





         IV.   STREET VACATIONS AND CLOSINGS





         V.   STREET NAME CHANGES





         VI.   REZONINGS





         VII.   CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS




TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



   (Note: This list of annexations is only a partial list and does not
represent every annexation since the town’s incorporation.)



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




5-1905
 
- -1905
 
Old farm, R1


5-1961
 
5-2-61
 
Amendment; annexation of land and redefinition of town’s corporate
boundaries


3-1972
 
- -72
 
Parkridge, R1, 26 acres


10-1972
 
- -72
 
Richard Bennett Furniture, OD, 14.85 acres


3-1975
 
- -75
 
County hospital/garage, R1, 162.26 acres


4-1979
 
- -79
 
Watson, 949 E Broadway, R1


1-1980
 
- -80
 
Federal Loan Bank, Lot 1 Park Manor, GB, .647 acres


5-1980
 
- -80
 
Alexander/Kadel engineering, 1625 and 1627 E Main St, OD, 15.66 acres


5-1981
 
- -81
 
Indiana Gas/Vectran Energy, SW corner E Main St and CR 200 E, GB, 3.592 acres


6-1982
 
- -82
 
Martin, 351 W Lincoln St, R2, .88 acres


3-1984
 
- -84
 
Lovall, 1692 E Main St, GB, 1.88 acres


6-1984
 
- -84
 
Stockment, Orchard Estates, R1, 50 acres


10-1985
 
- -85
 
Kisner, 630 N Washington, R1, 5.7 acres


14-1985
 
- -85
 
H.C. Association of Retired Citizens, 405 W. Lincoln St, R2, 1.1 acres


12-1985
 
- -85
 
Roberts, south of Woodfield on Washington, R1, 12.61 acres


16-1985
 
- -85
 
Bales, 397 W Lincoln St, R2, 2 acres


10-1986
 
- -86
 
JEME Inc, 150. and 1505 E main St, GB, .58 acres


3-1987
 
- -87
 
Rutledge, Danridge Center/US Post Office, GB, 75.56 acres


9-1987
 
- -87
 
Pollard, 1117 E CR 100 N, R2, 1 acre


10-1987
 
- -87
 
Waltz, 1121 E CR 100 N, R2, 1 acre


11-1987
 
- -87
 
Pitts, 924 N CR 50 N, R2, 2.53


12-1987
 
- -87
 
Smith, 845 N CR 50 N, R2, 2.02 acres


13-1987
 
- -87
 
Hillcrest Baptist Church, 1102 E CR 100 N, R2


1-1988
 
- -88
 
Kerlin/Honeysuckle Part., Stratford Ridge, R1, 85.18 acres


3-1988
 
- -88
 
Lawson, Woodfield on Washington, R1, 143.07 acres


8-1988
 
- -88
 
Stanley/Gerking, 843 Lincoln St, R2, 1.28


9-1988
 
- -88
 
Danville Apostolic Church, 1003 Lincoln St, R2, 1.11 acres


10-1988
 
- -88
 
Hatcher, 705 Lincoln St, R2, .73 acres


11-1988
 
- -88
 
Norton, 1033 Lincoln St, R2, .57 acres


12-1988
 
- -88
 
Siddons/Hannebutt, 1105 Lincoln St, R2, .57 acres


2-1990
 
- -90
 
Huppert, 1669 E Main St, GB, 2.55


11-1990
 
- -90
 
Smart, Main St and Old Farm, GB


12-1990
 
- -90
 
O’Brien, 1325 E Main St, GB, .91 acres


13-1990
 
- -90
 
Johnson, Sludge Farm - undeveloped, I, 26 acres


24-1990
 
- -90
 
Blair/Adams, Kroger strip mall, PUD, 12.3 acres


2-1991
 
- -91
 
Double E Farms (Tract A), Commerce Park, I, .87 acres


3-1991
 
- -91
 
Double E Farms (Tract B), Commerce Park, I, .05 acres


4-1991
 
- -91
 
Double E Farms (Tract C), Commerce Park, I, 57.266 acres


15-1991
 
- -91
 
Danville School Corp, South Elementary, R1, 40 acres


10-1992
 
- -92
 
Brain, pond property on Columbus St, R1, 1.22 acres


11-1992
 
- -92
 
Battershell, 498 N CR 50 E (Columbia St), R1, .82 acres


16-1992
 
- -92
 
Bair, 634 S 75 W, R1, 14.5 acres


2-1993
 
- -93
 
Rinehart, 708 E Main St, GB, 5.9 acres


3-1993
 
- -93
 
Town of Danville, Blanton Woods, P, 54.49 acres


4-1993
 
- -93
 
McKee, S CR 200 E, GB, .02 acres


5-1993
 
- -93
 
Myers/Gale at the Crossing, E Main and CR 300 E, R2/LB, 17 acres


6-1993
 
- -93
 
Habitat for Humanity, 2255 E Main St, R1, .81 acres


9-1993
 
- -93
 
K&K Farms, Pittsboro Rd to CR 100 N - undeveloped, R1, 145.54 acres


10-1993
 
- -93
 
Edmondson/Bishop, 2000 E main St, GB, 1.98


11-1993
 
- -93
 
Temple, 751 N CR 125 E and CR 100 N, R2, 48.74 acres


1-1994
 
- -94
 
Harvey (Woodberry), 2051 E Main St, PUD, 16.55 acres


2-1994
 
- -94
 
Harvey (Woodberry), 2051 E Main St, PUD, 16.55 acres


5-1994
 
- -94
 
Waste Mgmt/Leondis, Landfill property, PUD, 835 acres


11-1994
 
- -94
 
Money, 1545 E CR 100 N, R2, .689 acres


12-1994
 
- -94
 
Money, Money subdivision - undeveloped, R2, 3.354 acres


13-1994
 
- -94
 
Money, Money subdivision - undeveloped, R2, 75.4 acres


14-1994
 
- -94
 
Money, Money subdivision - undeveloped, R2, 58.6 acres


18-1994
 
- -94
 
Calvary Chapel, 2165 E Main St, GB, 16.645 acres


13-1995
 
- -95
 
Knox, 664 E Main St, R1, 1.1 acres


18-1995
 
- -95
 
Brain, 448 N CR 50 E (Columbia St), R1, 2.099 acres


7-1996
 
- -96
 
McKee, 21 S CR 200 E, GB, 1.41 acres


12-1996
 
- -96
 
Wright (Southwestern Elec), 2016 E Main St, GB, .57 acres


13-1996
 
- -96
 
Andreoni, Buhl, Powers, 1465 E Main St (Smart Ford), GB, 11.96 acres


1-1997
 
- -97
 
Kiefer-Cunningham, CR 50 S (School-owned - undeveloped), PUD, 96.5 acres


3-1997
 
- -97
 
Linsmeyer (Avon Aero), 2001 E Main St, GB, 1.76 acres


6-1997
 
- -97
 
Tharp (CVS), 675 & 689 E Main St, PD-C, 10.87 acres


14-1997
 
- -97
 
Fields, S. Lincoln St  mile W of SR 39, R2, 8.657 acres


19-1997
 
- -97
 
Pence Oldsmobile, 715 E Main St, GB, 5.95 acres


25-1997
 
- -97
 
Whisperwood (White, Clark, Stevens, Hoffer, Hatzell and Walker), SW corner CR
100 N & CR 200 E, R2, 91.2 acres


4-1998
 
- -98
 
Willard, 1655 E Main St, GB, .676 acres


6-1998
 
- -98
 
Stokes (Vet. Hospital), 1685 E Main St, GB, 1.33 acres


9-1998
 
- -98
 
McClure, 561 N Washington St, R1, .41 acres


11-1998
 
- -98
 
Danville Chrysler, 20 S CR 300 E, GB, 2.88 acres


16-1998
 
- -98
 
Stutz, 1422 E CR 100 N, R1, 5.92 acres


19-1998
 
- -98
 
Edwards Equipment, 1375 E Main St, GB, 1.22 acres


24-1998
 
- -98
 
Spurlock, 1700 & 1702 E CR 100 N & vacant lot, R2, 2.924 acres


25-1998
 
- -98
 
Smith, 1517 E CR 100 N, R2, .459 acres


29-1998
 
- -98
 
Freeland, 1589 E CR 100 N, R2, .918 acres


31-1998
 
- -98
 
GPI (Settler’s Run), E Main St and CR 300 E (3 parcels), PUD, 43.268


32-1998
 
- -98
 
GPI (Settler’s Run), E Main St and CR 300 E (3 parcels), PUD, 43.268


33-1998
 
- -98
 
GPI (Settler’s Run), E Main St and CR 300 E (3 parcels), PUD, 43.268


35-1998
 
- -98
 
Church of Christ, 2894 E Main St, R2, 1.86 acres


37-1998
 
- -98
 
Clark, 1780 and 1812 E CR 100 N, R2, 9.63 acres


39-1998
 
- -98
 
Clark, 1780 and 1812 E CR 100 N, R2, 9.63 acres


41-1998
 
- -98
 
Hadley, 1501 E CR 100 N, R2, .459 acres


46-1998
 
- -98
 
Riddle, E Main St and Commerce Dr, I, 1.24 acres


48-1998
 
- -98
 
Baker, 1481 E CR 100 N, R2, .459 acres


7-1999
 
- -99
 
Beaty, 2166 E Main St, GB, .33 acres


9-1999
 
- -99
 
Reed, 808 N CR 200 E, R1, 2.33 acres


15-1999
 
- -99
 
Wehrmen, 1575 E CR 100 N, R2, 1.077 acres


17-1999
 
- -99
 
Foster, 2102 E Main St, GB/R1, 1.18 acres


18-1999
 
- -99
 
Amish Furniture Mart, NW corner US 36 and CR 400 E - undeveloped, GB, 5.93
acres


20-1999
 
- -99
 
Anderson, 1583 E CR 100 N, R1, .5 acres


22-1999
 
- -99
 
Adams, 1533 E CR 100 N, R1, 1 acre


24-1999
 
- -99
 
Goode, 73 S CR 200 E, R1, 1.5 acres


26-1999
 
- -99
 
Estep, 1497 E CR 100 N, R2, .5 acres


1-2000
 
- -00
 
Reyman, 690 N Washington St, R1, 2.27 acres


5-2000
 
- -00
 
Copeland, 2698 E Main St, GB, .76 acres


12-2000
 
- -00
 
Stanley, 1247 E CR 100 N, R2, 2.97 acres


1-2001
 
- -01
 
Town of Danville, 625 N Washington St (Blanton House), P, 19.7 acres


10-2001
 
- -01
 
Larmer, E Main St (Self Storage in Commerce Park), I, 1.24 acres


12-2001
 
- -01
 
Amerigas, 1495 E Main St, GB, 5.54 acres


19-2001
 
- -01
 
Gill-Stevens, E Main St (east/west sides of Settlers Run entrance), R3, 8
acres


2-2002
 
- -02
 
Cameron Plumbing, 3393 E Main St, GB, 3.78 acres


5-2002
 
- -02
 
Michael Eaton, CR 50 N - undeveloped, R1, 34.99 acres


12-2002
 
10-21-02
 
Midland Co-op, 2822 E Main St, LB


3-2003
 
2-18-03
 
Jeannette A. Kraft, 2660 E Main St, GB


13-2003
 
1-20-04
 
Donna J. Spurlock, 1724 E. County Road 100 N.


1-2004
 
 
2-17-04Jeffrey Allen, 99 S. County Road 300 East, 2.67 acres


7-2004
 
 
6-7-04Coleman, 554 E. County Road 50 North


8-2004
 
 
6-7-04Larmer, vacant lot on the southeast corner of  the intersection of
East Main Street and Commerce Drive, 1.86 acres


9-2004
 
 
6-7-04Jason Searcy, 1303 East County Road 200 South, 28 acres


15-2004
 
8-16-04
 
1900 East Main Street, 145.89 acres


17-2004
 
9-7-04
 
Waddell, 2823 Lynwood Court


18-2004
 
9-20-04
 
Fuehrer, 407 N. County Road 200 East, 42.259 acres


21-2004
 
11-15-04
 
Waddell, 128 Meyerwood Drive


26-2004
 
12-6-04
 
Danville Friends Church, 45 N. CR 200 East, 6.36 acres


1-2005
 
 
4-4-05Butler, 7 Manor Drive


6-2005
 
 
7-25-05Russell, 2589 E. Main Street, 5.36 acres


12-2005
 
9-19-05
 
First Assembly of God Church, 3399 E. Main Street, 4.246 acres


13-2005
 
9-19-05
 
Orr, 3455 E. Main Street, 6.12 acres


14-2005
 
10-17-05
 
Dale, 2605 E. Main Street, 1.24 acres


15-2005
 
10-17-05
 
K.D.K. National Inc, 3173 E. Main Street, 5.97 acres


19-2005
 
11-21-05
 
Charles, 560 Sycamore Lane, 1.39 acres


1-2006
 
3-20-06
 
Fuehrer, 347 N. CR 200 E., 7.3 acres


4-2006
 
6-5-06
 
Haskett, 86 S. CR 300 E., 0.69 acre


5-2006
 
6-5-06
 
Rodriguez, 555 W. Lincoln Street


7-2006
 
6-5-06
 
Cook, 3212 E. Main Street, 9.86 acres


8-2006
 
5-15-06
 
Rioux, 4002 E. Main Street, 25.12 acres


13-2006
 
7-3-06
 
Rioux, 4002 E. Main Street, 145.24 acres


17-2006
 
8-21-06
 
Cook, 3212 E. Main Street, 9.86 acres


19-2006
 
9-18-06
 
Provencal, 687 N. CR 200 E., 1.13 acres


20-2006
 
9-5-06
 
Rioux, 4002 E. Main Street, 37.6 acres


21-2006
 
10-16-06
 
Vornholt, 551 N. Washington Street, 28.763 acres


26-2006
 
12-18-06
 
Masterson, 2411 E. Main Street, 0.91 acre


15-2007
 
10-15-07
 
Harvey, 64 S. CR 300 West, 0.69 acre


12-2008
 
10-6-08
 
Schwan’s Sales Enterprises, Inc., real estate located in the Southeast
Quarter of Section 1 in Township 15 North, Range 1 West, 2.087 acres


16-2008
 
2-17-09
 
Mary Martha Davis Revocable Trust, 2345 E. Main Street, 47.082 acres


18-2008
 
7-20-09
 
Wexford Corporation, 1051 N. CR 50 East, 38.04 acres


13-2009
 
9-8-09
 
Michael C. Beaty and Karen Kunkel-Beaty, 756 Sycamore Lane


08-2010
 
9-20-10
 
Matthew M. and Lori J. Hunt, 2566 E. Main Street


15-2011
 
11-7-11
 
Phi Delta Kappa, Gamma Theta Chapter, Inc., 802 Phi Delta Kappa Drive


1-2012
 
2-21-12
 
Larry W. and Rhoda M. Elliott, 2176 E. Main Street


2-2012
 
2-21-12
 
William E. Lush, 631 S. State Road 39


23-2012
 
12-17-12
 
Roger L. and Nancy J. Phillips, 6 Manor Drive


3-2014
 
6-16-14
 
Cameron & Company LLC/James K. Cameron, 27 N. County Road 300 East


 
 




 



TABLE II:  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


11-1995
 
8-7-95
 
Temporary extension of cable television franchise agreement with Comcast CATV
System


27-1997
 
11-17-97
 
Grant of a cable television franchise to Comcast Cablevision of Indianapolis,
L.P.


 
 



 



TABLE III:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




60-1950
 
4-3-50
 
Approval of a contract for electric energy for power and light for a
municipal water pumping and/or sewage disposal system with the Public Service
Company of Indiana, Inc.


—
 
6-18-56
 
Partial payment under a contract for construction of local sanitary sewer
improvement


3-1992
 
4-6-92
 
Approval of a lease between the Town Redevelopment Commission and the
Municipal Facilities Corporation


—
 
12-30-98
 
Agreement for the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment
facilities owned by the town


4-1999
 
3-15-99
 
Amendment; alteration of fees received from the Host Community Agreement;
creation of a Host Community Agreement Future Fund


—
 
7-30-01
 
Water main extension and water purchase agreement


1-2007
 
1-22-07
 
Approval of the execution of an agreement for services with the Indiana
Association of Cities and Towns and directing the payment of amounts due
under the agreement


 
 




 



TABLE IV:  STREET VACATIONS AND CLOSINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




—
 
10-7-85
 
Vacation of an alley between Jefferson Street and Cross Street


15-1985
 
10-7-85
 
Vacation of an alleyway


18-1986
 
12-1-86
 
Vacation of alleyways


18-1990
 
10-1-90
 
Vacation of a public alleyway and reservation of an easement


8-1991
 
6-3-91
 
Vacation of a portion of Clinton Street


10-1991
 
8-5-91
 
Vacation of a portion of an alleyway


8-1995
 
8-7-95
 
Vacation of a portion of a street


12-1995
 
8-7-95
 
Vacation of a portion of an alley


15-1996
 
10-7-96
 
Vacation of a portion of Walnut Street


1-1998
 
1-19-98
 
Vacation of a portion of an alley


43-1998
 
11-2-98
 
Vacation of a portion of an alley


45-1998
 
11-16-98
 
Vacation of a portion of Jefferson Street


5-1999
 
3-15-99
 
Vacation of a portion of a utility strip


11-2000
 
11-20-00
 
Vacation of a public street right-of-way


18-2001
 
10-1-01
 
Vacation of a portion of a platted easement


10-2004
 
4-19-04
 
Vacation of alleyway located between lots numbered 11 and 12 of the Craddicks
Addition to the Town of Danville


3-2010
 
3-1-10
 
Vacation of certain alleyway


12-2011
 
7-5-11
 
Vacation of a right-of-way


21-2011
 
12-19-11
 
Vacation of a public alleyway


10-2012
 
4-16-12
 
Vacation of a public alleyway described as a north south alleyway extending
north from North Street between 348 and 398 North Street and ending at an
east west alleyway bordered by Wayne Street and Gibson Street


5-2013
 
4-15-13
 
Vacation of a public alleyway


17-2013
 
11-4-13
 
Vacation of a right-of-way


 
 




 



TABLE V:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


—
 
- -
 
Changing the name of Smith Street to Broadway Street


8-1985
 
6-3-85
 
Naming streets:  the street commencing at U.S. 36 and winding around the
park on the east side of the crossing in front of Gill Pool and ending on the
west side of the town shall be known as Leedy Drive and the street commencing
with an intersection of the proposed Leedy Drive and winding around the west
side of the park and terminating at the intersection of Columbia Street and
the town shall be known as Helton Drive


 
 



 



TABLE VI:  REZONINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




17-2000
 
11-20-00
 
Rezoning of a planned unit development


2-2004
 
1-20-04
 
1724 E. CR 100 North from R-1 to R1


5-2004
 
2-17-04
 
99 S. County Road 300 East to I


11-2004
 
6-7-04
 
554 East County Road 50 North from R-B to R1


12-2004
 
6-7-04
 
1303 E. County Road 200 South from R-B to I


13-2004
 
6-7-04
 
Larmer property at the southeast corner of the intersection of East Main
Street and Commerce Drive from I-1 to I


20-2004
 
8-16-04
 
1900 East Main Street to PD


22-2004
 
9-7-04
 
2823 Lynwood Court from R-B to R1


23-2004
 
9-20-04
 
407 N. County Road 200 East from R2 and C2 to GB


25-2004
 
9-20-04
 
3389 E. Main Street from R3 to R4


32-2004
 
11-15-04
 
128 Meyerwood Drive from R-B to R1


34-2004
 
12-6-04
 
45 N. CR 200 East from C-2 to GB


4-2005
 
4-4-05
 
7 Manor Drive to GB


8-2005
 
5-16-05
 
425 South Cross Street from GB to R4


11-2005
 
7-25-05
 
2589 E. Main Street from RDD to I


17-2005
 
9-15-05
 
3399 E. Main Street to GB


18-2005
 
9-19-05
 
3455 E. Main Street to LB


20-2005
 
10-17-05
 
2605 E. Main Street from RDD to GB


21-2005
 
10-17-05
 
3173 E. Main Street from RDD to I


23-2005
 
11-7-05
 
Old Farm Inc. property on Tradition Lane between Old Farm Road and Sassafras
Drive from R1 to R4


25-2005
 
11-21-05
 
560 Sycamore Lane from R-B to R1


27-2005
 
12-19-05
 
Amendment to the official zoning map to reflect the new Industrial Zone
district classifications


9-2006
 
3-20-06
 
347 N. CR 200 E. from R-B to GB


12-2006
 
5-15-06
 
4002 E. Main Street from County PUD to Danville PUD


15-2006
 
6-5-06
 
86 S. CR 300 E. from RDD to GB


16-2006
 
6-5-06
 
555 W. Lincoln Street from R-A to R2


18-2006
 
6-19-06
 
3212 E. Main Street from R-A to R4


24-2006
 
9-18-06
 
687 N. CR 200 E. to R1


25-2006
 
10-16-06
 
551 N. Washington Street from R-A to R1


28-2006
 
12-18-06
 
2411 E. Main Street from RDD to GB


5-2007
 
4-16-07
 
Real estate located on High Street approximately 275 feet north of the
Clinton Street intersection, from undeveloped property to R2C


17-2007
 
10-1-07
 
99 S. CR 300 East from IL to IG


18-2007
 
10-15-07
 
64 S. CR 300 East to GB


10-2008
 
6-16-08
 
150 W. Clinton Street to IL


15-2008
 
10-6-08
 
2700 E. Main Street to IG


1-2009
 
2-17-09
 
2345 E. Main Street to IG


7-2009
 
4-20-09
 
501 S. Cross Street from R2C to R3


18-2009
 
9-8-09
 
Newly annexed 756 Sycamore Lane as R1


12-2010
 
9-20-10
 
Newly annexed 2566 E. Main Street as IG


17-2011
 
11-7-11
 
802 Phi Delta Kappa Drive as GB


6-2012
 
2-21-12
 
2176 E. Main Street as R1


7-2012
 
2-21-12
 
631 S. State Road 39 as R1


7A-2012
 
3-19-12
 
Real estate located between old US 36 and new US 36, east of CR 300 East in
Center Township, Hendricks County as R4 uses in addition to LB uses on the
undeveloped portion of the PUD


27-2012
 
12-17-12
 
6 Manor Drive as GB


7-2014
 
6-16-14
 
27 N. County Road 300 East as LB for the west portion and IL for the east
portion


 
 




 



TABLE VII:  CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


8-1960
 
7-19-60
 
Construction of extensions, additions and improvements to the town’s water
works system


2-1961
 
3-13-61
 
Construction of improvements and extensions to the town’s sewage works


3-1976
 
5-17-76
 
Construction of extensions, additions and improvements to the town’s water
works


4-1986
 
3-10-86
 
Construction of improvements and extensions to the town’s sewage works


7-1991
 
6-17-91
 
Construction of improvements, additions and extensions to the town’s water
works


 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Cite
 
Code Section




1-1-1-5
 
10.04


1-1-1-7
 
10.12


1-1-1-8
 
10.06


1-1-4-5
 
10.05


1-1-5-1
 
10.11


1-1-6-1
 
10.08


4-21.5-3-7
 
150.11


5-2-8-2
 
35.02


5-3-1-2
 
32.05


5-3-1-4
 
32.05


5-4-1-18
 
30.03


5-22
 
33.01


5-23
 
33.01


6-7-1-30.1
 
34.05


6-7-1-31.1
 
34.05


7.1-1-3-5
 
130.01


7.1-1-3-13
 
130.01


9-13-2-1
 
96.01


9-13-2-105
 
130.01


9-21-16-5.5
 
71.01


9-22-1-11
 
96.02


9-22-1-25
 
96.03


9-22-1-30
 
96.01


9-22-1-31
 
96.01


14-23-4
 
151.01


14-28-1-26
 
151.44


15-5-9-1
 
95.15


16-22
 
70.01


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
98.02


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
98.01


22-9.5-2-2
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-3
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-4
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-8
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-9
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-11
 
98.02


22-9.5-2-13
 
98.02


22-9.5-3
 
98.03


22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
98.09


22-9.5-4-8
 
98.10


22-9.5-5
 
99.02


22-9.5-5-1
 
98.03


22-9.5-6
 
98.02, 99.10


22-12-1-3
 
150.30


22-13-2-7
 
150.11


22-15-3-1
 
150.06


33-6-3-1 et seq.
 
31.01


33-36-2-3
 
54.07


34-24-1-1 et seq.
 
34.02


35-47-2
 
35.02


36-1-3
 
32.01


36-1-3-8(a)(10)
 
10.99


36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B)
 
50.120


36-5-4-12
 
33.03


36-5-4-12A
 
33.03


36-5-4-12B
 
33.03


36-5-4-12C
 
33.03


36-5-4-12D
 
33.03


36-5-5 et seq.
 
10.17


36-5-7 et seq.
 
10.18


36-7-4
 
151.01


36-7-4-205
 
32.04


36-7-4-207—36-7-4-220
 
32.04


36-7-4-214
 
32.04


36-7-4-218
 
32.04


36-7-4-500 et seq.
 
35.03


36-7-4-900
 
32.05


36-7-4-916
 
32.05


36-7-4-1300 et seq.
 
35.03


36-7-4-1316
 
35.03


36-7-4-1317
 
35.03


36-7-4-1318
 
35.03


36-7-4-1320
 
35.03


36-7-4-1321
 
35.03


36-7-4-1322
 
35.03


36-7-4-1322(a)
 
35.03


36-7-4-1322(g)
 
35.03


36-7-4-1323
 
35.03


36-7-4-1324
 
35.03


36-7-4-1325
 
35.03


36-7-4-1335(a)
 
35.03


36-7-4-1336
 
35.03


36-7-4-1338
 
35.03


36-7-4-1338(c)
 
35.03


36-7-4-1340
 
35.03


36-7-9
 
150.25


36-7-9-1
 
150.26


36-7-9-1—36-8-9-28
 
150.26


36-7-9-2
 
150.26


36-7-9-4
 
150.26


36-7-9-28
 
150.31


36-7-11.9
 
32.02


36-7-12
 
32.02


36-7-14 et seq.
 
32.03


36-8-3-4
 
32.08


36-8-3-4.1
 
32.08


36-9-16-2—36-9-16-4
 
34.05


36-9-23
 
53.10


36-10-3
 
32.01


36-10-3-22
 
34.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




5-1905
 
- -1905
 
T.S.O. I


60-1950
 
4-3-50
 
T.S.O. III


3-1950
 
7-3-50
 
72.01—72.11


2-1952
 
6-2-52
 
32.04


—
 
6-18-56
 
T.S.O. III


—
 
12-29-59
 
30.01


8-1960
 
7-19-60
 
T.S.O. VII


2-1961
 
3-13-61
 
T.S.O. VII


5-1961
 
5-2-61
 
T.S.O. I


15-1965
 
8-3-65
 
34.05


—
 
5-4-71
 
130.03


3-1972
 
- -72
 
T.S.O. I


10-1972
 
- -72
 
T.S.O. I


18-1972
 
12-16-72
 
34.04


3-1973
 
2-12-73
 
130.04


5-1973
 
5-24-73
 
95.01


3-1975
 
- -75
 
T.S.O. I


3-1976
 
5-17-76
 
T.S.O. VII


3-1978
 
10-11-78
 
30.02


4-1979
 
- -79
 
T.S.O. I


1-1980
 
- -80
 
T.S.O. I


5-1980
 
- -80
 
T.S.O. I


5-1981
 
- -81
 
T.S.O. I


3-1982
 
4-5-82
 
33.04


6-1982
 
- -82
 
T.S.O. I


7-1982
 
9-7-82
 
92.01


—
 
5-2-83
 
33.05


11-1983
 
12-27-83
 
92.02


12-1983
 
12-27-83
 
92.03


3-1984
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. I


6-1984
 
- -84
 
T.S.O. I


12-1984
 
12-27-84
 
111.01—111.07


8-1985
 
6-3-85
 
T.S.O. V


10-1985
 
- -85
 
T.S.O. I


12-1985
 
- -85
 
T.S.O. I


14-1985
 
- -85
 
T.S.O. I


—
 
10-7-85
 
T.S.O. IV


15-1985
 
10-7-85
 
T.S.O. IV


16-1985
 
- -85
 
T.S.O. I


4-1986
 
3-10-86
 
T.S.O. VII


10-1986
 
- -86
 
T.S.O. I


16-1986
 
11-3-86
 
52.01—52.10


17-1986
 
11-3-86
 
51.01—51.16, 51.99


18-1986
 
12-1-86
 
T.S.O. IV


3-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


9-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


10-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


11-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


12-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


13-1987
 
- -87
 
T.S.O. I


1-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


2-1988
 
2-1-88
 
94.01—94.12


3-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


4-1988
 
5-2-88
 
150.01—150.11


5-1988
 
- -88
 
150.25—150.31


8-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


9-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


10-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


11-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


12-1988
 
- -88
 
T.S.O. I


1-1989
 
3-6-89
 
70.01—70.03; 71.01, 71.02; Ch. 73, Scheds. I and III—VI; Ch. 74, Scheds.
I—VII


2-1990
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. I


11-1990
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. I


12-1990
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. I


13-1990
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. I


18-1990
 
10-1-90
 
T.S.O. IV


21-1990
 
11-19-90
 
32.03


24-1990
 
- -90
 
T.S.O. I


2-1991
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. I


3-1991
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. I


4-1991
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. I


5-1991
 
3-18-91
 
93.20—93.22


8-1991
 
6-3-91
 
T.S.O. IV


7-1991
 
6-17-91
 
T.S.O. VII


10-1991
 
8-5-91
 
T.S.O. IV


11-1991
 
8-27-91
 
91.01—91.07


15-1991
 
- -91
 
T.S.O. I


1-1992
 
1-20-92
 
90.20—90.25


3-1992
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O. III


6-1992
 
6-1-92
 
130.01


9-1992
 
8-3-92
 
33.03


10-1992
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. I


11-1992
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. I


16-1992
 
- -92
 
T.S.O. I


1-1993
 
1-18-93
 
151.01, 151.03—151.05, 151.10, 151.13, 151.25—151.27, 151.40—151.42,
151.44—151.46, 151.60, 151.63, 151.65, 151.99


2-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


3-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


4-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


5-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


6-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


9-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


10-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


11-1993
 
- -93
 
T.S.O. I


1-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


2-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


4-1994
 
2-7-94
 
93.35—93.46


5-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


7-1994
 
3-21-94
 
93.01—93.09


8-1994
 
4-4-94
 
51.05


—
 
4-24-94
 
32.06


9-1994
 
5-16-94
 
51.17


11-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


12-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


13-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


14-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


18-1994
 
- -94
 
T.S.O. I


24-1994
 
12-19-94
 
32.02


1-1995
 
1-3-95
 
34.03


3-1995
 
2-6-95
 
Ch. 73, Sched. IV


4-1995
 
5-1-95
 
Ch. 73, Sched. IV


5-1995
 
5-15-95
 
31.01—31.08


8-1995
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O. IV


11-1995
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O. II


12-1995
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O. IV


13-1995
 
- -95
 
T.S.O. I


18-1995
 
- -95
 
T.S.O. I


6-1996
 
4-15-96
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


7-1996
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. I


12-1996
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. I


13-1996
 
- -96
 
T.S.O. I


15-1996
 
10-7-96
 
T.S.O. IV


23-1997
 
1-20-97
 
30.03


1-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


3-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


6-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


11-1997
 
3-3-97
 
Ch. 73, Scheds. II and IV


13-1997
 
4-21-97
 
51.04


14-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


16-1997
 
5-5-97
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


17-1997
 
7-21-97
 
Ch. 74, Sched. VI


18-1997
 
8-4-97
 
Ch. 74, Sched. II


19-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


24-1997
 
11-3-97
 
31.03, 33.02, 130.05


25-1997
 
- -97
 
T.S.O. I


27-1997
 
11-17-97
 
T.S.O. II


1-1998
 
1-19-98
 
T.S.O. IV


2-1998
 
- -98
 
Ch. 74, Sched. III


4-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


6-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


8-1998
 
4-6-98
 
90.35—90.40


9-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


11-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


14-1998
 
5-4-98
 
32.01


16-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


18-1998
 
6-15-98
 
33.01


19-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


24-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


25-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


29-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


31-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


32-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


33-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


35-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


37-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


39-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


41-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


43-1998
 
11-2-98
 
T.S.O. IV


44-1998
 
4-6-98
 
90.01—90.06


45-1998
 
11-16-98
 
T.S.O. IV


46-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


48-1998
 
- -98
 
T.S.O. I


—
 
12-30-98
 
T.S.O. III


3-1999
 
2-16-99
 
Ch. 74, Scheds. V and VI


4-1999
 
3-15-99
 
T.S.O. III


5-1999
 
3-15-99
 
T.S.O. IV


7-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


9-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


12-1999
 
8-16-99
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II;  Ch. 74, Scheds. II and III


14-1999
 
9-20-99
 
92.02


15-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


17-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


18-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


20-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


22-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


24-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


26-1999
 
- -99
 
T.S.O. I


1-2000
 
- -00
 
T.S.O. I


5-2000
 
- -00
 
T.S.O. I


8-2000
 
6-5-00
 
34.02


11-2000
 
11-20-00
 
T.S.O. IV


12-2000
 
- -00
 
T.S.O. I


14-2000
 
8-7-00
 
50.001—50.006, 50.020—50.025, 50.035—50.037, 50.050—50.064,
50.075—50.087, 50.100, 50.101, 50.115—50.124, 50.135—50.137


17-2000
 
11-20-00
 
T.S.O. VI


1-2001
 
- -01
 
T.S.O. I


3-2001
 
5-7-01
 
35.01, 35.02


4-2001
 
5-7-01
 
95.15—95.25


6-2001
 
5-21-01
 
34.01


8-2001
 
6-4-01
 
Ch. 73, Sched. III; Ch. 74, Sched. VI


10-2001
 
- -01
 
T.S.O. I


12-2001
 
- -01
 
T.S.O. I


14-2001
 
7-2-01
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


15-2001
 
7-16-01
 
92.01


—
 
7-30-01
 
T.S.O. III


18-2001
 
10-1-01
 
T.S.O. IV


19-2001
 
- -01
 
T.S.O. I


22-2001
 
11-19-01
 
11.01


23-2001
 
12-3-01
 
30.02


24-2001
 
12-3-01
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


25-2001
 
12-17-01
 
Ch. 74, Sched. III


26-2001
 
12-27-01
 
30.02


1-2002
 
2-4-02
 
35.02


2-2002
 
- -02
 
T.S.O. I


3-2002
 
5-6-02
 
35.01, 35.02


5-2002
 
- -02
 
T.S.O. I


8-2002
 
9-3-02
 
35.02


9-2002
 
9-3-02
 
35.02


10-2002
 
10-21-02
 
30.02


11-2002
 
10-21-02
 
30.02


12-2002
 
10-21-02
 
T.S.O. I


13-2002
 
12-16-02
 
Adopting Ordinance


2-2003
 
2-18-03
 
35.02


3-2003
 
2-18-03
 
T.S.O. I


5-2003
 
4-21-03
 
35.02


6-2003
 
5-5-03
 
35.02


7-2003
 
6-2-03
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


8-2003
 
7-7-03
 
32.07


9-2003
 
7-7-03
 
34.03


12-2003
 
10-20-03
 
35.02


13-2003
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. I


15-2003
 
12-15-03
 
92.02


1-2004
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. I


2-2004
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. VI


4-2004
 
2-17-04
 
34.07


5-2004
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. VI


7-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


8-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


9-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


10-2004
 
4-19-04
 
T.S.O. IV


11-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. VI


12-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. VI


13-2004
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. VI


15-2004
 
8-16-04
 
T.S.O. I


17-2004
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. I


18-2004
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. I


19-2004
 
8-2-04
 
35.02


20-2004
 
8-16-04
 
T.S.O. VI


21-2004
 
3-15-04
 
T.S.O. I


22-2004
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. VI


23-2004
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. VI


25-2004
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. VI


26-2004
 
12-6-04
 
T.S.O. I


27-2004
 
10-18-04
 
94.20 - 94.25


28-2004
 
11-1-04
 
35.02


32-2004
 
11-15-04
 
T.S.O. VI


33-2004
 
11-15-04
 
94.21


34-2004
 
12-6-04
 
T.S.O. VI


35-2004
 
12-6-04
 
35.02


1-2005
 
4-4-05
 
T.S.O. I


2-2005
 
4-18-05
 
53.01


3-2005
 
3-21-05
 
35.02


4-2005
 
4-4-05
 
T.S.O. VI


6-2005
 
7-25-05
 
T.S.O. I


7-2005
 
5-16-05
 
Ch. 74, Sched. V


8-2005
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. VI


9-2005
 
7-5-05
 
35.02


11-2005
 
7-25-05
 
T.S.O. VI


12-2005
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. I


13-2005
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. I


14-2005
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. I


15-2005
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. I


17-2005
 
9-15-05
 
T.S.O. VI


18-2005
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. VI


19-2005
 
11-21-05
 
T.S.O. I


20-2005
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. VI


21-2005
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. VI


22-2005
 
11-7-05
 
34.01


23-2005
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. VI


24-2005
 
12-19-05
 
152.01


25-2005
 
11-21-05
 
T.S.O. VI


27-2005
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. VI


1-2006
 
3-20-06
 
T.S.O. I


2-2006
 
3-6-06
 
35.02


3-2006
 
3-20-06
 
34.01


4-2006
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


5-2006
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


6-2006
 
3-20-06
 
152.01


7-2006
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


8-2006
 
5-15-06
 
T.S.O. I


9-2006
 
3-20-06
 
T.S.O. VI


11-2006
 
5-1-06
 
35.02


12-2006
 
5-15-06
 
T.S.O. VI


13-2006
 
7-3-06
 
T.S.O. I


14-2006
 
5-15-06
 
Ch. 74, Sched. III


15-2006
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. VI


16-2006
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. VI


17-2006
 
8-21-06
 
T.S.O. I


18-2006
 
6-19-06
 
T.S.O. VI


19-2006
 
9-18-06
 
T.S.O. I


20-2006
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. I


21-2006
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. I


22-2006
 
8-7-06
 
152.01


24-2006
 
9-18-06
 
T.S.O. VI


25-2006
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. VI


26-2006
 
12-18-06
 
T.S.O. I


27-2006
 
11-20-06
 
Ch. 74, Sched. III


28-2006
 
12-18-06
 
T.S.O. VI


29-2006
 
12-28-06
 
35.02


30-2006
 
12-28-06
 
35.02


31-2006
 
12-28-06
 
112.01 - 112.02


33-2006
 
1-8-06
 
10.99


1-2007
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. III


5-2007
 
4-16-07
 
T.S.O. VI


7-2007
 
5-21-07
 
Adopting Ordinance


15-2007
 
10-15-07
 
T.S.O. I


17-2007
 
10-1-07
 
T.S.O. VI


18-2007
 
10-15-07
 
T.S.O. VI


3-2008
 
2-19-08
 
31.02, 31.05


4-2008
 
3-17-08
 
33.03


7-2008
 
4-7-08
 
94.22


8-2008
 
4-21-08
 
35.02


9-2008
 
5-19-08
 
31.03, 35.02


10-2008
 
6-16-08
 
T.S.O. VI


11-2008
 
6-16-08
 
112.02


12-2008
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. I


13-2008
 
8-18-08
 
32.08


15-2008
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. VI


16-2008
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. I


18-2008
 
7-20-09
 
T.S.O. I


1-2009
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. VI


3-2009
 
3-16-09
 
152.01


4-2009
 
3-16-09
 
152.01


6-2009
 
4-20-09
 
35.02


7-2009
 
4-20-09
 
T.S.O. VI


8-2009
 
6-15-09
 
97.01, 97.02, 97.10—97.12, 97.20—97.22, 97.30—97.39, 97.50—97.54,
97.99, Ch. 97, App. A, B


9-2009
 
6-15-09
 
98.01—98.10


10-2009
 
7-20-09
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


12-2009
 
7-20-09
 
Ch. 74, Sched. VI


13-2009
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. I


14-2009
 
9-8-09
 
31.03


15-2009
 
8-17-09
 
151.01—151.14, 151.25—151.27, 151.40—151.46, 151.60—151.66, 151.99


16-2009
 
8-17-09
 
35.02


17-2009
 
9-21-09
 
70.01, 71.01, 71.20—71.27


18-2009
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. VI


20-2009
 
11-2-09
 
53.10—53.14


22-2009
 
11-16-09
 
Adopting Ordinance


25-2009
 
12-7-09
 
35.02


26-2009
 
12-28-09
 
34.01


3-2010
 
3-1-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6-2010
 
6-7-10
 
99.01—99.05, 99.99


7-2010
 
5-17-10
 
35.02


08-2010
 
9-20-10
 
T.S.O. I


12-2010
 
9-20-10
 
T.S.O. VI


14-2010
 
11-1-10
 
35.02


02-2011
 
4-4-11
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


04-2011
 
5-2-11
 
35.02


6-2011
 
4-18-11
 
35.02


8-2011
 
6-6-11
 
33.06


9-2011
 
6-20-11
 
35.02


10-2011
 
6-20-11
 
33.06


11-2011
 
7-5-11
 
35.02


12-2011
 
7-5-11
 
T.S.O. IV


15-2011
 
11-7-11
 
T.S.O. I


17-2011
 
11-7-11
 
T.S.O. VI


20-2011
 
12-5-11
 
Adopting Ordinance


21-2011
 
12-19-11
 
T.S.O. IV


1-2012
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. I


2-2012
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. I


3-2012
 
2-6-12
 
35.02


4-2012
 
1-17-12
 
50.006, 50.020, 50.023


6-2012
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. VI


6-2012A
 
3-19-12
 
Ch. 74, Sched. III


7-2012
 
2-21-12
 
T.S.O. VI


7A-2012
 
3-19-12
 
T.S.O. VI


8-2012
 
4-16-12
 
50.120


10-2012
 
4-16-12
 
T.S.O. IV


11-2012
 
4-16-12
 
Ch. 74, Sched. IV


12-2012
 
5-7-12
 
130.06


13-2012
 
5-21-12
 
50.006, 50.051


14-2012
 
7-2-12
 
54.01—54.07


16-2012
 
6-18-12
 
50.004, 50.023


18-2012
 
7-16-12
 
35.02, 52.03


23-2012
 
12-17-12
 
T.S.O. I


26-2012
 
12-3-12
 
30.02


27-2012
 
12-17-12
 
T.S.O. VI


28-2012
 
12-17-12
 
152.01


7-2011
 
10-3-11
 
110.01—110.13, 110.99


1-2013
 
3-4-13
 
50.004, 50.006, 50.051, 50.115, 50.118, 50.122—50.124


2-2013
 
3-4-13
 
50.001—50.006, 50.020—50.025, 50.035—50.037, 50.050—50.064,
50.075—50.087, 50.100, 50.101, 50.115—50.124, 50.135—50.137


3-2013
 
3-18-13
 
35.02


4-2013
 
4-15-13
 
152.01


5-2013
 
4-15-13
 
T.S.O. IV


7-2013
 
5-20-13
 
Adopting Ordinance


8-2013
 
6-17-13
 
Ch. 73, Sched. III


17-2013
 
11-4-13
 
T.S.O. IV


18-2013
 
11-18-13
 
Ch. 74, Sched. II; Ch. 74, Sched. III


3-2014
 
6-16-14
 
T.S.O. I


7-2014
 
6-16-14
 
T.S.O. VI


8-2014
 
6-16-14
 
Ch. 74, Sched. VII


10-2014
 
7-21-14
 
75.01, 75.02, 75.99


19-2014
 
10-6-14
 
35.02


20-2014
 
11-17-14
 
Adopting Ordinance


3-2015
 
2-2-15
 
35.02


6-2015
 
3-16-15
 
35.02


13-2015
 
6-1-15
 
113.01—113.12, 113.99


14-2015
 
6-1-15
 
35.02


15-2015
 
7-20-15
 
95.26


18-2015
 
9-8-15
 
34.08


12-2016
 
5-16-16
 
35.02


18-2016
 
8-1-16
 
Ch. 74, Sched. VI


22-2016
 
10-17-16
 
35.03


23-2018
 
11-  -18
 
35.02


Section 1
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1
SECTION 1 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND EFFECT
1.1 TITLE
These regulations shall hereafter be known and cited as the Zoning Ordinance of Danville, Indiana.
1.2 INTENT AND PURPOSE
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to regulate the use and development of land within the jurisdiction of the Town of Danville. It is intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and more specifically to:
A. Guide future growth and development in accordance with the Danville Comprehensive Plan;
B. Reduce traffic congestion in public streets;
C. Secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers;
D. Provide adequate light and air;
E. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population;
F. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements;
G. Restrict development in areas prone to flooding
H. Avoid scattered and uncontrolled development of land that would result in excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of community services;
I. Protect the historic and architectural heritage of the town;
J. Provide for performance standards for the emission of pollutants into the air, water, and ground; and
K. Protect the natural resources of the Town of Danville.
Section 1
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2
1.3 INTERPRETATION
A. In their interpretation and application the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Public Provisions. The regulations herein not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other Ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or provision of law. Where any provision of this Zoning Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance or any other Ordinance, rule or regulation, or provision of law, those provisions that are more restrictive or impose higher standards shall control.
C. Private Provisions. The regulations herein are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall govern.
Private provisions which impose duties and obligations more restrictive or of higher standards than the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and determinations made thereunder.
1.4 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
A. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all the regulations of this Ordinance as they apply to the zoning districts in which such buildings uses of land shall be located.
B. This Ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, the prior existing Zoning Ordinance; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue; or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation; or as waiving any right of the Town of Danville under any section or provision existing at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance; or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or corporation, by lawful action of the Town of Danville, except as shall be expressly provided for in this Ordinance.
Section 1
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 3
C. All previously existing legal uses, lots and structures which do not comply with the regulations in this Ordinance and its amendments, shall be deemed legal nonconforming uses, lots, and structures and shall be subject to the regulations of Section 3.
D. All territory which may be hereafter annexed to the Town shall, effective the date of such annexation, be considered to be in the RE1 district until otherwise classified by amendment to this Ordinance.
1.5 SEVERABILITY
If any part or provision of these regulations or application thereof to any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by a court of law, such judgement shall be confined in its operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgement shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances. The Town hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision or application.
1.6 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ORDINANCE
After the effective date of this Ordinance, the Danville Zoning Ordinance adopted December 2, 1991, as amended, and all prior Zoning Maps are hereby repealed.
1.7 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance, Ordinance #13-2000, shall be in full force and effective upon approval, passage, and publication according to law.
Section 1
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 4
Adopted this _____ day of ________________, _______, by the Town Council of the Town of Danville.
__________________________________
Richard Burrows
__________________________________
Dave Odle
__________________________________
Myron Anderson
__________________________________
Jeff Martin
__________________________________
Mike Neilson
(Constituting a majority of the Danville Town Council)
Attest By: ________________________________________
Pauletta Frye, Clerk-Treasurer
Signed copy on file with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Danville,
Town Hall, 147 West Main Street, Danville, Indiana, 46122.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 5
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
2.1 WORDS AND PHRASES
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives are herewithin defined as follows:
 Words used in the future tense include the present.
 Words used in the present tense include the future.
 Words used in the singular include the plural.
 Words used in the plural include the singular.
 Words in the masculine include the feminine.
 Words in the feminine include the masculine.
 The word ―shall‖ is mandatory.
 The word ―may‖ shall be deemed as permissive.
2.2 DEFINITIONS
Accessory Apartment. A second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single family detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility with provision in the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. Accessory apartments shall be clearly subordinate to the primary use in both size and location.
Accessory Structure or Use. A structure or use that: (1) is incidental to and serves a principal building or use; (2) is subordinate in height, area, and purpose to the principal structure or principal use served; (3) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants, business, or industry of the principal structure or principal use served; and (4) is located on the same lot as the principal structure or principal use served, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provision of this Ordinance. Accessory parking facilities may be authorized to be located elsewhere. An accessory structure is a detached structure.
Actual Construction. See Section 3.4.
Administrator. The official appointed and/or delegated the responsibility for the administration of these as set forth in Section 19.3 of this Ordinance.
Adult Use. A use which provides a preponderance of services, trade or material of a sexually explicit nature, including but not limited to, adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult theaters, and sexual encounter establishments.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 6
Advisory Plan Commission. A planning commission serving a single local government jurisdiction, established as defined under the Indiana Code, 36-7-1-2 (1983), as amended. The Danville Plan Commission is an Advisory Plan Commission.
Airport: Any runway, land area or other facility designed and used either publicly or privately by any person for the landing and taking off of aircraft including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
Airport-Related Use. A use or activity whose purpose or function is primarily or partially dependent on location or access to the operational area of a public use airport, or whose functions are directly or indirectly necessary for the daily operations and economic viability of a full-service public use airport to include but not be limited to all necessary navigation and flight operation facilities, and accessory uses such as terminal, storage, and servicing facilities for aircraft, air research facilities, and restaurant, hotel, or motel facilities and similar related services for the comfort and accommodation of air crews, air passengers and the public.
Alley. A permanent public way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
Alternative Tower Structure: Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
Antenna Height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
Antenna Support Structure: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower tripod, or any other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves.
Applicant. The owner of land who makes application to the Danville Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals for action by said Commission or Board, thereby affecting that land.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 7
Arterial, Divided Secondary. A secondary arterial street or portion thereof which has a landscaped median strip dividing the lanes carrying traffic in opposite directions.
Arterial, Primary. A street intended to move through-traffic to and from such major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers, colleges and/or universities, military installations, major industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the Town or County and/or as a route for traffic between communities; a major intra- or inter-city thoroughfare as designated by and shown in Appendix B to this Ordinance.
Arterial, Secondary. A street intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to primary arterials, except that these streets service minor traffic generating areas such as community-commercial areas, primary and secondary educational facilities, hospitals, major recreational areas, churches, and offices; and/or designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the system of primary arterials as designated and shown in Appendix B to this Ordinance.
Basement. That portion of a building with more than one half (1/2) of its height below the ground.
Bed and Breakfast. An owner occupied dwelling unit containing guestrooms for rent for periods of less than two weeks.
Billboard. See Sign, Off Premise Advertising.
Block Face. One side of a street between intersections
Block. A tract of land bounded by street, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
Board. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Danville.
Boarding House. An establishment that offers rooms for rent, not available to transients, in which meals are regularly provided for compensation for at least three inhabitants, in contradistinction to hotels, bed and breakfast uses, and dwelling units.
Boarding Kennel. A place primarily for keeping four or more dogs, cats or other small animals that are ordinarily kept as pets and are at least four months old. The use may include grooming, breeding, training or selling of animals.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 8
Broadcast: To transmit information over the airwaves to two or more receiving devices simultaneously. Information can be transmitted over local television or radio stations, satellite systems or wireless data communications networks.
Buffer Landscaping. Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, or related landscaping features required under this Ordinance or the subdivision regulations to be placed either on private property and privately maintained, or in public rights-of-way for the purpose of buffering lots from adjacent properties, for aesthetic purposes and/or for creating sound and/or visual privacy barriers
Building. Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. (Each part of such a structure that is separated from the rest by unbroken party walls is considered to be a separate building for the purposes of this Ordinance.)
Building Area. The horizontal projected area of the buildings on a lot; excluding open areas or terraces, unenclosed porches not more than one story high, and architectural features that project no more than two feet.
Building Line. The line that establishes the minimum permitted distance on a lot between the front line of a building and the street right-of-way line.
Building Permit. See Improvement Location Permit.
Business. The purchase, sale, or exchange of goods or services, or the maintenance for profit of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises.
Business District. Refers to the LB, GB, Primary and Secondary CB, and OD districts.
Campground. Any site, lot, field, or tract of land designed with facilities for short-term occupancy by recreational vehicles and other camping equipment but not including mobile homes.
Cellular Service: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission sites called cell sites, either to the public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 9
Cellular Telecommunications: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio Service licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to providers in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead; includes any columbarium, crematory, mausoleum, or mortuary operated in conjunction with and on the same tract as the cemetery.
Child Care Home. A residential structure in which at least six (6) children (not including the children for whom the provider is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian or other relative) at any time receive child care from a provider:
1. While unattended by a parent, legal guardian or custodian;
2. For regular compensation; and
3. For more than four (4) hours but less than twenty-four (24) hours in each of ten (10) consecutive days per year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
The term includes Class I Child Care Homes and Class II Child Care homes.
 Class I Child Care Home: A childcare home that serves any combination of full-time and part-time children, not to exceed twelve (12) children at any one (1) time.
 Class II Child Care Home: A child care home that services more than twelve (12) children but not more than any combination of sixteen (16) full-time and part-time children at any one (1) time.
Clinic. An establishment in which patients are admitted for medical or dental study or treatment and in which the services of at least two physicians or dentists are provided.
Cluster Housing. Developments in which dwelling units are clustered in a specific area on the site in order to permit aggregation of the remaining land into common recreational or open spaces.
Collector Street. A street intended to move traffic from local streets to secondary arterials. (A collector street serves a neighborhood or large subdivision and shall if at all possible be designated so that no residential properties face onto it and no driveway access to it is permitted except if the property is to be in multi-family use for four (4) or more dwelling units.)
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 10
Collocation: Locating wireless communication equipment from more than one provider on a single site.
Commission. The Danville Plan Commission.
Communications Facility: A land use facility supporting antennas and microwave dishes that sends and/or receives radio frequencies signals. Communications facilities include structures or towers, and accessory buildings.
Condominium. Real estate lawfully subjected to IC 32-1-6 (the Horizontal Property Law) by the recordation of condominium instruments, and in which undivided interests in the common areas and facilities are vested in the condominium unit owners.
Construction Trailer. A manufactured mobile unit without cooking or bathroom facilities, not designed for dwelling purposes, and used as a temporary office during construction.
Corner Lot. See Lot, Corner.
Country Club. An establishment operated for social or recreational purposes that is open only to members and not to the general public.
County. Hendricks County, Indiana.
Day Care Center. See Child Care Home.
Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per gross acre of land.
Detached Building. A building that has no structural connection with another building.
Development Requirement. A requirement for development of real property in a zoning district for which a site plan is required, and that conforms to Section 17.
Double Frontage Lot. See Lot, Double Frontage.
Drive-Through Establishment. A facility which, by its physical design, either wholly or in part, allows people to receive goods or services while remaining in their automobile.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 11
Drives, Private. Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, which are wholly within private property except where they intersect with public streets within public rights-of-way.
Dwelling. A building or part of a building that is used primarily as a place of abode, but not including a mobile home, hotel, motel, boarding house, or tourist home.
Dwelling Unit. A dwelling or part of a dwelling used by one family as a place of abode, physically separated from any other dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
Easement. An officially recorded authorization grant made by a property owner for use by another of any designated part of his property for a clearly specified purpose.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
Façade: All wall planes of a building or structure which are visible from one side or perspective.
Façade, Front: Those portions of a façade which face and are most closely parallel to the front lot line.
Family. One or more persons sharing meals and living as a single housekeeping unit, within a single dwelling unit.
Farm. An area used for agricultural operations, including roadside produce stands, forestry, the operating of a tree or plant nursery, or the production of livestock, poultry or grain.
Fast Food Restaurant. An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared quickly. Orders are generally not taken at the customer’s table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. Establishment may include a drive-through service facility as an accessory use.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
Flag Lot. See Lot, Flag.
Flex Space. Commercial, office or light industrial uses that require a flexible amount of office or showroom space in combination with related
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 12
activities such as manufacturing, assembly, distribution, warehousing, shipping, or other similar activities. These types of uses generally occur in buildings designed and constructed with storefront-type windows, loading dock facilities in the rear, and open floor plans with high ceiling in the interior.
Flood Plain. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The Floodplain includes both the floodway and the floodway fringe districts (See Section 18).
Flood Protection Grade. The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA (see Section 18).
Floodway. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream. (See Section 18).
Floodway Fringe. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway (See Section 18).
Floor Area Ratio. The combined floor area of all stories of all buildings within a lot, divided by the land area.
Foundation. The supporting member of a wall or structure.
Frequency: The number of cycles completed each second by a sound wave; measured in hertz (Hz).
Front Line. With respect to a building, the foundation line that is nearest the front lot line.
Front Lot Line.
1. For an interior or through lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting street or a lake or watercourse; and
2. For a corner lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and the shorter of the two abutting street segments.
Front Yard. See Yard, Front.
Garage. A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. (Not a repair facility.)
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 13
Garage or Yard Sale. A private or public sale of six (6) or more items of personal property, the sale of which is conducted within a residence, garage, or other accessory building, or immediately outside of such building, and which is conducted by the owner or occupier of such structure.
Gas Pump Island. Any commercial building, structure, or premises used for the dispensing or sale of automobile fuels, oils, or accessories.
General Industrial Use. See Industrial Use, General.
Ground Floor Area. The area of a building in square feet, as measured in a horizontal plane at the ground level within its largest outside dimensions, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, and exterior stairways.
Group Homes. A residential facility, licensed by the Developmental Disabilities Residential Facilities Council, which provides residential services for not more than eight (8) developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, none of whom has a history of violent or anti-social behavior. Group homes are permitted such staff as are necessary to adequately manage the home, but not to exceed two (2) staff members residing in the home at any one time.
Height. With respect to a building, the vertical distance from the average finished grade level to the highest point for a flat roof; to the deck line for a mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for a gable, hip, or gambrel roof.
Hobby Farming. The use of land for purposes of beekeeping or horticulture (See Section 4.4.H).
Home Service. The use of a home for a business or professional service (See Section 4.4.B).
Household Pet. A domesticated animal, such as a dog, cat, hamster, tropical fish or bird, normally kept in a residential dwelling, intended to provide company, security, or pleasure for its owner and bred for this purpose, but not including animals that would generally be considered, by reason of their number or species, to be an inherent risk to human health or safety.
Improvement Location Permit. A document issued under Section 19 of this Ordinance, prerequisite to the issuance of a building permit, and indicating that the proposed use, erection, construction, enlargement,
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 14
alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, or demolition any building or structure or use of the land complies with the sections of this Ordinance.
Industrial Use, General. Manufacturing, processing, extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage, or disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, in which some operations, other than transportation, are performed in open area.
Industrial Use, Light. Manufacturing, processing, extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage, or disposal of equipment, raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, in which all operations, other than transportation, are performed entirely within enclosed buildings and for which all loading and unloading facilities are enclosed.
Interior Lot. See Lot, Interior.
Junk Yard. A place, usually outdoors, where wastes and discarded or used property other than organic matter, including but not limited to inoperative vehicles and other machinery, is collected, stored, salvaged and/or sold; this shall not include any industrial scrap metal yard.
Kennel. See Boarding Kennel.
License: The rights and obligations extended by the municipality to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate its system within the boundaries of the municipality for the sole purpose of providing services to persons or areas outside the municipality.
Light Industrial Use. See Industrial Use, Light.
Loading Berth. An off-street, off-alley area designed or used to load goods onto or unload goods from vehicles.
Local Street. A street intended to provide access to other streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for sewer, water, and storm drainage pipes.
Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or of building development.
Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 15
Lot, Double Frontage. A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage on more than one street.
Lot, Flag. A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
Lot, Through. See Lot, Double Frontage.
Lot Area. The horizontally projected area of a lot, computed exclusive of any portion of a street.
Lot Coverage. The total ground area of a lot, usually expressed as a percentage of the lot area that is covered, occupied or enclosed by principal and accessory buildings and structures.
Lot Frontage. The linear distance of a lot measured at the front line where such lot abuts a street, measured between side lot lines.
Lot Ground Level.
1. For a building having walls abutting (that is, generally parallel to and not more than five feet from) one street only: the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall abutting the street.
2. For a building having walls abutting more than one street: the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls that face streets; and
3. For a building having no wall abutting a street: the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines as measured on the building setback line.
Maneuvering Aisle. A maneuvering space which serves two or more parking spaces, such as the area between two rows of parking spaces and/or the driveway leading to those spaces.
Maneuvering Space. An open space in a parking area which is immediately adjacent to a parking space, is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing or driving forward a motor vehicle into said parking
space, but is not used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 16
Manufactured Home. A single family dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more modules at a location other than the home site by assembly-line production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process which bears a seal certifying it was built in compliance with the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) and which is constructed after January 1, 1981 and exceeds nine hundred and fifty (950) square feet of main floor area exclusive of garages, carports, and open porches and exceeds twenty-three (23) feet in width and which is attached to a permanent foundation of masonry construction in accordance with the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code.
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code. Title IV of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 USC 5401 et seq.) as amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act).
MHZ: Megahertz, or 1,000,000 Hz.
Micro-cell: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility used to provide increased capacity in high call-demand areas or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage.
Microwave: Electromagnetic radiation with frequencies higher than 1,000 MHZ; highly directional signal used to transmit radio frequencies from point-to-point at a relatively low power level.
Microwave Antenna: A dish-like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission of voice or data.
Mineral Extraction. Mining or quarrying and removal of earth materials.
Mobile Home. A dwelling unit designed and built in a factory prior to 1976 or built after 1976 and being less than twenty-three (23) feet wide, equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily transportable, on its own permanent chassis, from one site to another, and to be used either with or without a permanent foundation, and which was built in accordance to the manufactured home construction and safety standards set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, 24 CFR 3280, 3282, 3283 and 42 USC 5401 et seq., and bearing a HUD manufactured home seal on the exterior. (The phrase ―without a permanent foundation‖ indicates that the support system is constructed with the intent that the mobile structure placed thereon may be moved from time to time at the convenience of the owner.)
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 17
Mobile Home Park. Any plot of ground upon which three (3) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes is located.
Mobile Structure. A dwelling unit designed and built in a factory, equipped with the necessary service connections and made so as to be readily movable as a unit or units on its own running gear and designed to be with or without a permanent foundation. (Mobile Structure does not include manufactured homes.)
Modular Home. A dwelling unit designed and fabricated in one or more modules at a location other than the home site by assembly line production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process which bears a seal certifying it was built in compliance with the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code. (Modular Home does not include mobile homes or manufactured homes.)
Modular System. An industrialized building system other than a mobile structure intended for placement upon a permanent foundation.
Monopole Tower: A communication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.
Mural, Artistic. Artwork applied to the wall of a building which does not contain a commercial message. Artistic murals are not considered signs and are generally for the purpose of decoration or artistic expression. Artistic murals depict scenes or images of natural, social, cultural, or historic significance and may be painted, fresco, mosaic, or created with another approved technique.
Neighborhood Recreational Area. A private recreation area which is owned by a neighborhood association or a Developer, and is only for the use of the residents of that subdivision.
Nonconforming Building or Structure (Legally Established). Any continuous, lawfully established building or structure erected or structurally altered prior to the time of adoption, revision, or amendment of this Ordinance or granted a variance from this Ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, amendment, or variance, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use. A legal use of land existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 18
Occupied Space. The total area of earth horizontally covered by the structure, excluding garages, patios and porches and other accessory structures.
Omnidirectional Antenna: An antenna that is equally effective in all directions and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it was designed.
One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Indiana. The nationally recognized model building code adopted by the Indiana Department of Fire Prevention and Building Safety as mandated by Public Law 360, Act of 1971, and which includes those supplements and amendments promulgated by this agency.
Open Use. The use of a lot without a building, or a use for which a building with a floor area no larger than five percent of the lot area is only incidental.
Open Space. The total horizontal area of a lot, excluding the building area, paved roads, and parking areas, but including recreational areas and retention/detention ponds.
Parcel. A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person or persons.
Parking Lot or Area. A group of parking spaces, exclusive of any part of a street or alley, designated or used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Parking Lot, Commercial. A parcel of land or portion thereof used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for which a fee is charged independently of any other use of the premises.
Parking Garage. A garage where parking, but not repairs, are available to the public.
Parking Space. An open space for the parking of a motor vehicle, exclusive of maneuvering area and driveway.
Permanent Foundation. A structural system for transposing loads from a structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost line, without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 19
Person. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of government, or any other group that acts as a unit, as well as a natural person.
Planned Unit Development. A large-scale unified development meeting the requirements for zoning approval under the provisions of Section 15 of this Ordinance.
Portable Sign. See Sign, Portable.
Primary Arterial. See Arterial, Primary.
Principal Building. A building in which the principal use of the lot or parcel on which it is located is conducted. Standards recognized by the Indiana Department of Fire and Building Services shall be used to determine whether a given structure constitutes one or more buildings in cases where ambiguities exist.
Principal Use. The primary use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Private Garage. A garage whose principal use is to house motor vehicles for the accommodation of related dwelling units or related business establishments.
Private Recreational Development. A recreational establishment held in private ownership and either open only to members or open to the general public in exchange for an admission fee.
Professional Office. An office used by members of a recognized profession including but not limited to architects, artists, dentists, engineers, lawyers, musicians, physicians, surgeons or pharmacists, and realtors or insurance agents and brokers.
Private Camp. An area of land used or designed to be used to accommodate groups or organized camping parties; may include cabins, tents, food service and recreational facilities.
Public Event. Any event taking place within the Town to which the public is invited that is held or primarily sponsored by a governmental, educational, religious, charitable, or other civic organization of the Town. This shall not include events that primarily serve to promote or benefit a commercial enterprise.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 20
Public Improvement. Any drainage ditch, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Rear Lot Line. For an interior or corner lot this means the lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest from it; except for a triangular or other irregularly-shaped lot where it means the line at least ten feet long, parallel to and furthest from the front lot line, and which is wholly within the lot.
Recreational Vehicle. A portable vehicular structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and vacation uses which:
1. Is identified on the unit by manufacturer as a travel trailer; and
2. Is of a size that is street-legal
OR
3. Is a structure mounted on an automobile or truck; and
4. Is designed to be used for sleeping and human habitation.
Regulatory Flood. The flood having a one percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 18.5 of this Ordinance. The "Regulatory Flood" is also known by the term "Base Flood" (See Section 18).
Regulatory Floodway. See Floodway.
Remodel: Updating or altering the appearance and functional utility of a structure.
Renovation: Improving a structure to its original or near-original condition.
Repair: Any change that does not require a building permit and is not construction, relocation, or alteration.
Residential District. Those districts, RC1, RE1, R1, R2C, R2, R3, and R4 as described under Section 6, Use Districts.
Right-of-Way. A specific and particularly described strip of land, property, or interest therein devoted to and subject to the lawful public use,
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 21
typically as a thoroughfare of passage for pedestrians, vehicles, or utilities, as officially recorded in the office of the Hendricks County Recorder.
Roof and/or Building Mount Facility: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility in which antennas are mounted to a structure on the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or building face.
Scrap Metal Yard. A general industrial use established either independent of another general industrial use or ancillary to and connected with another general industrial use. A scrap metal yard is concerned exclusively with new and salvaged metal pipes, wire, beams, angles, rods, machinery, parts, filings, clippings, and all other metal items of every type; and it acquires such items incidental to its connection with the other general industrial use, by purchase, consignment or bailment. Such metal items may be stored, graded, processed, melted, cut, dismantled, compressed, cleaned, or in any way prepared for reuse by a related, on site, general industrial use; or they such metal items may be made available for sale, shipment, and use in other industries or businesses, including open hearth electric furnaces and foundry operations. Such establishments shall not include junkyards, dumps, or automobile graveyards.
The storage, dealing of, or accumulation of significant quantities of combustible, organic or nonmetal scrap materials such as wood, paper, rags, garbage, bones and shattered glass on the premises of such an establishment will disqualify it from being classified as a scrap metal yard. Such yards will be classified as junkyards.
Secondary Arterial. See Arterial, Secondary.
Section. A unit of a manufactured home.
Service Station. Any commercial building, structure, or premises used for the dispensing or sale of automobile fuels, oils, or accessories; and where light automobile maintenance may be conducted, including but not limited to oil changes, air conditioning service, tune-ups and detailing. Service stations shall not include heavy automobile maintenance or repair such as body work, painting, engine repair, or auto salvaging.
Setback Line. A line parallel to and equidistant from the relevant lot line (front, back, side) which establishes the minimum depth of yard on a lot, beyond which no building or structure is permitted; as measured from the street line or lot line.
Side Lot Line. Any lines, other than front or rear lot lines, that separate two lots.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 22
Side Yard. See Yard, Side.
Sign. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which conveys information or directs attention to an object, project, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business and is visible from the public right-of-way.
Sign, Animated. A sign depicting action, motion, light, or color changes through electrical or mechanical means. Although technologically similar to flashing signs, the animated sign emphasizes graphics and artistic display. Animated signs are regulated as electronic message centers.
Sign, Awning. A sign on an awning. Similar to a canopy sign, awning signs are typically painted or affixed directly onto a building-mounted structure, which is normally constructed of canvas, cloth, metal, plastic, or similar material, may provide additional functionality as shelter and is typically placed over windows and doors.
Sign, Bench. A sign located on the seat or back of a bench that is visible from a public right-of-way. (Bench signs are prohibited.)
Sign, Blade. Also known as a Projecting Sign. A building mounted sign with the faces of the sign projecting 12 inches or more from and generally perpendicular to the building fascia, excepting signs located on a canopy, awning, or marquee.
Sign, Canopy. A sign on a canopy. Similar to an awning sign, a canopy sign is mounted, painted or otherwise applied on or attached to a free-standing canopy or structural protective cover that provides shelter.
Sign, Changeable-Copy. A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change manually through placement of letters or symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.
Sign, Electronic Message Center. A variable-message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or a flipper matrix. Electronic message centers may include messages that are static, messages that appear or disappear from the display through dissolve, fade, travel or scroll modes, or similar transitions and frame effects that have text, animated graphics or images that appear to move or change in size, or be revealed sequentially rather than all at once. For purposes of this ordinance, Electronic Message Centers are
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 23
considered a type of Flashing Sign. (Electronic Message Centers are prohibited.)
Sign, Flashing. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. For the purpose of this Ordinance, any revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a ―flashing sign‖.
Sign, Freestanding. A sign that is not attached to a building.
Sign, Gross Surface Area of. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of such sign with two visible surfaces, the gross surface area shall be the sum of all sides of the sign.
Sign, Ground. A type of freestanding sign that has a visible support structure.
Sign, Human. A sign held by or attached to a human for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, or product. This can also include a person dressed in costume for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, or product. (Human signs are prohibited.)
Sign, Identification. A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
Sign, Menu Board. A variable-message sign that allows a retailer to list products and prices (for example, the bill of fare for a drive-through restaurant).
Sign, Monument. A type of freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other structure.
Sign, Mural. A sign painted or otherwise placed directly on an exterior surface, which has no supporting sign structure, and contains a commercial message. This type of sign is typically designed for high-impact visibility. Mural signs are considered a type of wall sign and are regulated as such.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 24
Sign, Nonconforming. Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations of the Town of Danville and maintained prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and which fails to conform to all applicable standards and restrictions of this Ordinance.
Sign, Off Premise Advertising. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
Sign, Pole. A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding mast or pole and not attached to any building, or supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground, but not including monument signs.
Sign, Political. A sign that advertises a candidate or issue to be voted upon on a definite election day.
Sign, Portable. Any sign designed to be transported or movable, including but not limited to:
1. Signs with wheels or with wheels removed;
2. Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels;
3. Signs designed to be transported by trailer, wheels or boat;
4. Signs converted to or constructed as an A- or T- frame sign;
5. Signs painted, mounted, or affixed on a motor vehicle for advertising purposes, parked on or off public right-of-way, and visible from the public right-of-way, except signs identifying the related business when the motor vehicle is being used in the normal day-to-day operations of that business.
Sign, Public Service. A sign or device displaying only the time, temperature, stock market quotations or civic messages.
Sign, Roof. A sign that is mounted or painted on the roof of a building, or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the roof. (Roof signs are prohibited.)
Sign, Sandwich Board. Also known as an A-frame sign. A sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located, but supported by its own frame and most often forming the cross-sectional shape of an A.
Sign, Snipe. An off-premise sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects. (Snipe signs are prohibited.)
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 25
Sign Structure or Support. Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover.
Sign, Projecting. A sign which is suspended from or affixed to any building wall or other structure and extends beyond the building wall or structure or parts thereof more than eighteen inches.
Sign, Vehicular. Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a product or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. For the purpose of this Ordinance, vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other business purposes.
Sign, Wall. A sign affixed, painted, posted, or placed on a building or structure.
Sign, Window. A sign that is applied or attached to or suspended from the exterior or interior of a window or located within the interior of a structure that is visible from the nearest right-of-way. Window signs may be either temporary or permanent:
Sign, Permanent Window. A window sign that is constructed of durable materials and is intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or tenant is located on the premises.
Sign, Temporary Window. A window sign that is typically constructed from light materials, is easily removed and is intended for display for a limited time period.
Sign, Yard Card. A type of free-standing temporary sign, not exceeding 32 sq.ft. which is not used for off-premise advertising.
Site Plan(s). Specific plan for the residential, commercial, or industrial development or other development of property, setting forth certain information and data required by the Plan Commission.
Special Exception. A use that is designated as such by this Ordinance as being permitted in the district concerned if it meets special conditions, following a public hearing and the approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
Storage, Outdoor. The outdoor accumulation or storage of goods, junk, vehicles, equipment, products, or materials for permanent or temporary holding.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 26
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. For purposes of this Ordinance, a basement shall not be counted as a story.
Street. A right-of-way that is dedicated to a governmental unit or is established by a recorded plat and publicly maintained to provide the principal means of access to abutting property.
Streetwall: The main wall of a structure that is closest to and most nearly parallel with an adjacent street.
Structural Change. A substantial change in a supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall or partition, column, beam, or girder, or in an exterior wall or the roof.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in the ground or attachments to something having a location on or in the ground.
Structure, Primary: A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plats, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including re-subdivision.
Telecommunications: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
Through Lot. See Lot, Double Frontage.
Tourist Home. See Bed and Breakfast.
Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
Town. The Town of Danville.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 27
Town Attorney. Usually that attorney regularly retained to advise or represent the Town in legal matters. In special circumstances the term may refer also to other attorneys retained by the Town for supplemental legal services.
Use. The employment or occupation of a building structure or land for a person’s service, benefit, or enjoyment.
Use Variance. The approval of a use other than that prescribed by this Zoning Ordinance. Changes of allowed uses are not permitted by this Ordinance except by Zoning Map amendment.
Variance. A specific approval for development or redevelopment which deviates from the development standards prescribed by this Ordinance, including but not limited to height, bulk, or yard areas; but not including a change in use. Such approvals are granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner prescribed in Section 19 of this Ordinance.
Vision Clearance. (See Section 4.8 for requirements at corners for a clear vision triangle.)
Yard. The area of a lot with a principal building that is open and unobstructed except as otherwise authorized by this Ordinance.
Yard, Front. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the right-of-way line, and that right-of-way line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the right-of-way line. Lots adjoining more than one street shall have front yards on all sides that adjoin a public or private street.
Yard, Rear. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the rear lot line and that rear lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the rear lot line.
Yard, Side. The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building to the side lot line, unoccupied other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than twenty-four (24) inches into that space, steps or terraces not higher than the level of the first floor of the building, and open lattice-enclosed fire escapes or fireproof outside stairways and balconies projecting not over twenty-four (24) inches into that space.
Zero Lot Line. The location of a building on a lot in such manner that one or more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line.
Section 2
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 28
Zoning Administrator. See Administrator.
Section 3
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 29
SECTION 3 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
3.1 INTERPRETATION & INTENT
Within the districts established by this Ordinance or by amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist certain structures or uses of land that were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which are prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or may be by future amendments hereto. Such legal nonconforming uses and structures may include:
 Nonconforming lots,
 Nonconforming structures,
 Nonconforming uses of land, and
 Nonconforming uses of land and structures in combination
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconforming lots, structures and uses of land to continue under the provisions of this section until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that legal nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses which are prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
3.2 INCOMPATIBILITY OF NONCONFORMING USES
Nonconforming uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which they are located.
3.3 ILLEGAL USES
Illegal uses existing at the time this Ordinance is enacted shall not be validated by virtue of its enactment.
3.4 AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or development on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially completed preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that the work shall be carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined as work done which is beyond the preparation stage and into that stage where the changes or additions are made permanent.
Section 3
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 30
3.5 ORDINARY REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
On any legal nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent (10%) of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure and market value of real estate, or nonconforming portion of the structure, whichever the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. If a legal nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
3.6 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS NOT CONSIDERED NONCONFORMING USES
Any use which is permitted by this Ordinance as a special exception in the district in which it is located shall be deemed a conforming use in such district with no further action.
3.7 NONCONFORMING LOTS
In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a single family dwelling may be constructed on a single lot that was legally established and recorded, even if this Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, establishes a minimum lot width or area requirement for the district that exceeds the width or area of this lot. All other requirements of this Ordinance and its subsequent amendments must be met for the use of this lot.
3.8 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
Where, at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this Ordinance, the uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
A. Enlargement of Use. No such nonconforming uses shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.
Section 3
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 31
B. Moving. No such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.
C. Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment. If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued for a continuous period in excess of one year (except where government action impedes access to the premises), such period of discontinuance of use shall constitute an abandonment of the use, and any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
D. New Construction. No additional structure or accessory structure not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
3.9 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not now be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
A. Structural Alteration or Enlargement. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
B. Damage or Destruction. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50 percent (50%) of the fair market value of the building immediately prior to the damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Moving. Should such structure be moved for any reason or for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
3.10 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN COMBINATION
If a lawful use involving individual structures, or a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that would not now be allowed in the district under the terms of
Section 3
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 32
this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.
A. Structural Alteration or Enlargement. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. Extension of Use. A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. Change in Use. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
D. Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment. If any such nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued for a continuous period in excess of one year (except where government action impedes access to the premises), such period of discontinuance of use shall constitute an abandonment of the use of the structure, or structure and land in combination, and the structure or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
E. Removal of Structure. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. However, any future use of the land must be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
3.11 NONCONFORMING PARKING
See subsection 11.2.B for regulations concerning nonconforming parking.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 33
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS OF ZONING DISTRICTS
4.1 USE OF BUILDING OR LAND FOR INTENDED PURPOSE
A. No building or land shall be used and no buildings shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, which are arranged, intended, or designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and specified in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No structure shall be erected or altered to provide for greater height or bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein.
4.2 PRINCIPAL USES
A principal use may be authorized as either a permitted use or a special exception. Permitted uses are those uses which are allowed without special permission of the Board of Zoning Appeals, given that they follow the provisions set forth in this Ordinance. Special exceptions are only permitted following a public hearing and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals, as per Section 5 of this Ordinance.
Principal uses for each district are listed with their provisions under the district headings in Sections 7 through 10 of this Ordinance. A quick reference is available in the form of a use matrix in Appendix A, however, because some principal uses may contain special provisions in some districts, Sections 7 through 10 shall be considered the definitive listing of principal uses and their regulations.
In any district, no more than one (1) principal structure and one (1) principal use shall be located on a single lot; except that primary structures designed and platted as a single unit under single ownership and control, such as a multi-family residential project, business shopping center, or combined industrial operations, may be permissible on a single lot under the terms of this Ordinance.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 34
4.3 ACCESSORY USES
A. Uses Considered to be Accessory Uses. For the purpose of this Ordinance, accessory uses will be referred to in Sections 7 through 10 of this Ordinance. Accessory uses are generally permitted in all zoning districts, provided they meet all provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
B. General Provisions
1. Bulk Requirements
The accessory use shall be clearly subordinate in height, area, bulk, extent, and purpose to the principal use, and shall not exceed the following:
a) Area. No accessory structure shall be greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square foot area of the principal structure or no greater than 1000 square feet, whichever is less.
b) Yard Depths. In any residential district except for the R2C district, an accessory building may be located no closer to a side lot line than six (6) feet, no closer to the rear lot line than ten (10) feet, and no closer to the front lot line than the front building line of the principal building.
In R2C districts, an accessory building may be located no closer to a side lot line than three (3) feet, no closer to the rear lot line than three (3) feet and no closer to the front lot line than the front building line of the principal building.
In all other districts, accessory uses must follow the minimum setbacks required by all structures in the district in which they are located.
c) Height. No accessory structure shall exceed the maximum height of fifteen (15) feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. In the R2C district, the height of an accessory garage may be increased up to a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet in order to match the roof pitch of the principal structure. No additional living space may be created as a result of the increased height.
2. The accessory use shall be operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the principal use.
3. Accessory uses shall be limited to three (3) structures in residential districts.
4. An accessory use shall not be permitted prior to the erection and operation of a principal use unless a Temporary Improvement Location Permit is issued as per Section 19 of this Ordinance.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 35
C. Regulations Specific to Particular Uses
1. Household pets, provided that the keeping of such pets is not for profit and not construed as a kennel.
2. Accessory apartments, as set forth in this Section.
3. Home occupations, as set forth in this Section.
4. Garages and carports, provided that such structures are accessory to private, residential uses, are used for the storage of motor vehicles, and are clearly accessory and not for commercial purposes.
5. Swimming pools and hot tubs, subject to the following: Private swimming pools shall be regulated according to the Indiana Swimming Pool Code, as amended. (State Code currently requires access to pools be restricted by one of three means. Refer to 675 IAC 20-4-27.) Swimming pools are subject to all yard requirements in the district in which they are located and shall be permitted in the rear yard only.
4.4 USES GENERALLY PERMITTED
A. Accessory Uses, as defined in this Section.
B. Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be a permitted accessory use in all residential dwelling units provided that the following conditions are met.
1. No more than one (1) person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such home service.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home service shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home service.
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible signs of the conduct of such home service other than one (1) non-illuminated sign, as follows:
a) One sign not exceeding four (4) square foot in area permanently mounted on the principle building; or
b) One sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area permanently mounted on a mailbox, fence or other permanent structure within the front yard of the principle building.
4. No home service shall be conducted in any accessory building.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 36
5. No traffic shall be generated by such home service in greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home service shall meet the off-street parking requirements as specified in this Ordinance, and shall not be located in a required front yard.
6. No equipment or process shall be used in such home service which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the parcel. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television off the premises, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage off the premises.
C. Group Homes shall be permitted in all residential districts, as permitted by Indiana law, provided all required licenses, certifications, permits and approvals are up to date and maintained.
D. Manufactured Housing. Manufactured homes as scattered-site residences shall be a permitted use in single family residential districts, subject to the requirements for all residential uses and lots in such districts, and provided the manufactured homes meet the following requirements and limitations:
1. The home shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance, possess all necessary improvement location, building, and occupancy permits and other certification required by this Ordinance;
2. The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation in conformance with the regulations of the State’s International Building Code and the manufacturer’s installation specifications;
3. The home shall comply with the provisions of the Town’s Building Code, pertaining to exterior covering material, roof covering material, and roof pitch as is customarily used on site-built residential dwellings. All exterior covering material shall extend over the top of the foundation;
4. The home shall meet the minimum square footage requirements for the appropriate zone; and
5. The home shall be oriented such that its longest side is the side that faces the street frontage.
E. Accessory Apartments. Accessory apartments shall be a Special Exception in all residential districts. Accessory apartments, also
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 37
known as in-law quarters and granny flats, shall be limited to occupation by family members only, and must be clearly subordinate to the primary residential use in both size and location on the lot. Special Exceptions for accessory apartments shall be obtained from the Board of Zoning Appeals as per Section 5 of this Ordinance and must be renewed every five (5) years.
F. Bed and Breakfasts. The following standards must be met for all Bed and Breakfast establishments:
1. Bed and breakfasts are permitted uses in the R3, R4, LB, GB, and Primary and Secondary CB Districts. Further, they are allowed as Special Exceptions in the R1, R2, and R2C Districts.
2. No exterior alterations to the structure shall be made which would change the residential appearance of the building.
3. The minimum total floor area of the principal residential structure needed to establish a bed and breakfast use shall be 2,500 square feet.
4. Parking standards set forth in Section 11 of this Ordinance shall be met.
5. Guestrooms shall not be used for cooking or eating, however, meals may be provided. Dining and other facilities shall not be open to the public but shall be exclusively for the use of the residents and registered bed and breakfast guests, unless the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that opening the facilities to the public will not have a negative impact on the surrounding area. The Board may set any additional regulations necessary to ensure that public use of such facilities will be in harmony with the surrounding area.
6. There shall be no more than the equivalent of one non-resident full-time employee hired solely for the purpose of working for the bed and breakfast use.
G. Public Utility Installations for Local Service
H. Hobby Farming. Hobby farming shall be a permitted use in all districts provided that:
1. The processing and storage of harvested produce or other end products shall not be allowed on site.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 38
2. The hobby farming use shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the land area of the lot and shall abide by all setback regulations.
4.5 TEMPORARY USES
A. Intent. Temporary uses shall be permitted in applicable zone districts by the grant of a temporary improvement location permit issued by the Administrator in accordance with the requirements of Section 19.
B. General Provisions.
1. The duration of the temporary period is stated in this Section, provided, however, renewal of such permit may be requested. All time periods, listed in days or months, are considered to be consecutive.
2. Temporary uses shall be subject to all the regulations of the applicable zone district.
3. Adequate access and off-street parking facilities shall be provided which shall not interfere with traffic movement on adjacent streets.
4. No public address systems or other noise producing devices shall be permitted in a residential district.
5. Any floodlights or other lighting shall be directed upon the premises and shall not be detrimental to adjacent properties.
6. The lot shall be put in clean condition, devoid of temporary use remnants upon termination of the temporary period.
C. Permitted Temporary Uses. Within any zoning district, no temporary use shall be used or arranged or designed to be used except in conformance with the following rules and time limits:
1. Mobile homes in single family residential areas are subject to the provisions of Section 19.11.I.2. Maximum use limited to one (1) year with no renewals.
2. Temporary office, model home or model apartment and incidental signs thereof, both incidental and necessary for the sale, rental or lease of real property in the zone district. Maximum use limited to eighteen (18) months.
3. Noncommercial concrete batching plant, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zoning district. Maximum use limited to eighteen (18) months.
4. Temporary portable storage units. Maximum use limited to ninety (90) days.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 39
5. Temporary building or yard for construction materials and equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zone district. Maximum use limited to eighteen (18) months.
6. Parking lot designated for a special non-profit event in zone district. Maximum use limited to thirty (30) days.
7. Bazaars, carnivals, and other similar temporary uses. Maximum use limited to ten (10) days.
8. Tent or roadside sale are limited to not-for-profit or civic organizations. Maximum use limited to sixty (60) days.
9. Parking of recreational vehicles for visitation. Maximum use limited to seven (7) days.
10. Construction trailers as a temporary office during the period of construction and development. Maximum use limited to eighteen (18) months.
11. Anything herein to the contrary, notwithstanding a recreational vehicle, may be temporarily parked or stored upon the grant of a temporary improvement location permit in the open in connection with the following:
a) A public health program sponsored by a public health department.
b) A program sponsored by any unit of government.
c) A carnival or other public affair or function authorized by proper authority
d) Other similar uses deemed temporary by the Board of Zoning Appeals and attached with such time period, conditions and safeguards as the Board may deem necessary.
D. Garage or Yard Sales
1. Location and Duration. A garage or yard sale may be conducted one time in any one calendar year on any premises located in any RC1, RE1, R1, R2, R2C, R3, or R4 zone, but no such sale shall be conducted for more than three (3) consecutive days.
2. Hours of Operation. A garage or yard sale shall only be conducted during the hours from sunrise to sunset.
3. Property for Sale. All items of personal property sold at a garage or yard sale shall be owned by the owner or occupier of the premises or by a participant at the sale. Personal property for sale must not be property that has been acquired by the owner expressly for the purpose of resale.
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 40
4. Removal of Sale Items and Signs. All personal property exhibited for sale outside any structure during a garage or yard sale shall be removed from the outside and placed within a building immediately following the last day of such sale. All signs erected for such garage or yard sale shall likewise be removed.
5. Requirement for a Permit. No garage or yard sale shall be held without the owner or occupier of the premises having first obtained a permit for the sale. The permit shall be obtained through application to the Administrator who shall issue such permit upon the payment of a fee of five dollars ($5.00). The permit shall specify the address and date of the sale, and the permit must be clearly displayed at the site of the garage sale at all times.
4.6 OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS
All required yards shall be kept free of all material including but not limited to buildings, structures, parking lots, material for sale, outdoor storage, and advertising or display to attract attention.
The following shall not be considered obstructions when located within required yards except in areas required for vision clearance at intersections:
A. In All Yards
1. Open terraces not over four (4) feet above the average level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-over terrace or porch
2. Awnings or Canopies
3. Steps that are four (4) feet or less above grade, which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a building lot from a street or alley
4. Chimneys projecting eighteen (18) inches or less into the yard
5. Movable recreational and laundry-drying equipment located in rear yards
6. Arbors and trellises
7. Flag poles
8. Walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height above natural grade level
B. In Front Yards
1. One-story bay windows and overhanging eaves
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 41
2. Down spouts projecting not more than six (6) feet into the yard
C. In Rear Yards
1. Enclosed, attached, or detached off-street parking spaces
2. Open, off-street parking spaces
3. Balconies, breezeways and open porches
4. One-story bay windows projecting not more than three (3) feet into the yard
5. Overhanging gutters and eaves projecting not more than two (2) feet into the yard
D. In Side Yards
1. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting no more than two (2) feet into the yard
4.7 PLACING STRUCTURES OVER UTILITY EASEMENTS
No building or structure shall be placed or erected over utility easements, except for fences or signs. Such structure shall be subject to the paramount right of the utility or municipality to install, repair, maintain or replace its installation. Structures in easements under the terms of this Section shall be permitted only upon presentation of evidence sufficient to show that the structure will not interfere with any utility facility or drainage system. In the event that such structure must be removed or altered in order to accommodate utilities or drainage, the removal or alteration shall be accomplished at the expense of the property owner.
4.8 VISION CLEARANCE AT INTERSECTIONS
At the street intersection of each corner lot, the triangular space determined by the two street centerlines at that corner and by a diagonal line connecting the two points on those centerlines lines that are seventy-five (75) feet respectively from the intersecting point of said centerlines, shall be kept free of any obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half (2½) feet and twelve (12) feet above the centerline grade.
4.9 GENERAL, TRAFFIC, AND OPEN AIR BUSINESS STANDARDS
In any zone district, where applicable, the following standards shall supplement the business use requirements of the zone district.
A. General Standards
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 42
1. No amplification of radio music or other audio advertising shall be permitted on the premises
2. No lights utilizing an attracting device or lights or stringers of unshielded incandescent lamps or attention attracting lighting from apparatus of a type used by emergency vehicles shall be permitted on the premises.
3. There shall be no exterior displays which restrict visibility in any way or which impede the movement of any vehicles. All such displays shall be maintained in an orderly manner.
4. Adequate interior or outdoor trash containers shall be required; provided, that outdoor trash containers be screened in accordance with Section 13.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Adequate employee and customer off-street parking areas shall be provided. No such parking shall be permitted on driveway approaches, landscape areas, adjacent alleys or streets (unless specified in Section 11 of this Ordinance), on any public right-of-way, or in such a manner as to restrict motorists’ visibility.
B. Standards Concerning Traffic Congestion
1. Number of traffic access points. The number of traffic access points for establishments with one hundred (100) feet or less of frontage on a street shall not exceed one (1).
2. Service Roads. Whenever practicable, for establishments with frontage of more than one hundred (100) feet, a service road shall be provided of not less than two (2) lanes in width or a combined service road and parking area, parallel with and adjacent to the street upon which the establishments front. In the event the establishments front on more than one (1) street, such service roads may be required on more than one (1) frontage street.
The service road required by this subsection shall be effectively separated from the main roadway by a landscape strip or other suitable delineation, and shall be designed and arranged so as to provide the principal means of access to abutting business establishments. In general, the use of public improved alleys, interior access roads, or any other designed means to minimize the number of traffic access points and business intersections are encouraged.
C. Drive Through and Open Air Business Regulations
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 43
Any establishment where the principal uses are the drive-in, drive-through, or open air type business operation shall be subject to the following standards.
1. Gasoline pump islands, canopies and support posts, or other free standing accessory devices which are essential to the operation of the business must observe a setback line of at least fifteen (15) feet. However, no structure or device authorized by this Section shall be located in such a manner as to impede intersection visibility.
2. Such business uses shall be limited to the characteristics customarily associated with such use, and no other.
3. Drive through stacking spaces shall be provided as set forth in Section 11.2.F.6 of this Ordinance.
4. All drive-through establishments shall be subject to plan review and approval by the city engineer prior to the issuance of any building permits. At a minimum this review shall include off-site and on-site circulation related to the use, including turning movement and compatibility with pedestrian circulation.
4.10 ADDRESSES AND STREET NAMES
A. Addresses
1. All houses and buildings within the Town shall be numbered in a uniform manner as prescribed by the Plan Commission in conjunction with the U.S. Postal Service.
2. All houses and buildings shall display the building number in a conspicuous place on the side of the building parallel to the street of the corresponding number. Numerals shall be at least three (3) inches in height.
3. The Plan Commission shall direct the Zoning Administrator to change the house or building number of any street or part of a street when the change shall be necessary by reason of readjustment of any kind, inaccuracy, or mistake, or for any other cause.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or deface any house or building number properly assigned or placed on or near a building, or to place or retain on any building any number other than the one duly assigned.
B. Street Names
Section 4
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 44
1. Pursuant to IC 36-7-4-405, all street names shall be reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission to avoid duplication or conflict with other names of streets within the township.
Section 5
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 45
SECTION 5 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
5.1 PURPOSE
Special Exceptions are those uses that, because of their unique characteristics and potentially adverse impact upon the immediate area, as well as the Town as a whole, require a greater degree of scrutiny in a given location. Therefore, the determination of a Special Exception as appropriate shall be contingent upon its meeting a set of standards, intended in each case, to weigh the public need and benefit of the use against its impact, giving effect to the measures proposed by the applicant for the amelioration of any adverse impacts through special site planning and development techniques, as well as the provisions of public improvements, sites, right-of-way and services.
5.2 AUTHORITY
The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or deny Special Exceptions.
5.3 PARTIES ENTITLED TO SEEK SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
The owner or lessee of the subject property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject property may file an application for a Special Exception with the Zoning Administrator.
5.4 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND DECISION
A. Application. At a minimum, the application shall contain the following information:
1. Name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
2. Legal description of the property;
3. Description of the existing use, if any;
4. The particular zoning district;
5. Description of the proposed Special Exception;
6. A plan of the proposed site for the Special Exception showing the location of all buildings, parking and loading areas, traffic access and traffic circulation, open spaces, landscaping, refuse and service areas, utilities, signage, yards, and such other information as the Board deems warranted; and
7. A narrative statement evaluating the effects of the Special Exception on abutting property, as well as other properties in the district, and the relationship of the Special Exception to the
Section 5
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 46
Comprehensive Plan, or any specific land use objectives of the Town of Danville.
B. Action by the Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a Special Exception permit, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals the application together with any reports and recommendations subject to
the proposed application.
C. Public Hearing and Notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with its rules. Notice for the public hearing shall be performed in the manner prescribed by the Board.
D. Action by Board of Zoning Appeals. Within thirty (30) days after the close of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, in writing, either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or deny the application. Upon reaching a decision, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to notify the applicant in writing of its decision. If the application is approved or approved with conditions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Zoning Administrator to issue a Special Exception permit which shall specify all conditions associated with the Special Exception approval.
E. Review by Certiorari. A decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the Circuit Court of Hendricks County a petition duly verified setting forth that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
5.5 STANDARDS FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed Special Exception in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
1. Is in fact a Special Exception listed in the specific zoning district involved;
2. Will not be detrimental to or endanger the public’s health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
Section 5
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 47
3. Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
4. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such services;
5. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public expense for public facilities and services, nor be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community or result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance;
6. At least one year has elapsed since any denial by the Board of any prior application for a Special Exception that would have authorized substantially the same for all or part of the site, unless the Board determines that conditions in the area have substantially changed.
5.6 SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS AND SAFEGUARDS
A. In granting any Special Exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe additional conditions and safeguards concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, parking and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Section. Violation of any such condition or safeguard shall be considered a violation of this Section and subject to the procedures for enforcement.
B. In addition to prescribing additional conditions and safeguards, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require the owner of the subject property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the property.
5.7 NO PRESUMPTION OF APPROVAL
The listing of a Special Exception within each zoning district shall not constitute an assurance of presumption that such Special Exception will be approved. Rather, each proposed Special Exception shall be evaluated on
Section 5
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 48
an individual basis, in relation to its compliance with the standards and conditions set forth herein and with the standards for the district in which it is to be located.
5.8 LIMITATIONS ON SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
A. A Special Exception permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use at the particular location for which the Special Exception was granted, and the permit shall automatically expire should, for any reason, the Special Exception cease for more than one (1) year.
B. A Special Exception may be terminated by the Board upon filing of an application by an interested person or the Zoning Administrator, and upon a finding at a public hearing, with notice to the property owner, that the terms of this Ordinance or conditions of approval or commitments have not been met.
5.9 EFFECT OF APPROVAL
A. The approval of a proposed Special Exception shall not authorize the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and processing of applications for such permits or approvals as may be required by the regulations of the Town.
B. Improvement Location Permit Required. If the Board approves the Special Exception, it shall direct the applicant to apply for an improvement location permit under Section 19 of this Ordinance. If such applications complies with this Ordinance, and all other applicable codes and Ordinances, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the improvement location permit for the approved Special Exception. No Special Exception may be approved without the issuance by the Zoning Administrator of an improvement location permit as per Section 19 of this Ordinance.
Section 6
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 49
SECTION 6: USE DISTRICTS
6.1 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS
The zoning districts established for the Town of Danville are as follows:
A. Residential Districts
1. Residential Conservation District (RC1): Districts designated ―RC1‖ establish areas for low density, single-family residences while providing for substantial preservation of unique and sensitive natural features.
2. Residential Estate 1 District (RE1): Districts designated ―RE1‖ establish areas for very low density, single-family residences with a density of 1.5 or less per acre.
3. Residential 1 District (R1): Districts designated ―R1‖ establish areas for low density, single-family residences with a density of two (2) dwelling units or less per gross acre.
4. Residential 2 Central District (R2C): The district designated ―R2C‖ encompasses the residential core of the Town and is generally comprised of higher density, single family residences, many with historically unique architectural styles and features.
5. Residential 2 District (R2): Districts designated ―R2‖ establish areas for medium density, single-family residences with a density of four (4) dwelling units or less per gross acre.
6. Residential 3 District (R3): Districts designated ―R3‖ establish areas for higher density two-family and condominium residential development, and for multi-family residential development. The density in an R3 district shall be six (6) dwelling units or less per gross acre.
7. Residential 4 District (R4): Districts designated ―R4‖ establish areas for the highest density two-family and multi-family residential development, as well as amenities to serve those residential units. The density in an R4 district shall be ten (10) dwelling units or less per gross acre.
B. Commercial Districts
1. Local Business District (LB): Districts designated ―LB‖ establish commercial areas that are close to residential areas, and include uses appropriate to meeting the convenience shopping and service needs of neighboring residents.
2. General Business District (GB): Districts designated ―GB‖ establish areas that are appropriate for most businesses, services, and light industrial uses.
Section 6
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 50
3. Primary Central Business District (CB-P): The CB-P district encompasses Danville’s Courthouse Square. This district is established to provide an appropriate location for businesses and professional uses while protecting the historic character of the district’s structures and surroundings.
4. Secondary Central Business District (CB-S): The CB-S district encompasses the portion of the Town’s core business area not covered by the Primary Central Business District.
5. Office District (OD): Districts designated ―OD‖ establish locations appropriate for professional offices, with limited service and retail uses to meet the needs of the district’s employees.
6. Airport Development District (AD): The AD district is an area adjacent to Gordon Graham Field that permits uses which promote aviation safety, are compatible with and support airport operations, and encourage economic development in the vicinity of the airport.
C. Industrial Districts
1. Industrial Office (IO): Districts designated ―IO‖ establish areas for research and administrative facilities that are office-like in appearance and service requirements.
2. Industrial Light (IL): Districts designated ―IL‖ establish areas for manufacturing and wholesale businesses that are clean, quiet, free of hazardous elements, and generate low volume industrial traffic.
3. Industrial General (IG): Districts designated ―IG‖ establish areas for major manufacturing, processing, and warehousing that require extensive community services and need reasonable access to collector or arterial thoroughfares.
4. Industrial Park (IP): Districts designated ―IP‖ establish areas for master-planned industrial parks along minor arterials or major collector streets.
D. Corridor Protection Overlay District (CPOD): The Corridor Protection Overlay District includes a mix of commercial and residential uses that abut the Main Street corridor from Twin Bridges Road to Clear Creek Drive. Any new construction or exterior renovation occurring in this overlay district is subject to additional development standards in order to protect the character and aesthetic quality of this corridor.
E. Planned Unit Development Districts (PUD): Planned Unit Development areas provide for flexibility in the development of land. These areas must be developed following an approved site plan.
Section 6
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 51
―PUD‖ Districts are established under the provisions of Section 15 of this Ordinance.
F. Flood Plain Districts (FP): Districts designated ―FP‖ are established to regulate development in areas subject to inundation and damage from flood waters. These areas include low lying areas adjacent to lakes and ponds and the areas within the flood plain of rivers and creeks.
G. Park Districts (PD): The designation of a Park District provides the Town of Danville with a means of setting aside land for future park use. It is not intended that privately held land would be given this designation, but that land already purchased by the Town for the purpose of a public park would be given the ―PD‖ designation in order to ensure its eventual development in this capacity. Principle uses in the PD district follow.
1. Permitted Uses
a) Public Library or Museum
b) Public Park
c) Public Swimming Pool
d) Skating Rinks (roller or ice)
2. Special Exceptions
a) Church or Temple
b) Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
c) Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
d) Communication Relay Tower
e) Wireless Communication Tower
f) Country Club or Neighborhood Recreation Center
g) Golf course, Driving Range, or Miniature Golf
h) Riding Stable and Trails
i) Public Exposition Centers (Fairgrounds or other similar facilities)
6.2 ZONING MAP
The boundaries of each zoning district are indicated on the Official Zoning District Map, entitled ―Town of Danville Zoning District Map,‖ attached hereto and made a part of this Ordinance. The notations, references, indications and other matters shown on the Zoning Map shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if they were fully described herein.
The ―Town of Danville Zoning District Map‖ shall be kept in the custody of the Town Manager and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and buildings within the Town of Danville. Amendments to the ―Town of Danville Zoning District Map‖ shall be made according to the provisions in Section 19 of this Ordinance.
Section 6
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 52
6.3 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of any district as shown on the ―Town of Danville Zoning District Map,‖ the following rules shall apply:
A. When exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall be determined by use of the scale of the Zoning Map.
B. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow thoroughfares such as highways, streets or alleys shall be interpreted as following the centerlines of such thoroughfares.
C. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow platted lot lines shall be interpreted as following such lot lines.
D. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow Town Limits shall be interpreted as following Town Limits.
E. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow railroad lines shall be interpreted as following the railroad line at a position midway between the main tracks.
F. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow shorelines shall be interpreted as following such shorelines. In the event that the shoreline changes, the boundary shall be interpreted as moving with the actual shoreline.
G. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be interpreted as following such center lines. However, where streams and rivers meander from their beds as they existed on the effective date of this Ordinance, the boundary shall be interpreted as following the original stream or riverbed, except for floodplain boundaries which are dependent on bodies of water for their definition.
H. Boundaries appearing to approximately follow flood plain lines shall be interpreted as following such contour lines. Further information regarding the interpretation of flood plain boundaries can be found in Section 18 of this Ordinance.
I. If the boundary line of a district divides a lot having frontage on a street so that the front part of the lot lies in one district and the rest of the lot lies in another, use requirements and restrictions that apply to the front part of the lot apply to the entire lot.
Section 6
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 53
J. Where physical features existing on the ground differ from those shown on the ―Town of Danville Zoning District Map‖, or in circumstances not covered in this subsection or Section 18, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the boundaries.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 54
SECTION 7: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
7.1 INTENT
The intent of the residential zoning districts of the Town of Danville is to provide a wide range of quality housing types to meet the present and future housing needs of the Town’s residents.
7.2 RESIDENTIAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT (RC1)
A. Purpose The Residential Conservation District (RC1) is intended to preserve those areas within the Town of Danville that contain unique and sensitive natural features such as woodlands, steep slopes, streams, meadows, floodplains, wetlands, or other similar features while still providing for single family development that is compatible with and preserves Danville’s traditional rural character. Therefore, all new development within the RC1 Conservation District shall be limited to those uses permitted or allowed herein.
B. Requirements for Establishment of the District
Establishment of the RC1 Conservation District shall require a minimum of seven (7) acres. Petition for the establishment of the RC1 Conservation District shall be subject to the requirements for amending the Zone Map.
C. Permitted Uses
1. Agricultural and horticultural uses, exclusive of feedlots
2. Single Family Dwellings
3. Public Park
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see Section 4.3.C.4).
3. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.B of this Ordinance.
4. Public utility installation for local service.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory apartments subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance.
2. Artificial lakes of 3 or more acres
3. Cemetery
4. Neighborhood Recreational Area
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 55
F. Minimum Area Devoted to and Preserved for Conservation
A minimum of forty percent (40%) of a development shall be preserved in conservation open space consisting of, but not limited to:
1. Open land left in its natural state;
2. Farmland devoted to the raising of crops, plants, or trees;
3. Pastureland for the grazing of horses and equestrian practice facilities;
4. Noncommercial recreational areas, including ball fields, playgrounds, courts bikeways, and walking trails;
5. Wild game sanctuaries;
6. Lakes, streams, and wetlands; and
7. Noncommercial gardens or meadows.
Parking facilities shall not be counted toward the minimum conservation open space requirement.
Measures shall be taken to permanently preserve all conservation open space. Such measures may include, but not be limited to the granting of conservation easements or the dedication of such space to a homeowners association, public or private trust, municipal government or state agency. Maintenance of such conservation open space shall be the responsibility of the owners of the property. The Danville Plan Commission shall approve the measures taken for permanently preserving the conservation open space during plat approval in accordance with the Danville Subdivision Control Ordinance.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 square feet and 7,900 square feet, provided, however, that no more than half a residential subdivision, or any section thereof, may be developed at 7,900 square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: Seventy-five (75) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard:
a.) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 56
b.) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area:
a.) For lots of 10,000 square feet:
One story buildings: 1,350 square feet
Multiple story buildings
First floor: 1,000 square feet
Total 1,350 square feet
b.) For lots of 7,900 square feet:
One story buildings: 1,050 square feet
Multiple story buildings
First floor: 850 square feet
Total: 1,050 square feet
c.) For all lots
Accessory apartment: 1,000 square feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys
9. Building Material Requirement: Pursuant to IC 36-7-2-4, all single family structures shall be constructed of brick or stone on at least one hundred percent (100%) of the ground floor.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory uses shall be subject to the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
I. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development standards that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.2.G.
J. Other Development Controls
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 57
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7.3 RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT (RE1)
A. Definition The RE1 District establishes areas for low density, single-family residences.
B. Density: 1.5 dwelling units or less per acre
C. Permitted Uses
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Public Park
3. School, Public or Parochial
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in subsection 4.4.B of this Ordinance.
4. Public utility installations for local service.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory apartments subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance.
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more acres
3. Cemetery
4. Church or Temple
5. Country Club or Neighborhood Recreational Area
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
7. Police Station or Fire Station
8. Public Swimming Pool
9. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 22,000 square feet
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 58
2. Minimum Lot Width: one hundred thirty (130) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard: thirty (30) feet
a.) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Thirty (30) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Fifteen (15) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area:
a.) One story buildings: 1,800 square feet
b.) Buildings with more than one story: 1,500 square feet
c.) Accessory apartment: 1,000 square feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.3.F.
I. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary Structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 59
7.4 RESIDENTIAL 1 DISTRICT (R1)
A. Definition. The R1 District establishes areas for low density, single-family residences.
B. Density: two (2) dwelling units or less per gross acre
C. Permitted Uses
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Public Park
3. School, Public or Parochial
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed
4. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in subsection 4.4.B of this Ordinance
5. Public utility installations for local service.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory apartments, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
3. Boarding House, including a bed and breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
4. Cemetery
5. Country Club or Neighborhood Recreational Area
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
7. Police Station or Fire Station
8. Public Swimming Pool
9. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 13,500 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: Ninety (90) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 60
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area (for residential uses only)
a) One story buildings: 1,400 square feet
b) Buildings with more than one story: 1,200 square feet
c) Accessory apartment: 1,000 square feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys.
I. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
J. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.4.F.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 61
K. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary Structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7.5 RESIDENTIAL 2 CENTRAL DISTRICT (R2C)
A. Definition. The Town of Danville has a single R2C District. It is generally regarded as the residential core of the Town and includes many residences with historically unique architectural styles and features.
B. Density: four (4) dwelling units or less per gross acre
C. Permitted Uses
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Public Park
3. School, Public or Parochial
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed
4. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.B of this Ordinance
5. Public utility installations for local service.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory apartments, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance
2. Boarding House, including a bed and breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
3. Cemetery
4. Church or Temple
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 62
5. Neighborhood Recreational Area
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
7. Public Library or Museum
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: Seventy-five (75) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area (for residential uses only)
a) One story buildings: 1,100 square feet
b) Buildings with more than one story: 960 square feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 63
9. Architecture in the R2C District: In order to protect the unique historic character of the Town’s residential core, all new construction in the R2C District shall conform in street orientation and massing to adjacent structures. Furthermore, any new dwelling must be built in one of the prevailing architectural styles existing on the street where the structure is to be located.
The prevailing architectural styles for a street shall be identified by the Plan Commission based on the determination of architectural consultants engaged by the Commission who shall make such determinations utilizing the existing structures within a minimum two-block radius of the lot where construction will occur.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.6.F.
I. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7.6 RESIDENTIAL 2 DISTRICT (R2)
A. Definition. The R2 District establishes areas for medium density, single family residences.
B. Density: four (4) dwelling units or less per gross acre
C. Permitted Uses
1. Single Family Dwellings
2. Public Park
3. School, Public or Parochial
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 64
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed
4. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.B of this Ordinance
5. Public utility installations for local service.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory apartments, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
3. Assisted Living Facility or Nursing Home
4. Boarding House, including a bed and breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
5. Cemetery
6. Church or Temple
7. Country Club or Neighborhood Recreational Area
8. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
9. Police Station or Fire Station
10. Post Office
11. Public Library or Museum
12. Public Swimming Pool
13. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
14. Two-Family Dwellings
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 10,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: Seventy-five (75) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 65
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area (for residential uses only)
a) One story buildings: 1,100 square feet
b) Buildings with more than one story: 960 square feet
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.5.F.
I. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 66
4. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7.7 RESIDENTIAL 3 DISTRICT (R3)
A. Definition The R3 District establishes areas for higher density two family, condominium, and multi family residences.
B. Density: Six (6) dwelling units or less per gross acre.
C. Permitted Uses
1. Assisted Living Facility or Nursing Home
2. Boarding House, including a Bed and Breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
3. Condominiums
4. Multi Family Dwellings
5. Public Park
6. Public Swimming Pool
7. School, Public or Parochial
8. Two Family Dwellings
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed
4. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.B of this Ordinance
5. Public utility installations for local service.
6. Management offices and other facilities normally associated with tenants’ convenience, such as vending machines, laundry facilities, and fitness facilities, provided they are associated with a multi-family development and provided there is no exterior display.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory Apartments, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance.
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
3. Cemetery
4. Church or Temple
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 67
5. Country Club or Neighborhood Recreational Area
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
7. Police Station or Fire Station
8. Post Office
9. Public Library or Museum
10. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
11. Trade or Business School
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size
a) Two Family Dwellings and Condominiums: 7,900 square feet
b) Multi Family Dwellings: 3,000 square feet for the first three (3) dwelling units, plus an additional 1,000 square feet for each additional unit
c) Nonresidential Uses: 6,800 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width
a) Two Family Dwellings: Seventy (70) feet
b) Multi Family Dwellings: Eighty-five (85) feet
c) Nonresidential Uses: Sixty (60) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 68
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area (for residential uses only)
a) One story buildings
1.) Two Family Dwellings: 1500 square feet
2.) Multi Family Dwellings: 750 square feet per unit
b) Buildings with more than one story
1.) Two Family Dwellings: 1440 square feet
2.) Multi Family Dwellings: 720 square feet per unit
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in Section 7.7.F.
I. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance shall be required for any multi-family or school use permitted in this zone.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 69
7.8 RESIDENTIAL 4 DISTRICT (R4)
A. Definition The R4 District establishes areas for the highest density two family and multi family residential development, as well as amenities to serve those residential units.
B. Density: Ten (10) dwelling units or less per gross acre
C. Permitted Uses
1. Assisted Living Facility or Nursing Home
2. Boarding House, including a Bed and Breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
3. Church or Temple
4. Condominiums
5. Multi Family Dwellings
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
7. Police Station or Fire Station
8. Post Office
9. Public Library or Museum
10. Public Park
11. Public Swimming Pool
12. School, Public or Parochial
13. Two Family Dwellings
D. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed.
4. Home occupations subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.B of this Ordinance
5. Public utility installations for local service.
6. Management offices and other facilities normally associated with tenants’ convenience, such as vending machines, laundry facilities, and fitness facilities, provided they are associated with a multi-family development and provided there is no exterior display.
E. Special Exceptions
1. Accessory Apartments, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.E of this Ordinance
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 70
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
3. Bakery – Retail (see 7.8.H)
4. Cemetery
5. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand (see 7.8.H)
6. Convenience Store, without pumps (see 7.8.H)
7. Country Club or Neighborhood Recreational Area
8. Delicatessen (see 7.8.H)
9. Drug Store (see 7.8.H)
10. Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment (see 7.8.H)
11. Self Service Laundry (see 7.8.H)
12. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
13. Trade or Business School
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size
a) Two Family or Condominium Dwellings: 6,000 square feet
b) Multi Family Dwellings: 3,000 square feet for the first three (3) units, plus 850 square feet for each additional unit
c) Nonresidential Uses: 5,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width:
a.) Two Family Dwellings: Sixty-five (65) feet
b.) Multi Family Dwellings: Eighty (80) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 71
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Six (6) feet
6. Minimum Ground Floor Area:
a.) One story buildings
1.) Two Family Dwellings: 1,400 square feet
2.) Multi Family Dwellings: 700 square feet per unit
b.) Buildings with more than one story
1.) Two Family Dwellings: 1,300 square feet
2.) Multi Family Dwellings: 650 square feet per unit
7. Maximum Lot Coverage: Fifty percent (50%)
8. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, exclusive of chimneys.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 7.8.F. However, the following special exceptions shall also be subject to a maximum total floor area:
1. Convenience Stores, Drug Stores, Dry Cleaning and Laundry establishments, and Self Service Laundry Facilities shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in area
2. Bakeries, Coffee Shops, Refreshment Stands, and Delicatessens shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in area.
I. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
Section 7
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 72
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. No outdoor storage of any materials (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone, except within enclosed containers.
7. All business activities permitted in this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off street parking and loading areas and outdoor dining facilities.
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 16 of this Ordinance shall be required for any multi-family, church, school, or governmental facility use permitted in this zone.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 73
SECTION 8: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
8.1 INTENT
The intent of the commercial zoning districts of the Town of Danville is to provide a full spectrum of shopping and service uses to the Town’s residents in a manner that ensures such commercial development is compatible with surrounding uses.
8.2 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (LB)
A. Definition. The LB District establishes commercial areas in close proximity to residential districts in order to provide retail and service uses appropriate for meeting the convenience shopping and service needs of neighboring residents.
B. Permitted Uses
1. Assisted Living Facility or Nursing Home
2. Banks and Other Financial Institutions
3. Boarding House, including a Bed and Breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance.
4. Church or Temple
5. Dancing, Aerobics or Gymnastics Studio
6. Drug Store
7. Government Facilities
8. Grocery Store
9. Multi Family Dwelling
10. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
11. Police Station or Fire Station
12. Post Office
13. Public Library or Museum
14. Public Park
15. Radio, TV, and Music Sales and Service
16. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
17. School, Public or Parochial
18. Trade or Business School
19. Service Uses, including: Alterations Shop; Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment; Self Service Laundry; Shoe Repair Shop; Tailor and Pressing Shop; Bakery (retail); Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand; Dairy (retail); Delicatessen; Convenience Store (without pumps); Meat Market; Barber Shop; Beauty Shop; and Health Spa or Fitness Center.
20. Retail Uses, including: Apparel Shop; Shoe Store; Flower Shop; Gift, Souvenir or Craft Shop; Hardware Store; Jewelry Store;
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 74
Newsdealer; Record Shop; Antique Shop; Stationary and Bookstore; Sporting Goods Store; and Furniture Store
C. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Carports and garages, provided such uses are accessory to private residential structures and are for the private storage of motor vehicles (see 4.3.C.4).
3. Foster family care, where not more than six (6) children unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided no sign shall be displayed
4. Public utility installations for local service.
5. Management offices and other facilities normally associated with tenants’ convenience, such as vending machines, laundry facilities, and fitness facilities, provided they are associated with a multi-family development and provided there is no exterior display.
6. Outdoor dining associated with a restaurant, provided it meets the following restrictions:
a) The limits of the outdoor dining area should be clearly defined.
b) The outdoor dining area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum seating capacity of the indoor dining area.
c) The outdoor dining area shall not have any entertainment, music, or sound amplifying system.
d) The outdoor dining area shall not be within the required yard areas.
e) The outdoor dining area shall not be operated any later than 10:00 PM on Sunday through Thursday or later than 11:00 PM on Friday and Saturday.
D. Special Exceptions
1. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
2. Auction House
3. Car Wash
4. Cemetery
5. Clinics or Professional Support Services
6. Communication Relay Tower, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 14 of this Ordinance
7. Convenience Store with Pumps
8. Department Store
9. Electric Appliance Service and Sales
10. Liquor Store
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 75
11. Lodge or Private Club
12. Movie Theater, indoor
13. Offices
14. Optician or Optical Goods Store
15. Outdoor Commercial Recreational Enterprise
16. Private Recreational Development
17. Public Swimming Pool
18. Roadside Food Sales Stand
19. Satellite Dish Sales and Service
20. Service Station, without repair
21. Studios for Professional Work or Teaching
22. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
23. Travel Agencies
24. Wireless Communication Facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 14 of this Ordinance
E. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size
a) Multi Family Dwellings: 3,000 square feet for the first three (3) dwelling units; add 1,000 square feet for each additional unit.
b) Nonresidential Uses: 5,000 square feet
2. Maximum Lot Size: 3 acres
3. Minimum Lot Width
a) Multi Family: Eighty-five (85) feet
b) Nonresidential Uses: Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) However, in cases where more than fifty percent (50%) of the structures on the blockface contain primary structures, the minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the permitted uses on the block, provided that such front yard shall be no less than ten (10) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 76
c) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
d) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: None; except where the lot line of a non residential use abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be ten (10) feet.
6. Intensity: The total floor area of any building shall not exceed 50,000 square feet. However, the total floor area of any single establishment shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
7. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
F. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 8.2.E.
H. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
4. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. No outdoor storage of any materials (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 77
7. All business activities permitted in this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off street parking and loading areas and outdoor dining facilities.
8. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance shall be required for any development permitted in this zone.
8.3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (GB)
A. Definition. The GB District establishes commercial areas throughout the town that are appropriate for a wide range of commercial uses, including retail, services, and light industrial uses.
B. Permitted Uses
1. Auction House
2. Automobile and Motorcycle Sales and Service
3. Automobile Parts and Accessories Sales
4. Automobile Rental and Leasing Service
5. Banks and Other Financial Institutions
6. Billiard Room
7. Boarding House, including a Bed and Breakfast, subject to the regulations of Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance
8. Bowling Alley
9. Car Wash
10. Church or Temple
11. Clinics or Professional Support Services
12. Commercial Greenhouse
13. Communication Relay Tower, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 14 of this Ordinance
14. Dancing, Aerobics or Gymnastics Studio
15. Electric Appliance Sales and Service
16. Government Facilities
17. Grocery Store
18. Hotel and Motel
19. Laboratories – Medical and Dental
20. Lodge or Private Club
21. Lumber Yard, provided that any outdoor storage of materials that is incidental to the operation of the lumber yard must be completely enclosed by a solid fence of at least six (6) feet in height. Stored materials shall not exceed the height of the fence, and such fence shall be subject to the provisions of Section 13 of this Ordinance.
22. Movie Theater, indoor
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 78
23. Night Club
24. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
25. Offices
26. Optician or Optical Goods Store
27. Outdoor Commercial Recreational Enterprise
28. Playhouse or Dinner Theater
29. Police Station or Fire Station
30. Post Office
31. Private Recreational Development
32. Public or Commercial Parking Lot or Parking Garage
33. Public Library or Museum
34. Public Park
35. Radio, TV, and Music Sales and Service
36. Recycling Center
37. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
38. Restaurant, drive-through
39. Roadside Food Sales Stand
40. Satellite Dish Sales and Service
41. School, Public or Parochial
42. Service Station, without repair
43. Skating Rinks (ice or roller)
44. Studios for Professional Work or Teaching
45. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Station
46. Trade or Business School
47. Travel Agencies
48. Tree Nursery
49. Veterinarian, with or without boarding
50. Wireless Communication Tower, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 14 of this Ordinance
51. Service Uses, including: Alterations Shop; Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment; Drug Store; Self Service Laundry; Shoe Repair Shop; Tailor and Pressing Shop; Bakery (retail); Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand; Dairy (retail); Delicatessen; Convenience Store (without or without pumps); Meat Market; Barber Shop; Beauty Shop; Health Spa or Fitness Center; Boarding Kennel; and Massage Therapy or Tanning Salon.
52. Retail Uses, including: Bait Sales; Apparel Shop; Shoe Store; Flower Shop; Gift, Souvenir or Craft Shop; Hardware Store; Jewelry Store; Newsdealer; Record Shop; Antique Shop; Stationary and Bookstore; Sporting Goods Store; Liquor Store; Art Supply Store; Camera and Photographic Supply Store; Carpet and Rug Stores; Department Store; Garden Supplies; Pet Shop, excluding boarding; Leather Goods or Luggage Store; Hobby or Fabric Shop; Toy Store; Paint or Wallpaper Store; Glass, Pottery or China Store; Variety Store; and Furniture Store
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 79
C. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installations for local service.
3. Uses listed below that are included within and entered from within any hotel, motel, or office building as a convenience to the occupants thereof, and their patients, clients or customers; provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building, and no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building.
a) Swimming Pools
b) Newsdealers
c) Gift, Craft, or Souvenir Shop
d) Coffee or Refreshment Stand
e) Delicatessen
4. Administrative offices that are incidental to the operation of the permitted use.
5. Outdoor dining associated with a restaurant, provided it meets the following restrictions:
a) The limits of the outdoor dining area should be clearly defined.
b) The outdoor dining area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum seating capacity of the indoor dining area.
c) The outdoor dining area shall not have any entertainment, music, or sound amplifying system.
d) The outdoor dining area shall not be within the required yard areas.
e) The outdoor dining area shall not be operated any later than 10:00 PM on Sunday through Thursday or later than 11:00 PM on Friday and Saturday.
D. Special Exceptions
1. Above Ground Tanks/Storage
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
3. Campground
4. Cemetery
5. Crematorium
6. Exhibit, Reception and Assembly Halls
7. Flea Market
8. Funeral Home
9. Golf Course, Driving Range, or Miniature Golf
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 80
10. Hospital
11. Penal or Correctional Institutions
12. Private Camp
13. Public Swimming Pool
14. Recycling Collection Facility, defined as a building or trailer providing for a collection location for the temporary storage of recyclable materials. Such facilities shall be restricted to the rear or side yard, and all materials must be completely enclosed within the storage containers at all times.
15. Theater, Outdoor
E. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 6,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: 50 feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
c) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: None; except where the lot line of a non residential use abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be ten (10) feet.
6. Intensity: The total floor area shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
7. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 81
F. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 8.3.E.
H. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
4. Temporary Structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. Merchandise may be displayed on sidewalks in the General Business zone in accordance with the following restrictions:
a) Only merchandise for sale shall be displayed
b) Such displays shall be limited to directly in front of the commercial establishment offering the items for sale.
c) No merchandise display shall be permitted within six (6) feet of the edge of the sidewalk nearest the curb, and there must remain a clear walking path of at least six (6) feet in width.
d) No stacks shall be greater than five (5) feet high.
e) No displays using electricity, animation, lights, or noise making devises will be permitted.
f) Displaying multiple copies of the same piece of merchandise shall not be considered to be outdoor display, and is not permitted
g) Before displaying merchandise on a public sidewalk, the merchant must obtain a temporary use permit allowing the merchant to display merchandise for no more than three (3) consecutive days.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 82
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required for any development permitted in this zone.
8.4 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS (PRIMARY CB & SECONDARY CB)
A. Definition. The Town of Danville has two Central Business Districts: the Primary Central Business District, and the Secondary Central Business District. Together the two districts cover the historic core of the Town, and the regulations of these districts are designed to maintain the integrity and historic assets of these areas of Danville. The Primary Central Business District covers the historic courthouse square, while the Secondary Central Business District covers the mix of commercial and residential uses comprising the rest of the historic downtown and its neighboring areas.
B. Permitted Uses in the Primary CB District
1. Banks and Other Financial Institutions, provided no such facilities include a drive-through window
2. Billiard Room
3. Clinics or Professional Support Services
4. Dancing, Aerobics, Gymnastics Studio
5. Government Facilities
6. Lodge or Private Club
7. Movie Theater, Indoor
8. Night Club
9. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
10. Optician or Optical Goods Store
11. Playhouse or Dinner Theater
12. Police Station or Fire Station
13. Public Library or Museum
14. School, Public or Parochial
15. Offices
16. Boarding House, including a bed and breakfast, subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.4.F of this Ordinance.
17. Automotive Parts and Accessory Sales
18. Radio, TV, and Music Sales and Service
19. Studios for Professional Work or Teaching
20. Service Uses, including: Alterations Shop, Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment, Shoe Repair Shop, Tailor and Pressing Shop, Bakery – Retail, Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand, Dairy – Retail, Delicatessen, Convenience Store (without pumps), Meat
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 83
Market, Restaurant (with or without alcoholic beverages), Barber Shop, and Beauty Shop
21. Retail Use, including: Liquor Store, Apparel Shop, Shoe Store (sales and repair), Art Supply Store, Camera and Photographic Supply Stores, Drug Store, Flower Shop, Garden Supplies, Pet Shop (excluding boarding), Gift/Souvenir/Craft Shop, Leather Goods or Luggage Store, Hobby or Fabric Shop, Toy Store, Hardware Store, Paint or Wallpaper Store, Jewelry Store, Glass/Pottery/China Store, Newsdealer, Record Shop, Antique Shop, Stationary and Book Store, Sporting Goods Store, and Variety Store
C. Permitted Uses in the Secondary CB District
1. All uses permitted in the Primary CB District
2. Banks and Other Financial Institutions, with drive-through facilities
3. Public Park
4. Grocery Store
5. Convenience store, with pumps
D. Accessory Uses (both districts)
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installations for local service.
3. Dwelling Units above the first story of a nonresidential use, provided such dwelling units have a separate primary entrance to the street (fire escapes, back stairways, and the like shall not serve as primary access). Such dwelling units shall be accessory to nonresidential primary uses only.
4. Outdoor dining associated with a restaurant, provided it meets the following restrictions:
a) The limits of such dining area should be clearly defined.
b) The outdoor dining area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum seating capacity of the indoor dining area.
c) The outdoor dining area shall not have any entertainment, music, or sound amplifying system.
d) The outdoor dining area shall not be within the required yard areas.
e) The outdoor dining area shall not be operated any later than 10:00 PM on Sunday through Thursday or later than 11:00 PM on Friday and Saturday.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 84
E. Special Exceptions in the Primary CB District
1. Exhibit, Reception, and Assembly Halls
2. Apartments above Ground Floor
3. Bowling Alley
4. Church or Temple
5. Trade or Business School
6. Electric Appliance Service and Sales
7. Health Spa or Fitness Center
8. Funeral Home
9. Carpet and Rug Stores
10. Department Store
11. Furniture Store
F. Special Exceptions in the Secondary CB District
1. All Special Exceptions of the Primary CB District
2. Public or Commercial Parking Lot or Parking Garage
3. Crematorium
4. Private Recreational Development
G. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size
a) Primary CB: Area of original platting
b) Secondary CB: 5,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width
a) Primary CB: 16 feet
b) Secondary CB: 25 feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) Primary CB: None, all buildings shall set to the prevailing streetwall.
b) Secondary CB: The minimum depth of front yard shall be the average depth of the front yard of the other buildings on the block, except no front yard depth shall exceed five (5) feet.
Note: Buildings to be removed to clear a lot for a new building shall not be included in the calculation of average yard depth.
c) Both Districts: Balconies and awnings shall be permitted to encroach within sidewalk areas as follows:
1.) Balconies: 3 feet
2.) Awnings: 6 feet
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard (both districts): Ten (10) feet
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 85
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard (both districts): None, except where a use in the Secondary Central Business District abuts a residential use or district, the minimum depth of the side yard shall be six (6) feet.
6. Minimum Building Height in the Primary Business District: Two (2) stories, or twenty-six (26) feet.
7. Maximum Building Height (both districts): Thirty-five (35) feet, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
8. Architecture in the Primary Business District: In order to protect the historic resources of the downtown square, all new construction and rehabilitation in the Primary Business District shall conform in street orientation and massing to adjacent structures. Furthermore, each new building or exterior renovation of an existing building must be built in one of the architectural styles listed in Appendix B.
8. Demolition in the Primary Business District: No permits shall be issued for the demolition of any building in the Primary Business District without the owner first obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Zoning Administrator. Such Certificate of Appropriateness shall only be conveyed following a public hearing and approval of the Plan Commission.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
I. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 8.4.G.
J. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 86
4. Temporary Structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. No outdoor storage of any materials (usable or waste) shall be permitted in this zone.
7. All business activities permitted in this zone shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off street parking and loading areas and outdoor dining facilities.
8. Merchandise may be displayed on sidewalks in the Central Business zones in accordance with the following restrictions:
a) Only merchandise for sale shall be displayed
b) Such displays shall be limited to directly in front of the commercial establishment offering the items for sale.
c) No merchandise display shall be permitted within six (6) feet of the edge of the sidewalk nearest the curb, and there must remain a clear walking path of at least six (6) feet in width.
d) No stacks shall be greater than five (5) feet high.
e) No displays using electricity, animation, lights, or noise making devises will be permitted.
f) Displaying multiple copies of the same piece of merchandise shall not be considered to be outdoor display, and is not permitted
g) Before displaying merchandise on a public sidewalk, the merchant must obtain a temporary use permit allowing the merchant to display merchandise for no more than three (3) consecutive days.
9. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance shall be required for any development permitted in this zone except for a single-family residential use.
8.5 OFFICE DISTRICT (OD)
A. Definition. The Office District establishes areas for the development of professional offices and the limited retail and service uses to meet the needs of the employees, clients, and customers of those professional establishments.
B. Permitted Uses
1. Government Facilities
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 87
2. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
3. Police Station or Fire Station
4. Public Library or Museum
5. Public Park
6. Public or Commercial Parking Lot or Parking Garage
7. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
8. Trade or Business School
9. Post Office
10. Animal Control Authority
11. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand
12. Restaurant, with or without Alcoholic Beverages
13. Health Spa or Fitness Center
14. Hospital
15. Lodge or Private Club
16. Banks or Other Financial Institutions
17. Offices
18. Studios for Professional Work or Teaching
19. Clinics or Professional Support Services
20. Laboratories – Medical or Dental
21. Optician or Optical Goods Store
22. Veterinarian, with or without boarding
23. Travel Agencies
C. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installations for local service.
3. Uses listed below that are included within and entered from within any office building as a convenience to the employees or clientele thereof, provided that the accessory uses shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the gross floor area of the permitted uses in the building, and provided no exterior advertising displays for any of the accessory uses shall be visible from outside the building.
a) Newsdealers
b) Gift, Craft, or Souvenir Shop
c) Coffee or Refreshment Stand
4. Outdoor dining associated with a restaurant, provided it meets the following restrictions:
a) The limits of the outdoor dining area should be clearly defined.
b) The outdoor dining area shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum seating capacity of the indoor dining area.
c) The outdoor dining area shall not have any entertainment, music, or sound amplifying system.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 88
d) The outdoor dining area shall not be within the required yard areas.
e) The outdoor dining area shall not be operated any later than 10:00 PM on Sunday through Thursday or later than 11:00 PM on Friday and Saturday.
D. Special Exceptions
1. Cemetery
2. Penal or Correctional Institution
3. Public Swimming Pool
4. Artificial Lake of 3 or more Acres
5. Communication Relay Tower
6. Wireless Communication Tower
7. Bakery – Retail
8. Delicatessen
9. Grocery Store
10. Barber Shop
11. Beauty Shop
12. Dancing, Aerobics, Gymnastics Studio
13. Outdoor Commercial Recreational Enterprise
14. Art Supply Store
15. Camera and Photographic Supply Stores
16. Drugstore
E. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 5,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: Fifty (50) feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1.) Abutting a local street: twenty-five (25) feet
2.) Abutting a collector street: thirty (30) feet
3.) Abutting a secondary arterial: forty (40) feet
4.) Abutting a primary arterial: sixty (60) feet
b) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
c) For a lot which does not abut a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the front lot line.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 89
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Fifteen (15) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: None; except where the lot line of a non residential use abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be ten (10) feet.
6. Intensity: The total floor area shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
7. Maximum Building Height: Thirty-five (35) feet, except that chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
F. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
G. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 8.5.E.
H. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
4. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required for any development permitted in this zone.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 90
8.6 AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (AD)
A. Purpose. The purpose of the ―AD‖ District is to (1) promote aviation safety, (2) encourage the area around Gordon Graham Field to develop with land uses that are compatible with, and support, airport operations, and (3) advance economic development in the Town of Danville.
B. Permitted Uses
1. All uses legally existing before the effective date of this Ordinance, subject to Section 3 of this Ordinance and this Section.
2. Airport-Related Uses
3. Light Manufacturing
4. Medical and Dental Laboratories
5. Commercial and Non-Commercial Recreation
6. Public Parks and Recreation Facilities
7. Publicly Owned Buildings and Utilities
8. Research and Testing Laboratories
9. Warehouses
10. Wholesale Businesses
11. Retail Businesses
12. Offices, Professional and Business
13. Minor Residential Plats
14. Individual Single Family Dwellings
15. Agriculture
16. Any other use the Plan Commission determines supports the purpose of this Ordinance
C. Accessory Uses
Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows:
1. Signs meeting the requirements of this Section and Section 12 of this Ordinance.
2. Other accessory uses and structures in conjunction with a primary use or structure provided the necessary use does not change the character of the district.
Accessory uses and buildings shall be incidental and subordinate in height, area, bulk, extend, and purpose to the principal use. Accessory buildings shall not be erected prior to the building.
D. Special Exceptions
1. Mixed non-residential uses
2. Shopping centers not exceeding 15,000 sq ft in gross floor area
3. Cemeteries
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 91
E. Prohibited Uses
1. Major Residential Plats
2. Major commercial or industrial plats with a residential component
3. Auditoriums
4. Amphitheaters
5. Day Care Center
6. Concert Halls
7. Hospitals
8. Mobile Home Parks
9. Nursing Homes
10. Outdoor Music Facilities
11. Public and Private Educational Institutions
12. Churches, Temples, or other Religious Places of Worship
13. Wireless Communication Facilities
F. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size:
a) Residential use: 1.5 acres
b) All other uses: None
2. Minimum Lot Width:
a) Residential use: 150 feet
b) All other uses: None
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard
a) The following minimum front yard depths apply:
1) Abutting a local street: 25 feet
2) Abutting a collector street: 30 feet
3) Abutting a secondary arterial: 40 feet
4) Abutting a primary artery: 60 feet
b) For double frontage and corner lots which have more than one yard abutting a street, minimum front yard depth requirements shall apply to each yard which abuts a street.
c) For a lot which does not about a public street, the minimum depth of front yard shall be twenty-five feet, measured from the front lot line.
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard:
a) Residential use: 15 feet
b) All other uses: 20 feet if within district
c) All other uses: 40 feet if adjoining less intensive district
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard:
a) Residential use: 15 feet
b) All other uses: 20 feet if within district
c) All other uses: 40 feet if adjoining less intensive district
6. Maximum Lot Coverage:
a) Residential use: 50%
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 92
b) All other uses: 60% principal building
7. Maximum Building Height:
a) Residential use: 35 feet principal structure
b) Residential accessory use: 15 feet
c) All other uses: 60 feet for principal structure
d) All other uses: 40 feet accessory structure
G. Area and Height Regulations for Accessory Uses
Accessory Uses shall be regulated by the provisions of Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
H. Area and Height Regulations for Special Exceptions
All uses allowed by special exception shall be subject to the same development controls that apply to permitted uses. These regulations are set forth in subsection 8.6.F.
I. Air Safety Land Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may be made of land within this zoning district in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of an airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each permitted use. The Town of Danville shall require compliance with these restrictions as a condition of issuing an Improvement Location Permit/Building Permit.
1. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with streets, parking, signs, or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner that it is not misleading or dangerous to Gordon Graham Field or in the vicinity thereof.
2. No operations of any type shall produce smoke, glare, or other visual hazards within this zoning district.
3. No operations of any type shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communications between the Airport and aircraft.
4. Structure height shall be regulated by the standards of both this zoning district and Indiana Code 8-21-10 Regulation of Tall Structures.
5. Marking and lighting
a) A structure or object of natural growth may require the installation, operation, and maintenance on the structure or object of natural growth any markers and lights necessary indicate to aircraft the presence of an airport hazard.
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 93
b) Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, any structure over two hundred (200) feet above ground level shall have installed lighting in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70/7460-1K and amendments thereto on such structures. This lighting may include flashing red beacons, steady burning red obstruction lights, or high intensity obstruction lights. All required lighting must be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70/7460-1K and amendments thereto.
J. Airport Hazards Described and Prohibited
An airport hazard is a land use, structure, or object of natural growth located in this zoning district that:
1. Exceeds the height limits of Section 8.6.G(4) of this Ordinance.
2. Interferes with visual, radar, or other system of tracking, acquiring data relating to, monitoring, or controlling aircraft.
3. Interferes with a pilot’s ability to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of a pilot, or impairs visibility in the vicinity of the Airport.
4. Creates a wildlife hazard, as defined by the Code of Federal Regulations Title 14, Part 139.
5. Otherwise endangers or interferes with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of an aircraft.
K. Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Objects
1. Nonconforming Uses
a) All uses legally existing before the effective date of this Section which would not be classified under this Ordinance as a permitted use, accessory use, or special exception shall be classified as nonconforming uses.
b) All uses legally existing before the effective date of this Section which would be classified as a prohibited use under this Ordinance shall be classified as nonconforming uses.
c) All uses approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals before the effective date of this Section which are not classified under this Section as a permitted use, accessory use, or special exception shall be classified as nonconforming uses.
d) Regulation of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 3 and Section 8.6 of this Ordinance.
2. Nonconforming Structures
Section 8
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 94
a) All structures legally existing before the effective date of this Section which do not meet the requirements of this Section shall be classified as nonconforming structures.
b) Regulation of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 3 and 8.6 of this Ordinance.
3. Nonconforming Objects of Natural Growth
a) Objects of natural growth existing before the effective date of this Section which do not meet the requirements of this Section shall be classified as nonconforming objects of natural growth, provided, however, that such object of natural growth shall not encumber the imaginary surfaces described in Indiana Code 8-21-10 Regulation of Tall Structures in which event the encumbrance may be removed in accordance with any available remedy provided by applicable law.
b) Nonconforming objects of natural growth that have been removed or destroyed shall not be replaced.
L. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
2. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
3. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
4. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
5. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
6. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required for all commercial development permitted in this zone.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 95
SECTION 9: CORRIDOR PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
9.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the Corridor Protection Overlay District is to protect, re-establish and retain the unique architectural, historic, and aesthetic characteristics of the Main Street and US 36 corridor. This overlay district covers a mix of commercial and residential uses with frontage on Main Street and US 36 and applies a set of high quality development standards to ensure that renovated or developed property will be compatible with Danville’s traditional character and improves or enhances the livability of local neighborhoods.
9.2 CORRIDOR PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
The CPOD shall apply to all property abutting the right-of-way on either side of Main Street and/or US 36 and to all property adjacent to the Courthouse Square to a depth of one (1) block. If a non-buildable parcel abuts Main Street and/or US 36, then the overlay shall be extended to include the buildable parcel(s) immediately adjacent to and behind it. The overlay district includes the entire Main Street and/or US 36 corridor that is within Danville's corporate limits. If any portion of a piece of property lies within the CPOD, the requirements of this section shall apply to the entire parcel.
A. Uses in the CPOD
All permitted uses, accessory uses, and special exceptions permitted in any underlying district to which the CPOD is applied will continue to be permitted as a part of the overlay district. In addition, the following uses are allowed within the CPOD:
1. Special Exceptions, with approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
a.) Hotel or Motel within the CB-P or CB-S zoning districts
b.) Assisted Living Facility or Nursing Home within the CBS zoning district
c.) Mail Order Distribution within the OD zoning district
d.) Print Shops within the CB-P, CB-S or OD zoning districts
e.) Roadside Food Sales Stand within the CB-P or CB-S zoning districts
f.) Boarding Kennel or Pet Grooming Service within the GB zoning district
g.) Massage Therapy Salon or Tanning Salon within the OD zoning district
h.) Pet Shop, excluding boarding within the GB, CB-P or CB-S zoning districts
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 96
2. Additional Permitted Uses:
a.) Satellite Dish Sales and Service within the GB or CBS zoning districts
b.) Massage Therapy Salon or Tanning Salon within the CBP or CBS zoning districts
c.) Factory Outlet Store within the LB, GB, CBP or CBS zoning districts
B. Development Standards for Permitted Uses, Accessory Uses, and Special Exceptions
1. All development standards established by any underlying zoning district shall also apply if that district is included in the CPOD unless alternate development standards are specified in this ordinance.
2. Properties located in the CPOD shall also be subject to any additional development standards established in this ordinance.
3. If the development standards for the underlying zoning district and the overlay district are inconsistent, the overlay district shall apply.
C. Design Review
Design Review is required for most construction or remodeling activities within the CPOD. The Design Review Committee shall conduct the design review when it is required and shall forward a recommendation to the Plan Commission. When design review is required, the Danville Plan Commission must first approve all construction or remodeling before any activity may occur. More specifically, design review is required as follows:
1. Non-residential Uses
a.) All new non-residential construction or remodeling located in the CPOD that requires a building permit shall be subject to design review.
b.) In addition, the following non-residential construction or remodeling occurring on property located within the CPOD shall be subject to design review, even if they do not require a building permit:
1. Changes to existing openings for windows and doors
2. Awnings
3. Changes to the exterior surface material
c.) Non-residential activity that does not require design review includes the following:
1. Changes to minor accessory structures or minor building details (i.e., mailboxes, shutters, etc.)
2. Changes to landscaping
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 97
3. Changes to the interior
4. Adding, deleting or changing a patio
5. Adding, deleting or changing outdoor lighting
6. Changing the exterior paint color
7. Electrical work that requires a permit
2. Residential Uses
a.) All new residential construction or remodeling located in the CPOD that requires a building permit shall be subject to design review. If a building permit is not required, then design review is not necessary.
b.) Residential activity that does not require design review includes the following:
1. Changes to minor accessory structures or minor building details (i.e., mailboxes, shutters, etc.)
2. Changes to landscaping or fencing
3. Changes to the interior
4. Adding, deleting or changing a patio
5. Adding, deleting or changing outdoor lighting
6. Changing the exterior paint color
7. Roofing work that requires a permit
8. Adding an accessory structure less than 150 sq.ft.
9. Construction or remodeling under a valid permit that does not increase the square footage of the main structure
10. Construction or remodeling that does not increase the square footage of an accessory structure to 150 sq.ft. or more
11. Electrical, plumbing, or HVAC work that requires a permit
D. Overlay District Development Standards
1. Architecture in the Corridor Protection Overlay District:
a) Any new construction shall conform to one of the following architectural styles, except as approved under subsection c) below: American Four Square Bungalow Colonial Revival Eastern Stick Federal Georgian Gothic Revival Greek Revival Italianate
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 98
Neoclassical Prairie Queen Anne Renaissance Revival Roman Classicism Romanesque Revival Second Empire Tudor Revival Victorian Gothic Victorian Vernacular
Examples of these styles are provided in Appendix B of this Ordinance.
b) Any exterior renovation of existing buildings within the CPOD shall conform in style and context with the existing building’s architecture.
c) The Design Review Committee may approve new construction in other styles that it determines to be compatible with the Corridor Protection Overlay District.
2. Building Orientation:
a) All primary structures shall face the front of the lot on which they are located.
b) All structures located in the Primary Central Business District shall be set to the prevailing streetwall.
c) The setback for primary structures located in the Secondary Central Business District shall be no closer to the front lot line than the adjacent primary structure that is closest to the front lot line. The primary structure may be no further from the lot line than the adjacent primary structure that is farthest from the front lot line. In any case, the structure may not be set back from the front lot line more than 5 feet.
d) No loading docks, overhead service doors, or trash collection bins may be placed on or adjacent to any façade which faces a public street.
3. Large Building Elevations: The front elevation of large structures must be divided into smaller areas or planes. When the front elevation of a structure is more than 750 square feet in area, the elevation must be divided into distinct planes of 750 square feet or less. For the purpose of this standard, areas of wall that are entirely separated from other wall areas by a projection, such as a porch or a roof over a porch, are also individual building wall planes. This division can be done by:
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 99
a) A porch, a dormer that is at least 4 feet wide, or a balcony that is at least 2 feet deep and is accessible from an interior room;
b) A bay window that extends at least 2 feet; or
c) Recessing a section of the façade by at least 2 feet; the recessed section must be at least 6 feet long.
4. Building Height:
a) Maximum height of primary structures in the CPOD shall be 50 feet.
b) Minimum height of primary structures in the CB-P District shall be 26 feet. Minimum height of primary structures in all other districts shall be 16 feet.
5. Main Entrance:
a) Non-residential Uses:
1) Location of main entrance: the main entrance of each primary structure must face Main Street. On corner lots the main entrance may face either Main Street or be oriented to the corner.
2) Awnings or canopies:
a.) Awnings shall be made of professional-grade canvas or fabric.
b.) Canopies shall be:
1) integrated into the architectural design of the façade,
2) shaped to fit the opening, and
3) without back lighting.
3.) Ornamental columns: if the front porch or covered balcony at a main entrance provides columns, the columns must be ornamental columns that are consistent with the architectural style.
4.) Openings between porch floor and ground: All openings between porch floor and ground must be covered with a solid material or lattice.
b) Residential Uses:
1.) Location of main entrance: the main entrance of each primary structure must face Main Street. On corner lots the main entrance may face either Main Street or be oriented to the corner.
2.) Front porch at main entrance: there must be a front porch at all main entrances that face a street. If the porch projects out from the building, it must have a roof. If the
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 100
roof of a required porch is developed as a deck or balcony, it may be flat.
3.) Covered balcony: a covered balcony on the same façade as the main entrance may be provided instead of a front porch. The floor of the covered balcony must be no more than 15 feet above grade, and must be accessible from the interior space of the building.
4). Awnings or canopies:
a.) Awnings shall be made of professional-grade canvas or fabric.
b.) Canopies shall be:
1) integrated into the architectural design of the façade,
2) shaped to fit the opening, and
3) without back lighting.
5.) Ornamental columns: if the front porch or covered balcony at a main entrance provides columns as corner supports, the columns must be ornamental columns that are consistent with the architectural style.
6.) Openings between porch floor and ground: All openings between porch floor and ground must be covered with a solid material or lattice.
6. Reinforce the Corner: On sites within the CB-P and CB-S Districts, all of the following requirements must be met:
a) The primary structure must meet the average front setback of adjacent buildings, excluding nonconforming buildings, but in any case may not be setback more than 10 feet from the edge of the right-of-way. This requirement must be met on any corner adjacent to Main Street;
b) The highest point of the building’s street-facing elevation must be within 25 feet of the corner;
c) A main entrance must be on a street-facing wall and either at the corner, or within 25 feet of the corner; and
d) There is no parking within 40 feet of the corner.
7. Exterior Finish Materials: This requirement must be met on all building facades:
a) Quarried stone, cultured stone, brick, wood siding, composite lap siding, and architectural concrete are permitted exterior finishes. These permitted materials must comprise at least 80% of the building’s exterior finish.
b) Plain concrete block, split-face concrete block, exposed concrete, corrugated metal, molded plastic, plywood or
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 01
sheet pressboard are not allowed as exterior finish material. Metal, wood shakes, or stucco (EIFS) may be used as an accent to highlight architectural details on the exterior, but may cover no more than 20% of the structure's exterior wall area.
c) Composite boards manufactured from wood or other products may be used when the board product is less than 6 inches wide.
d) Where horizontal siding is used, it must be shiplap or clapboard siding composed of boards with a reveal of 3 to 6 inches. Vinyl or aluminum siding that is in a clapboard or shiplap pattern may be used where the boards in the pattern are 6 inches or less in width.
e) Exterior color for all new construction and for all renovations in the CB-P District must be appropriate to the style of the architecture and compatible with surrounding structures.
f) Other building materials not listed here may be allowed by the Design Review Committee if the Committee determines them to be appropriate for the architectural style and compatible with the purpose of the CPOD.
8. Foundation Material: Plain concrete block or exposed concrete may be used as foundation material if the foundation material is not revealed more than 1 foot above the finished grade level adjacent to the foundation wall.
9. Distinct Ground Floor: The ground floor of any primary structure in the CB-P or CB-S Districts must be visually distinct from upper stories. This separation is provided by:
a) a cornice above the ground level;
b) an arcade;
c) a portico or;
d) changes in building material or texture.
10. Windows:
a.) New non-residential construction:
1) In any commercial zoning district, at least sixty percent (60%) of the street-facing ground level façade must be windows. Each window must be square or vertical—at least as tall as it is wide—or a horizontal window opening may be created when two or more vertical windows are grouped together to provide a horizontal opening, and they are either all the same size, or no more than two sizes are used.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 102
2) For all other zoning districts in the CPOD, at least 15 percent of the area of a street-facing façade must be windows.
b.) Non-residential renovation:
1. When historic windows are too deteriorated to be retained or repaired and must be replaced, they shall be replaced with windows that match the existing windows in size and function. To the extent feasible, historic trim and casing shall be retained.
2. The Committee may approve replacement windows made of materials that do not match the existing windows when significant cost or durability issues exist.
11. Trim and Historic Details:
a) Trim must mark all building roof lines, porches, windows, and doors on all elevations. The trim must be at least 3-1/2 inches wide. Buildings constructed with a masonry exterior are exempt from this standard.
b) In cases of renovation where historic building details are present, they shall be retained and preserved, if economically and structurally feasible. If the details are missing or damaged, they must be replicated to the extent economically possible. The Committee may approve replacements made of materials that do not match the existing when significant cost or durability issues exist.
12. Roofs: Primary structures must have:
a.) A sloped roof with a pitch that is no flatter than 4/12and no steeper than 12/12; or
b.) A roof with a pitch of less than 4/12 must have a cornice that meets the following:
1. There must be two parts to the cornice. The top part of the cornice must project at least six inches from the face of the building and be at least 2 inches further from the face of the building than the bottom part of the cornice; and
2. The height of the cornice is based on the height of the building as follows: Buildings 16 feet in height must have a cornice at least 12 inches high. Buildings greater than 16 feet but less than 26 feet must have a cornice at least 18 inches high. Buildings 26 feet or greater must have a cornice at least 24 inches high.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 03
13. Roof eaves: Except for the CB-Primary District, roof eaves on all elevations must project from the building wall at least twelve (12) inches.
14. Exterior stairs and fire escapes: Exterior stairs, other than those leading to a main entrance, must be at least forty (40) feet from all streets. Except for the CB-Primary District, fire escapes must be at least forty (40) feet from all streets.
15. Parking Area Landscaping: Landscaping screening shall be provided around the perimeter of all parking areas which include 15 (fifteen) or more parking spaces (refer to Appendix C for a list of permitted landscaping plants).
a) The screening shall be located within five (5) feet of the edge of the parking area and shall provide screening at least four (4) feet in height for at least 75% of the perimeter or the parking area.
b) Screening shall consist of either a row of evergreen shrubs or a combination of mounding, ground covers and shrubs.
1) If only shrubs are used, they shall measure a minimum of 24 inches in height from ground level at the time of planting and be placed 5 feet on center.
2) If landscape mounding is also used, it shall undulate between the heights of 2 and 4 feet from ground level. Shrubs shall be planted on the mound at a ratio of one shrub for every 5 horizontal feet of mounding. The shrubs shall measure a minimum of 18 inches in height from ground level at the time of planting and may be placed in an irregular, natural pattern.
16. Foundation Landscaping: For any non-residential use, all street-facing elevations must have landscaping along their foundation. The landscaped area may be along the outer edge of a porch instead of the foundation. This landscaping requirement does not apply to portions of the building façade that provide access to the building for pedestrians or vehicles. The foundation landscaping must meet the following standards:
a.) The use of native plants common to hardiness zone 5 is encouraged (refer to Appendix C);
b.) The landscaped area must be at least 3 feet wide;
c.) There must be at least one three-gallon shrub for every 3 linear feet of foundation; and
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 104
d.) Ground cover plants must fully cover the remainder of the landscaped area.
17. Street Trees: One (1) tree must be planted in the area between the sidewalk and the street for each 30 feet of street frontage. This also applies to lots with frontage on two streets. The type (see Appendix C) and location of street trees will be determined based on the specific configuration or limitations of each particular project.
18. Outdoor Storage, Docks, Mechanical Equipment, and Waste Containers: Outdoor storage of unfinished products or supplies shall be prohibited. All outdoor storage of finished products or materials for sale, all trash and recycling containers, all truck docks, and all mechanical equipment shall be completely enclosed or screened.
a) Stored materials, seasonal and other outdoor sales areas, mechanical equipment, and waste containers located on the ground shall be enclosed by a fence or wall constructed of like materials as the primary structure on the lot.
1) The structure shall not exceed 8 feet in height.
2) No stored products or waste containers or materials may exceed the height of the enclosure.
3) An opaque wooden gate, painted consistent with the main color of the primary structure on the lot shall be provided at all access points to the enclosed area.
b) Mechanical equipment for commercial uses:
1. Mechanical equipment located on the roof shall be screened on all sides by a parapet or other building feature based on an elevation view of the building.
2. Mechanical equipment located on the ground shall be screened on all sides by the building, walls, or fences of a material or color which is compatible with the primary building or an evergreen hedge which is not less than the height of the mechanical equipment at the time of planting.
c) No area of the storage of waste materials shall be located within 20 feet of any public street right-of-way, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian way.
d) All truck docks shall be screened from view from all public areas, including parking lots and adjacent public streets. The screening enclosure shall consist of a fence or wall constructed of like material as the exterior of the primary structure on the lot.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 05
19. Gas Pump Islands, Gas Island Canopies and Related Facilities
a) All structures on the site (including kiosks, car wash buildings, gas pump islands, etc.) shall be architecturally consistent with the main structure.
b) All building elevations shall be architecturally detailed to avoid the appearance of the ―back of the building‖ and should contribute a positive presence to the street scene.
c) Gas island canopies shall be built of the same high quality materials as the convenience store or kiosk associated with the gas island. These structures shall be designed to create architectural harmony with the primary structure on the site.
d) Gas island canopy structural columns shall be covered with the same architectural materials as the associated building.
20. Fencing:
a) The following types of fences shall be permitted in the Corridor Protection Overlay District:
1.) Masonry walls
2.) Ornamental iron
3.) Wood or vinyl
4.) Live hedges
b) Permitted fences shall comply with the requirements of Section 4.8 and Section 13.8 of this ordinance.
c) The following fence types shall not be permitted in the Corridor Protection Overlay District:
1.) Chain link or woven wire
21. Lighting: Lighting on each lot shall be designed to reduce light pollution while providing the minimum light necessary for security and safe pedestrian and vehicle traffic movements.
a) Exterior lighting shall be limited to those areas needed for safety and security purposes only.
b) All areas containing outdoor lighting shall limit light spillage onto adjacent property to no more than one (1) footcandle through the use of light fixture shielding, location, height, and aim.
c) All lighting shall have 90-degree cutoff luminaries (shielded down lighting).
d) Lights illuminating structures shall be designed to wash the façade of the building in light rather than providing a spot or floodlight effect.
e) Light poles in vehicle use areas shall be round and shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
f) Sidewalks shall have 90-degree cutoff luminaries (shielded down lighting). Bollard-style lighting is preferred adjacent to pedestrian walkways.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 106
g) For gas station canopies or similar structures, all canopy lighting shall be flush-mounted or shielded canopy fixtures.
22. Parking Lot Location:
a) In the Primary and Secondary Central Business Districts, no parking lots shall be placed between the primary structure and the abutting public street.
b) In all other districts, for parking lots of 15 spaces or more, no more than 10% of the parking spaces provided on each lot may be placed between the front façade of the primary structure and the abutting public street.
23. Pedestrian Walkways/Sidewalks:
a) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided across the frontage of all lots, connecting the lot, the primary structure, and parking areas to each other and with adjacent properties. Sidewalks shall also be provided along the full length of all facades which include a customer entrance and/or are adjacent to a parking area.
1) Walkways shall be concrete and shall be a minimum of 4 feet in width.
2) Walkways parallel to parking lots and interior drives shall be separated from such areas by a curbed landscaped area measuring a minimum of 5 feet in width.
3) Walkways through vehicle use areas shall be of a paving material different from that of the vehicle use area.
4) Except for the Primary Central Business District and any property in the CB-S District with frontage on Main Street, walkways along the facades of the primary structure shall be separated from the building by a landscape area which is a minimum of 5 feet in width.
b) For each 100 square feet of hard-surface area between the building and the street lot line at least one of the following amenities must be provided:
1) a bench or other seating;
2) a bike rack;
3) a decorative fountain; or
4) a landscape planter or similar feature.
Structures built in the CB-P District are exempt from this requirement. Amenities installed in the Secondary Central Business District must conform to the specifications provided in Appendix D.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 07
E. Signs
In addition to the sign regulations described in Section 12 of this ordinance, the following regulations apply to signage in the Corridor Protection Overlay District:
a) Permitted signs in the CPOD shall be limited to the following types:
1) Wall signs
2) Monument or ground signs
3) Projecting or blade signs
4) Awning or canopy signs
b) Any new sign shall be architecturally integrated with its surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that they are complementary to the overall design of the new development or existing structure.
c) Sign themes shall be designed so that all signs within a strip-style development are comprised of one single sign type (i.e. cabinet type, channel letters, projecting, etc.) for each commercial use.
d) All signs shall be constructed of materials and color that match or are compatible with the principal materials of the structure and landscaping on the property.
e) Monument or ground signs shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
f) Monument or ground signs in the Primary or Secondary Central Business Districts with frontage along Main Street are limited to one half (½) square foot of signage per one (1) linear foot of building frontage not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
g) Monument or ground signs in the Primary or Secondary Central Business Districts shall be allowed a one (1) foot setback from the property line, provided the sign complies with the requirements of Section 4.8 for vision clearance. In all other districts, the minimum setback shall be one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of sign height measured from the road right-of-way and from any other property line.
h) Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted in the CB-P and CB-S Districts. For all other districts, the illumination shall comply with Section 12.5.C of this ordinance.
i) Projecting or blade signs shall not project more than thirty-six (36) inches from the wall surface upon which they are mounted and the bottom edge of the sign shall be at least nine (9) feet from grade.
j) Signage will not be allowed on roof top screening or roof top equipment penthouses, above the roof line, or on sloped roofs.
k) A landscaped area shall be provided around the entire base of all monument or ground signs. In the Primary and Secondary Business Districts, the landscaped area shall be one half (½) square foot of landscaping for every one (1) square foot of sign
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 108
area. For all other districts, the landscaped area shall be one (1) square foot of landscaping for every one (1) square foot of sign area.
l) Directional Signs: Non-residential uses shall be permitted directional signs to direct traffic within a site provided such signs do not exceed three (3) feet in height and three (3) square feet in area for each sign. All directional signs shall be used for directional indications and address identification purposes only and shall not be used for business advertising purposes.
m) In addition to the temporary off-premise signage permitted by Section 12.6 of this ordinance, the Town of Danville may erect off-premise or wayfinding signage in the area of the downtown square.
F. Design Review Committee
1. Purpose: The purpose of the Design Review Committee is to provide professional and technical advice to the Plan Commission in the administration of the Corridor Protection Overlay District.
2. Membership. The Design Review Committee shall consist of a seven (7) member committee appointed as follows:
a) One (1) ex-officio member of the Plan Commission appointed from among its members;
b) Six (6) members appointed by the Plan Commission who may not be members of the Plan Commission. These members should possess at least one of the following qualifications:
i. A college level academic degree in architecture, landscape architecture, art history, historic preservation, history, urban design, or an equivalent combination of education and experience in dealing with the historic and/or visual aspects of the natural and built environments; or
ii. A sensitive and keen interest in the protection and enhancement of the community’s overall character and image.
3. Terms of Office: Members shall be initially appointed with staggered terms. Thereafter each successive member shall be appointed for four (4) years. The staggering of terms is intended for the purpose of giving the committee continuity in its recommendations to the Plan Commission.
4. Jurisdiction: The committee shall have a jurisdiction, which is co-terminus with that of the other sections of this ordinance.
Section 9
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 09
5. Design Review Submissions: For any new construction or renovation in the CPOD, the requirements specified in Section 17 for site plan review shall be provided for design review; however, all submissions must include a complete set of building elevations for evaluation by the committee.
G. Other Development Controls
1. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance unless specified otherwise in this Section.
2. Temporary uses or structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
3. All business activities permitted in the CPOD shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, with the exception of off street parking and loading areas and outdoor dining facilities.
4. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required for all development permitted in the Corridor Protection Overlay District.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 110
SECTION 10: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
10.1 INTENT
The intent of the industrial zoning districts of the Town of Danville is to establish industrial uses in areas best suited for that type of development based on location, accessibility, and other related conditions. Furthermore, Industrial Districts have established performance standards to ensure a safe and healthy co-existence of industrial and non-industrial uses.
10.2 INDUSTRIAL OFFICE (IO)
The purpose of the IO District is to encourage the development of research facilities, test laboratories, and administrative facilities that are office-like in physical appearance and service requirements. This district is used as a transitional use or buffer between commercial and more intense industrial uses.
H. Permitted Uses
1. Banks and Other Financial Institutions
2. Colleges and Universities
3. Flex Space
4. Governmental or Municipal Buildings or Facilities
5. Local and Suburban Transit
6. Nursery School, Kindergarten or Day Care
7. Office/Laboratories—Medical or Dental
8. Police or Fire Station
9. Post Office
10. Print Shops
11. Service Organizations
12. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
13. Trade or Business Schools
I. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installations for local service.
J. Special Exceptions
4. Artificial Lake of 3 or more acres
5. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand
6. Public Park
7. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 11
K. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
a) Minimum Lot Size: 20,000 square feet
b) Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
c) Minimum Depth of Front Yard: Forty (40) feet
d) Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
e) Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the lot line abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
f) Intensity: The total floor area of the industrial building shall not exceed 80% of the lot area.
g) Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet, except that the setback portion of the building which is in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet up to the maximum height allowed. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
L. Other Development Controls
1. Uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Section 10.6 of this Ordinance.
2. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
3. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
5. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
6. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 112
10.3 INDUSTRIAL LIGHT (IL)
The purpose of the IL District is to encourage the development of manufacturing and wholesale business establishments which are clean, quiet, free of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke, or glare, operate entirely within enclosed structures and generate low volume industrial traffic. This district is designated as a transitional use between general industrial uses and other less intense uses.
A. Permitted Uses
1. Assembly of Finished Goods
2. Beverage Bottling
3. Colleges and Universities
4. Communication Relay Tower
5. Construction Offices, General or Heavy Contractors
6. Flex Space
7. Food Production, except for canning
8. Governmental or Municipal Buildings or Facilities
9. Light Industry
10. Local and Suburban Transit
11. Machine Shop
12. Mail Order Distribution
13. Packaging of Finished Goods
14. Police or Fire Station
15. Post Office
16. Print Shop
17. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
18. Trade or Business School
19. Warehousing
20. Wholesale Produce Terminal
21. Wireless Communication Tower
B. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installation for local service.
C. Special Exceptions
1. Animal Control Authority
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more acres
3. Banks and other Financial Institutions
4. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand
5. Office/Laboratories—Medical or Dental
6. Public Park
7. Recreation Center, Indoor or Outdoor
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 13
8. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
9. Self Storage Units (commercial)
D. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard: Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the lot line abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
6. Intensity: The total floor area of the industrial building shall not exceed 80% of the lot area.
7. Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet, except that the setback portion of the building which is in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet up to the maximum height allowed. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
E. Other Development Controls
1. Uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Section 10.6 of this Ordinance.
2. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
3. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
5. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
6. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 114
10.4 INDUSTRIAL GENERAL (IG)
The purpose of the IG District is to encourage major manufacturing, processing, and warehousing uses that require extensive community facilities and reasonable access to arterial or major collector thoroughfares. They may have extensive outdoor storage and service areas, general heavy traffic, and shall be subject to performance and site plan review standards.
A. Permitted Uses
1. Assembly of Finished Goods
2. Beverage Bottling
3. Bottled Gas Storage and Distribution
4. Bulk Storage (not commercial self storage)
5. Chemical Processing
6. Commercial Grain Elevators
7. Commercial Greenhouse
8. Commercial Nursery
9. Communication Relay Tower
10. Concrete Mixing Facility
11. Construction Offices, General or Heavy Contractors
12. Food Production, except for canning
13. General Industry
14. Governmental or Municipal Buildings or Facilities
15. Light Industry
16. Local and Suburban Transit
17. Lumber Yard
18. Machine Shop
19. Mail Order Distribution
20. Packaging of Finished Goods
21. Painting and Customizing
22. Police or Fire Station
23. Power Plant
24. Public or Commercial Parking Garages
25. Racing and Testing
26. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
27. Truck Terminal
28. Warehousing
29. Wholesale Produce Terminal
30. Wireless Communication Tower
B. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installation for local service.
C. Special Exceptions
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 15
1. Above Ground Storage Tanks/Storage
2. Animal Control Authority
3. Airport
4. Artificial Lake of 3 or more acres
5. Banks and other Financial Institutions
6. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand
7. Junk Yard
8. Liquid Fertilizer Storage & Distribution (commercial)
9. Manufacturing, Storage, or Use of Explosives
10. Mineral Extraction, Borrow Pit, Topsoil Removal, & Storage Areas
11. Mining or Excavation
12. Office/Laboratories—Medical or Dental
13. Penal or Correctional Institution
14. Public or Commercial Sanitary Fill, Refuse Dump, Garbage Disposal Plant, or Trash Transfer Station
15. Public or Commercial Sewage Disposal Plant
16. Public Park
17. Recreation Center, Indoor or Outdoor
18. Recycling Center
19. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
20. Scrap Metal Yard
21. Self Storage Units (commercial)
22. Slaughter House
23. Storage & Dismantling of Vehicles
D. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard: Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the lot line abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
6. Intensity: The total floor area of the industrial building shall not exceed 80% of the lot area.
7. Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet, except that the setback portion of the building which is in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet up to the
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 116
maximum height allowed. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
E. Other Development Controls
1. Uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Section 10.6 of this Ordinance.
2. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
3. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
5. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
6. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required.
10.5 INDUSTRIAL PARK (IP)
The purpose of the IP District is to encourage and accommodate a community of industries, providing a master-planned park-like setting located along minor arterials or major collectors which are developed under a single developer. The industrial park or subdivision may or may not be owned and/or operated under single ownership.
A. Permitted Uses
1. Assembly of Finished Goods
2. Beverage Bottling
3. Colleges and Universities
4. Communication Relay Tower
5. Construction Offices, General or Heavy Contractors
6. Flex Space
7. Food Production, except for canning
8. Governmental or Municipal Buildings or Facilities
9. Light Industry
10. Local and Suburban Transit
11. Machine Shop
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 17
12. Mail Order Distribution
13. Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
14. Packaging of Finished Goods
15. Painting and Customizing
16. Police or Fire Station
17. Post Office
18. Print Shop
19. Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
20. Trade or Business School
21. Warehousing
22. Wholesale Produce Terminal
23. Wireless Communication Tower
B. Accessory Uses
1. Accessory uses.
2. Public utility installation for local service.
C. Special Exceptions
1. Animal Control Authority
2. Artificial Lake of 3 or more acres
3. Banks and other Financial Institutions
4. Chemical Processing
5. Coffee Shop or Refreshment Stand
6. Office/Laboratories—Medical or Dental
7. Public Park
8. Racing and Testing
9. Recreation Center, Indoor or Outdoor
10. Restaurant, with or without alcoholic beverages
11. Self Storage Units (commercial)
D. Area and Height Regulations for Permitted Uses
1. Minimum Lot Size: 20,000 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
3. Minimum Depth of Front Yard: Forty (40) feet
4. Minimum Depth of Rear Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the rear yard abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum rear yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
5. Minimum Depth of Side Yard: Ten (10) feet; except where the lot line abuts a residential district, in which case the minimum side yard depth shall be forty (40) feet.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 118
6. Intensity: The total floor area of the industrial building shall not exceed 80% of the lot area.
7. Maximum Building Height: Eighty (80) feet, except that the setback portion of the building which is in excess of thirty-five (35) feet shall be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet up to the maximum height allowed. Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, penthouses, stacks, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by any other law.
E. Other Development Controls
1. Uses shall be subject to the performance standards set forth in Section 10.6 of this Ordinance.
2. Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance.
3. The use and placement of signs shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance.
4. Required screening, buffering, and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 13 of this Ordinance.
5. Temporary structures shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 4.5 of this Ordinance.
6. Fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13 of this Ordinance.
7. A site plan, as regulated by Section 17 of this Ordinance, shall be required.
10.6 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
A. Air Pollution.
1. Smoke. For the purpose of grading in the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be employed. No industrial use may emit more than sixty (60) smoke units (as defined by the United States Bureau of Mines) per stack or smoke in excess of Ringlemann No. 2. However, for the purposes of soot blowing, process purging, and fire cleaning, once during any 24-hour period, each stack may emit up to ten (10) additional smoke units up to and including Ringlemann No. 3, but not for more than five (5) minutes.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 19
2. Particulate Matter. For the purposes of this Section, the term ―particulate matter‖ shall mean divided liquid or solid material that is discharged and carried along in the air. The rate of emission of particulate matter for individual processes within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed a figure of .06 pounds per 1000 pounds of effluent gas, of which no more than ten percent by weight may be particles larger than 44 microns.
3. Odor. The emission of odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines is prohibited.
4. Dust. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from sources such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment and the like within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening, sheltering, paving, oiling, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable means.
5. Poisonous and Injurious Fumes and Gases.
a) The emission of any fumes or gases across lot lines in concentrations detrimental to or endangering public health, safety, comfort, and welfare or causing injury or damage to property or business is prohibited.
b) The emission of toxic and nontoxic fumes or gases may not produce any concentration at a residence or business district boundary line exceeding twenty-five percent (25%) of the threshold limit as set for the fume or gas in question in the latest issue of ―Threshold Limit Values For Toxic Materials In Industry,‖ issued by the Indiana State Board of Health, from the American Conference of Governmental Hygienists.
B. Glare, Heat and Other Emissions. No use, operation, activity or structure shall cause heat or glare to be a public nuisance at or beyond any residence or business district boundary. No such use may cause illumination or glare at the or beyond any residential district boundary in excess of one (1) footcandle. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arch weld or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be permitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards when measured at the property line.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 120
C. Vibration. No use shall cause vibrations or concussions detectable beyond lot lines without the aid of instruments.
D. Noise
1. No use shall produce noise in excess of seventy-five (75) decibels, day or night.
2. No activity or operation producing noise, other than ordinary vehicle noise, shall be conducted so that noise from the activity or operation can be detected at any point off of the lot on which that use is located.
3. Public safety sirens and related apparatus used soley to warn the public of an emergency shall be exempt from this standard.
E. Fire and Explosion Hazards
1. Incombustible to Moderate Burning Materials. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined for liquids by a closed cup flash point of less than 187o F, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for this district.
2. Free Burning to Intense Burning Materials. The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning as determined for liquids by a closed cup flash point of less than 187o F but not less than 105oF, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance standards for this district and provided the following conditions are met:
a) Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls.
b) All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty (40) feet from lot lines.
c) Buildings or structures containing such free burning to intense burning materials shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with the installation standards prescribed by the American Insurance Association; or if the materials, goods or products are liquids, the protection thereof shall be in conformity with the standards prescribed by the American Insurance Association Phamplet No. 30, June 1959, or any subsequent revision or amendment thereto.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 21
3. Flammable and Explosive Materials. The utilization in manufacturing processes of materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases determined for liquids by a closed cup flash point of less than 105o F shall be permitted in this district, provided:
a) That the final manufactured product does not itself have a closed cup flash point of less than 187o F;
b) That the use and storage of such materials shall be in conformity with standards prescribed by the American Insurance Association and the requirements of any other ordinances;
c) That the storage of more than 50,000 gallons of materials or products having a closed cup flash point of less than 105o F (exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers) is prohibited;
d) That the storage of more than 100,000 gallons of materials or products having a closed cup flash point of less than 180oF (exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers) is prohibited.
F. Electrical Disturbance. No use shall cause electrical and/or non-visible light (infra-red, microwave, ultraviolet) disturbance adversely affecting radio, television, or other equipment in the vicinity.
G. Toxic Matter. The storage, handling, or transport of toxic substances shall comply with all federal, state, county, and local laws and regulations regarding the storage, handling, or transport of toxic material. No use shall discharge across boundaries of its lot toxic matter so as to endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare, or cause injury or damage to an abutting or adjoining property.
H. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials, and flammable products within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such storage from adjacent properties and public right-of-way. No outdoor storage of fuel, raw materials and flammable products shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district or use.
I. Exterior Lighting. Any lighting used for exterior illumination of the building or parking areas shall direct light away from adjoining residential districts or uses.
Section10
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 122
J. Waste Matter. No use shall accumulate within the lot, or discharge beyond the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in violation of applicable public health, safety, and welfare standards and regulations.
K. Water Pollution. No use shall produce erosion or other pollutants in such quantity as to be detrimental to adjacent properties or be permitted to discharge liquid or solid wastes into public waters except as permitted under the Stream Pollution Control Law (Acts of 1943, Chapter 214, as amended).
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 23
SECTION 11 PARKING AND LOADING
11.1 INTENT
The intent of this Section is to alleviate or prevent congestion of streets by setting forth sufficient requirements for the on-site storage, loading, and/or unloading of motor vehicles in order to meet the needs normally generated by each use.
11.2 APPLICATION
No new building or structure shall be constructed or used in whole or in part, and no building or part thereof shall be altered, enlarged, reconstructed or used, and no land shall be used unless off-street parking is provided in accordance with the conditions set forth in this Section.
A. No Elimination of Parking Spaces. No existing off-street parking spaces shall be eliminated by the replacement or enlargement of an existing building or structure, unless the remaining spaces meet or exceed the required number of parking spaces, or the spaces are replaced by new spaces provided in accordance with this Section.
B. Nonconforming Parking
1. Previously lawfully established buildings, structures, or uses, or structures or uses for which improvement location permits have been issued at the time this Ordinance becomes effective shall not be subject to the requirements of this Section, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
2. For any nonconforming building or structure that has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other disaster, restoration of such existing building or structure shall be permitted without conforming to the requirements of this Section if said restoration or rebuilding complies with the following requirements.
a.) The restoration does not reduce the number of parking spaces that were originally available to the building or structure, and were in existence prior to the damage and subsequent restoration.
C. Additional Parking Required
1. Additions. Enlargements or alterations which result in an increase in the ground coverage or the usable floor area of a building or structure shall require additional off-street parking spaces in accordance with the provisions of this Section, but only to the extent that such increase exceeds five percent (5%) of the original
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 124
ground coverage or fifteen percent (15%) of the floor area existing at the time this Ordinance becomes effective.
2. Change in Use. Changes in the use of existing buildings, structures, or land shall require additional off-street parking spaces to meet the number of required spaces for that new use.
D. Accessory Parking Permitted. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of accessory off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided that all regulations herein governing the location, design, and operation of such facilities are adhered to.
E. Distinction Between Parking and Loading Areas. Required off-street loading and unloading spaces shall not be construed as being part of the required off-street parking spaces.
F. Limitations on Parking Areas
1. Use of Parking Areas Limited. Accessory off-street parking facilities shall be utilized solely for the parking of passenger automobiles or light trucks belonging to the residents, patrons, occupants, or employees of the specified uses. Said parking facilities shall not be used for the storage, display, sale, repair, dismantling, or wrecking of any vehicle, equipment, or material.
2. Only areas improved with concrete, asphalt, or stone may be utilized for parking. Grass areas are not considered off-street parking areas and shall not be utilized as such.
3. Commercial Vehicles in Residential Areas. For each dwelling unit in a residential zoning district, a maximum of one (1) off street parking space may be provided for a commercial vehicle of no more than three (3) tons capacity (manufacturer’s rating); provided further, that such vehicle is parked in an enclosed garage, accessory building, or rear yard and is used by a resident of the premises.
4. This regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit commercial vehicles from temporary loading and unloading in any residential district.
5. Parking of Inoperable Vehicles. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any type without current license plates or in an inoperable condition, so as to be deemed dead storage, shall be prohibited in residential zone districts other than in completely enclosed buildings, and shall not be parked or stored in any zone district unless specifically authorized under the terms of this Ordinance.
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 25
6. Drive-Through Stacking. Drive through establishments shall provide stacking space for vehicles awaiting use of drive-through windows. Each stacking space must be twelve (12) feet long and each lane of stacking spaces must be at least nine (9) feet wide. Lane widths should be delineated with pavement markings. However, individual spaces within the lane need not be marked. Table 11-2, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements denotes the number of stacking spaces required for common drive-through uses. Any drive through use not listed shall be required to provide at least four (4) stacking spaces per drive-through window. Stacking spaces must be in addition to the required parking spaces and must not be located within a required driveway, internal circulation system, or parking aisle.
11.3 REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING RATIOS
A. General Requirements. Except as provided elsewhere in this Section, each principal and accessory use of land shall be provided with the number of off-street parking spaces indicated for that use in Table 11-2, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements. However, there shall be no minimum parking requirement in the Primary Central Business District.
B. Uses Not Specified. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in the requirements herein, the requirements for off-street parking or off-street loading for a use which is mentioned, and which is similar to the unmentioned use, shall apply.
C. Multiple Tenant Developments. Where there is a combination of uses on a lot, the minimum required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements of the individual uses, unless otherwise provided by subsection 11.4.C.
D. Fractions. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 11-2 results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded while a fraction in excess of one half shall be counted as one parking space.
E. Additional Requirements for Company Vehicles. Every company car, truck, tractor or trailer normally stored at a business site shall be provided with an off-street parking space. Such space shall be in addition to the parking requirements listed in Table 11-2.
F. Public Assembly Seating. In sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in which patrons occupy benches, pews, or other similar
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 126
seating facilities, each twenty-four (24) inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements the hereunder.
G. Parking Spaces Accessible to the Disabled. The Town of Danville encourages all development within the Town which serves the public to provide facilities which are accessible to people with disabilities as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. In accordance with this goal, accessible parking shall be provided by any building or use initiated after the effective date of this code according to the following minimum requirements and any further requirements hereafter adopted by federal, state, or local law.
1. Required Spaces. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided at a rate listed in Table 11-1 below. In addition to these requirements, accessible patient parking at outpatient facilities must equal no less than ten percent (10%) of the required parking, and facilities which specialize in treatment or services for persons with mobility impairments must provide accessible parking equaling no less than twenty percent (20%) of the required parking for patient use.
TABLE 11-1: ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
2. Design and Layout of Accessible Parking Lots. Access aisles and accessible routes for the mobility impaired shall be provided pursuant to ADA requirements. Accessible spaces must be a Total Number of Parking Spaces In Lot Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces Required
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2% of total
1,001 and over
20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 27
minimum of eight (8) feet wide with a five (5) foot access aisle. One of every eight (8) spaces, however, must have an access aisle of eight (8) feet wide and be designated ―van accessible‖.
3. Passenger Loading Zones. Passenger loading zones shall provide an access aisle of a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length, adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull up space. If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull up space, then a curb ramp shall be provided.
4. Signage and Marking. All accessible spaces shall be designated by the international access symbol. Van accessible spaces will be labeled by both the international access symbol and an additional sign indicating that the space is accessible for vans.
Signs shall be a minimum of five and one half (5 ½) feet above ground level so as not to be obscured by parked vehicles. The mobility impaired symbol shall also be painted on the ground to the rear of the parking space.
H. Off Street Parking Ratios
Off street parking shall be provided according to the ratios set forth in the following table.
TABLE 11-2: SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
USE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
Airport or Heliport
One space per two employees; plus one space per based or daily transient aircraft
Automobile, Motorcycle, RV, and Camper Sales
Automobile Rental and Leasing Service
One space for each two employees; plus one space per 400 sq. ft. per gross floor area of showroom; plus one space per service bay, where applicable
Banks
One space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area; plus three stacking spaces for each drive-through lane, where applicable (See Section 10.2.F.3)
Billiard Room
Two spaces per table; plus one per employee on largest shift
Bowling Alley
Three spaces per lane; plus one space per employee on largest shift
Business Offices, Professional Offices, and other Similar Uses not elsewhere listed
One space per 300 sq. ft. of leasable floor area
Boarding House, including Bed and Breakfast
One space per guest room; plus two spaces for the resident owner
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 128
USE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
Bus Station
One space per 10 seats in waiting area
Car Wash
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one drying space and four stacking spaces per washing space (See Section 10.2.F.6)
Church or Temple
One space per three seats in main auditorium (See also Section 11.3.F)
Clinic – Medical or Dental
One space per employee; plus three spaces per doctor or dentist
Country Club or Private Golf Course
One space per four individual members or one space per two families, based on maximum anticipated membership
Dancing, Aerobics, or Gymnastic Studio
One space per 200 sq. ft. of studio floor area
Driving Range
One space per tee; plus one space per employee on largest shift
Dwellings, Single and Two-Family
Two spaces per unit
Dwellings, Multi-Family
Efficiencies and one bedroom apartments: one space per unit
Apartments with two bedrooms or more: two spaces per unit
Exhibit, Assembly, and Reception Halls
One space per two persons at maximum occupancy
Funeral Home or Crematorium
One space per two employees; plus one space per four seats in the chapel, if applicable
Greenhouse or Tree Nursery
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per 300 sq. ft. of sales floor area
Golf Course, Public
One space per two employees; plus three spaces per golf hole
Health Spa or Fitness Center
One space per 200 sq. ft. of gross leasable area
Home Occupation
One space, in addition to residential requirements
Hospital
One space per two beds; plus one space per two staff members on largest shift, including nurses; plus one space per doctor; plus one space per hospital vehicle
Hotel or Motel
One space per three employees; plus one space per guest room; plus 75% of the required parking figured separately for banquet/meeting rooms and restaurants
Industrial Uses
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area open to the public (See also: Section 10.3.E)
Junk Yard or Recycling Center
One space per employee on the largest shift.
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 29
USE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
Kennel
One space per employee; plus one space per five animal cages
Kindergarten, Nursery School, or Day Care Center
One space per two employees; plus one space per five children
Miniature Golf
One space per hole; plus one space per employee on largest shift
Motor Vehicle Repair
One space per service bay; plus one space per employee on largest shift (service bay itself does not qualify as a parking space)
Movie Theater, Indoor
One space per four seats; plus one per two employees on largest shift
Night Club or Tavern
One space per three persons at maximum capacity
Nursing Home
One space per five beds; plus one space per employee on largest shift
Outdoor Commercial Recreational Use
One space per employee; plus one space per 500 sq. ft. of use area
Park
Spaces equivalent to one percent (1%) of the total land area (parking along park roads may be used to fill this requirement
Playhouse or Dinner Theater
One space per four seats; plus one space per two employees on largest shift
Penal or Correctional Institution
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per 20 inmates
Police or Fire Station
One space for each person on duty on largest shift
Post Office
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area open to the public (See also: Section 10.3.E)
Private Camp or Campground
One space per camp site; plus one space per cabin; plus one space per two employees on largest shift
Public or Commercial Sewage Disposal Plant and Related Uses
One space per employee on largest shift
Public Library or Museum
Two spaces per 1000 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Restaurant
One space per four seats; plus one space per two employees on largest shift
Restaurant, Fast Food
One space per two and a half seats (2 ½); plus one space per two employees on the largest shift; plus if there is a drive-through, seven stacking spaces per window (See Section 11.2.F.6).
If no indoor seating, minimum of 10 spaces.
Retail and Personal Service Stores, not otherwise mentioned
One space per 300 sq. ft. of leasable floor area
Riding Stable
One space for each two stalls
Roadside Food Sales Stand
Five spaces per stand
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 130
USE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
School, Elementary and Middle
One space per staff member; plus one space per classroom
School, High
One space per staff member; plus one space per four students
Service Station, with repair
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per four gas pumps; plus one space per service bay
Service Station, without repair
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per four gas pumps
Shopping Center
(See also: Section 10.4
25,000-400,000 sq. ft.: Four spaces per 1000 sq. ft. leasable floor area
400,000-600,000 sq. ft.: Four and a half (4 ½) spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. leasable floor area
600,000 sq. ft. or larger: Five spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. leasable floor area
Skating Rinks (ice or roller)
One space per 200 sq. ft. skating area
Swimming Pool
One space per 100 sq. ft. of pool area
Telephone Exchange or Public Utility Substation
One space per employee
Theater, Outdoor
One space per four seats; plus one per two employees on largest shift
Truck Terminal
Four spaces; plus one space per employee on largest shift (See also: Section 10.3.E)
Trade or Business School
One space for every three employees and member of the staff; and one space per every three students
Veterinarian
Three spaces for every doctor; plus one space for each additional employee
Wholesale Produce Terminal
One space per employee on largest shift; plus one space per 300 sq. ft. of sales floor area
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 31
11.4 PROGRAMS AND INCENTIVES TO REDUCE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The following programs and incentives are provided to permit reduced parking requirements in the locations and situations outlined herein where the basic parking requirements of this code would be excessive or detrimental to goals and policies of the Town relating to traffic congestion and environmental protection.
A. Parking Reductions in the CB Districts. There are no off-street parking requirements in the Primary CB District. However, for each building erected and for certain other uses of land in the Secondary CB District, parking spaces for motor vehicles and loading and unloading berths as specified for the use to which such building or land is to be devoted shall be provided, except that the Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a special exception that waives the parking spaces required when the use is located within three hundred (300) feet of a public parking lot; and where a use fronts a street with parallel parking, credit toward off-street parking shall be granted at the rate of one (1) off-street space per every twenty-five (25) feet of frontage.
B. Credit for On-Street Parking or Public Parking in Non-CB Districts. Wherever on-street parking or other public parking is provided in the improvement of a street, credit toward off-street parking requirements shall be granted at the rate of one (1) off-street space for every marked on-street or public space.
C. Mixed-Use Shared Parking Programs
1. Purpose. The Town recognizes that strict application of the required parking rations may result in the provision of excessive numbers of parking spaces, and therefore, excessive pavement and impermeable surfaces. A Mixed-Use Shared Parking Program provides an option to reduce the total required parking in large mixed-use facilities in which uses operate at different times from one another throughout the day.
2. Applicability. The Mixed-Use Shared Parking Program may be applied where mixed-uses are proposed.
3. Procedure.
a) The Administrator may authorize a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly providing on site parking, if the respective hours of operation of the uses do not overlap.
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 132
b) The total number of parking spaces shall not be reduced by more than twenty percent (20%).
11.5 LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING
A. General Requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this Section, off-street parking shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the use it is intended to serve.
B. Off Site Parking Facilities. Required Parking for a nonresidential development may be located off-site under certain circumstances. Requests for variances allowing the substitution of off-site for on-site parking must meet the following requirements, in addition to the standard variance criteria.
1. The off-site parking shall be located so that it will adequately serve the use for which it is intended. In making this determination the following factors, among other things, shall be considered:
a) Proximity of the off-site parking facilities, generally within three hundred (300) feet of the use they are intended to serve;
b) Ease of pedestrian access to the off-site parking facilities; and
c) The type of use the off-site parking facilities are intended to serve. For example, off-street parking may not be appropriate for high turnover uses such as retail.
2. A written commitment shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the Town Attorney and executed by all parties concerned, assuring the continued availability of off-site parking facilities for the use they are intended to serve.
C. Front Yard Parking Requirements. Parking spaces may not be located in the required front yard except in business and industrial districts. However, no parking area shall be permitted within five (5) feet of the front property line in any district.
11.6 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR OFF STREET PARKING
Each parking area shall comply with the standards as hereinafter set forth.
A. Design
1. Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall have the minimum dimensions set forth in the following table:
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 33
TABLE 11-4: MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS FOR PARKING AREAS
(IN FEET)
2. Measurement of parking space width and length, aisle width, and parking angle shall be made as per the following diagram. Driveways shall be arranged for the free flow of vehicles at all times, and all maneuvering spaces and aisles shall be so designed that all vehicles may exit from and enter into a public street by being driven in a forward direction, except that residents and employees may be permitted to back in from alleys. (See diagram above.)
Each required off-street parking space shall be designed so that any motor vehicle may proceed to and from said space without requiring the moving of any other or by passing over any other parking space, except where the parking area is limited to employees.
3. On any parking area in any district, all paved portions of all parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any wall of a building, and a minimum of five (5) feet from any private or public way, or any lot line of any land in residential districts or used for a residential purpose.
4. All parking areas shall provide means of pedestrian circulation to the use and between the use and the street.
B. Construction
1. All required parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and driveways, except in FP districts, shall have a durable, dustless, all-weather surface, such as bituminous concrete or cement concrete, and shall provide for a satisfactory disposal of surface water by Angle of Parking Width of Parking Space Length of Parking Space Maneuvering Aisle
61o-90o
9’0’’
18’0’’
24’0’’
46o-60o
9’0’’
18’0’’
18’0”
45o
8’6’’
18’0’’
15’0”
Parallel
8’0’’
22’0’’
12’0”
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 134
grading and drainage in such a manner that no surface water shall drain onto any lot in other ownership. Such surfaces shall be well maintained.
2. Parking areas in all districts shall be provided with curbing, wheel stops, or other devices to prevent motor vehicles from being parked or driven within required setback areas or into required landscaped open space.
3. In any parking area the surface shall be painted, marked, or otherwise delineated so that each parking space is apparent.
C. Landscaping and Screening. All parking lots designed for fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall provide landscaping and screening in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.3 and 13.4. Smaller parking lots shall provide landscaping as deemed appropriate by the Administrator
D. Lighting.
1. All parking lots shall be illuminated.
2. All artificial lighting used to illuminate a parking area, maneuvering space, or driveway shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light sources into any public street or private way or onto adjacent property. Illumination shall measure no more than five (5) foot-candles on adjacent public or private streets and no more than one (1) foot-candle on adjacent residential properties.
11.7 OFF STREET LOADING
There shall be provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this subsection in connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles.
A. Location. All required off-street loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served, and no portion of the vehicle shall project into a street or alley. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard, or side yard adjoining a street.
No loading berth for vehicles over a two (2) ton capacity shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property in a residential district
Section 11
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 35
unless completely enclosed by a building wall or solid wall or fence, or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height.
B. Size. Off-street loading berths for over-the-road tractor-trailers shall be at least fourteen (14) feet in width by at least sixty (60) feet in length with a sixty (60) foot maneuvering apron, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least fifteen (15) feet.
For local pick-up and delivery trucks, off-street loading berths shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width by at least thirty (30) feet in length with a forty-five (45) foot maneuvering apron, and shall have a vertical clearance of at least twelve (12) feet.
C. Access
1. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
2. A minimum access aisle width of eighteen (18) feet shall be provided for one-way aisles, and a minimum access aisle width of twenty-four (24) feet shall be provided for two-way aisles.
D. Surfacing. All open off-street loading berths shall be improved with a compact base of not less than six (6) inches thick, surfaced with not less than two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all-weather, dustless material.
E. Off-street Loading Space Requirements. Nonresidential uses, except those that do not receive or transport goods in quantity by truck delivery, shall be provided with loading berths as follows: one off-street loading berth shall be provided for every 10,000 square feet of gross floor area but no more than a total of two spaces up to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area, one space for each additional 40,000 square feet up to 160,000 square feet, and one space for every 80,000 additional square feet.
The minimum number of off-street loading spaces shall not apply to uses within the Primary Central Business (Primary CB) District. However, for those uses within the Primary Central Business District that do transport goods in quantity by truck delivery, no loading or unloading shall be permitted within the right-of-way of any of the streets comprising the courthouse square peak traffic hours. Loading and unloading from these streets shall only be permitted between the hours of 7:30 PM and 6:00 AM.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 136
SECTION 12 SIGNS
12.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide a legal framework for the comprehensive regulation of signs in the Town of Danville. It recognizes the need for adequate identification, advertising, and communication within the community that is structurally sound, well maintained, and attractive in appearance. To achieve this purpose, the Ordinance is intended to control the height, area, location, and other similar aspects of signs and sign structures:
A. To allow businesses, institutions and individuals to exercise their right to free speech by displaying an image on a sign and to allow audiences to receive such information.
B. To provide and maintain visually attractive residential, retail, commercial, historic, open space and industrial areas.
C. To provide for reasonable and appropriate communication and identification for on-premise signs in residential zoning districts, commercial zoning districts and industrial zoning districts.
D. To encourage the use of creative and visually attractive signs.
E. To ensure that signs are located and designed to reduce sign distraction and confusion that may be contributing factors in traffic congestion and accidents, and maintain a safe and orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment.
F. To protect property values.
G. To promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town of Danville by avoiding conflicts between signs and traffic control devices, avoiding traffic hazards, and reducing visual distractions and obstructions.
12.2 SIGNS PROHIBITED
The following signs shall be prohibited:
A. Commercial billboards, posterboards, and other signs, when located upon vacant lots or parcels or when displaying information not related to the conduct of a business or other enterprise located on the same
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 37
premises as said billboard or posterboard, except as such signs are permitted by state or federal regulations.
B. Commercial signs not advertising bona fide business conducted or a product sold on the property, except as such signs are permitted by state or federal regulations.
C. Roof signs, except as hereafter authorized.
D. Signs which move or give the appearance of movement, including but not limited to signs which flutter, undulate, swing, rotate, oscillate or otherwise move by natural or artificial means, and signs containing flashing or running lights giving the illusion of movement.
1. Temporary promotional signs as described in Section 12.6 shall not be deemed to fall within this prohibition, provided a sign permit is first obtained from the Zoning Administrator pursuant to Section 12.3 below.
2. Time and temperature signs shall not be deemed to fall within this prohibition.
E. Signs which imitate traffic signs, including not but not limited to, signs which incorporate the words STOP, DANGER, WARNING, CAUTION, or GO SLOW, unless such language is part of a name of a business. (Signs which are accessory to a parking lot shall not be deemed to fall within this prohibition).
F. Portable or wheeled signs converted to a sign permanent in nature.
G. Signs placed on parked vehicles, boats or trailers where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or to direct the public to a business or activity located on or off the same premises.
H. Inflatable images such as balloons, except as specifically authorized in Section 12.6.
I. Miscellaneous advertising devices, other than signs that conform to the provisions of this Section, shall not be allowed.
J. Signs which display obscene, indecent, or immoral matter.
K. Obsolete signs; any sign that contains inaccurate or outdated information.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 138
L. Pennants, feathers, streamers, portable signs, and festoon lights, except as specifically authorized in Section 12.6 below.
M. Signs hung across any street or alley or within a public right-of-way, except when authorized by Section 12.4 or the Town of Danville (12.6.C.6).
N. Signs that emit audible sounds, odors or visible matter.
O. Beacon lights.
P. Yard card signs, except in residential zoning districts and as specifically authorized in Section 12.6 below.
Q. Bench signs.
R. Human signs.
S. Snipe signs.
T. Electronic Message Centers and animated signs.
12.3 SIGN PERMITS
A. Scope. No sign, except as provided in Section 12.4 below, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered, or relocated without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator.
B. Applications. Applications for a sign permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
1. In addition, all applications shall contain the following information.
a) Name, address, email (if applicable), and telephone number of the applicant.
b) Location of the building, structure or parcel of property to which, or upon which, the sign is to be attached or erected.
c) Position of sign in relation to nearby building, structures and street grade.
d) Two (2) copies of plans and specifications showing the method of construction.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 39
e) Sketch showing sign faces, exposed surfaces and proposed message thereof accurately represented in scale as to size, proportion and color.
f) Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting, constructing, altering or relocating the sign.
g) Written consent of the owners of the building, structure or land on or to which the sign is to be erected.
h) Such other information as the Zoning Administrator may require demonstrating full compliance with this and all other laws and Ordinances of the Town.
C. Issuance of the Permit.
1. The Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of a fully complete sign permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall examine the application and all material attached thereto to determine its compliance with this Section, as well as, any other applicable Town title, Ordinance, or law. The Zoning Administrator shall take formal action on the application within thirty days of the date the application was filed.
2. Approval by Electrical Inspector. Applications for a sign permit in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall also be reviewed and approved by the Building Inspector for the Town.
D. Validity of the Permit. If work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within one year of the date of issuance, the sign permit shall then become void.
E. Appeals. An appeal from the decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Section 19.8.
12.4 EXEMPTIONS
A. Exempt Signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements set forth in Section 12.3 above; provided however, they meet the remaining requirements of this Section, as well as any limitation set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance.
1. Public Service Signs. Signs used for safety purposes relative to the repair or maintenance of streets, sidewalks, or utilities in a public right-of-way.
2. Address Signs. Address numbers not exceeding two square feet in area.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 140
3. Governmental. Signs and public notices erected or required by Governmental bodies, or authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute, or Ordinance, including official traffic signs authorized by the Town of Danville.
4. Public Information Signs. Signs identifying the telephone, restrooms, and similar facilities, providing no advertising matter accompanies the sign.
5. Government Flags. Flags of any country, state, or unit of local government. Flagpoles accompanying such flags shall be limited to a height of thirty feet in residential districts and forty feet in nonresidential districts.
6. Corporate Flags. Corporate flags when flown in conjunction with the flag of the United States of America, provided such corporate flag is not larger than twenty-four square feet in area.
7. Memorial Plaques. Memorial plaques and cornerstones when not exceeding two square feet in area when permanently affixed to a building or premises.
8. Bulletin Boards. Notice and bulletin boards for public, charitable, religious, or similar type institution when not exceeding 16 square feet and located on the same premises as the institution. Such signs shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.
9. Time and Temperature Signs. Time and temperature signs containing computer-generated messages limited to time, temperature, and date are permitted in all districts except Primary Central Business District. These signs may not exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
10. Historical Identification Signs. Signs for property designated by the Federal, State, or local governments as a historical location, site, or landmark, provided such sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
11. Miscellaneous Information Matter. Matter appearing on newspaper vending boxes, automatic teller machines, and other vending machines, or matter appearing on or adjacent to entry doors such as "Push," "Pull," "Open," and "Closed," or matter
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 41
appearing on display windows or doors denoting hours of operation, credit cards accepted, and similar information.
12. No Trespassing Signs. No trespassing signs, warning signs (e.g., "Beware of Dog") and other such signs regulating the use of property when such signs do not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
13. Remembrances. Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary/memorial plaques or remembrances of persons or events that are noncommercial in nature.
14. Private Traffic Direction Signs. Private traffic direction signs directing traffic movement on a premise or within a premise, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height for each sign and containing no form of advertising.
15. Gas Pump Island Information Signs. Gas pump island informational signs, provided, however, such signs shall comply with the following regulations:
a) Gas pump island information signs shall be permanently mounted to gasoline pump island canopy supports, or the canopy face;
b) A maximum of four (4) signs, totaling no more than twenty-four (24) square feet of sign area, shall be permitted per gasoline pump-island. No single sign shall exceed nine (9) square feet in area and no sign shall exceed a height of twelve (12) feet;
c) A maximum of one (1) sign shall be permitted per canopy support. No sign shall exceed eight (8) square in area, nor shall a sign exceed a height of twelve (12) feet; and
d) A maximum of two (2) signs may be attached to the horizontal
face of the canopy. No single sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, nor shall such signs be permitted to rise above the canopy roofline.
16. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs in the type and number listed below:
a) Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of residential property:
1) No sign shall exceed nine square feet in area;
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 142
2) No sign shall be erected more than six feet above grade and not displayed above the second floor of a multi-story building;
3) Not more than one sign per street frontage is displayed;
4) Every sign is located on the same premises as the subject property; and
5) Every sign is removed seven days after the closing or execution of the lease.
b) Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of unimproved property, provided:
1) No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area for
properties from zero to ten acres; thirty-two (32) square feet in area for properties from eleven acres and above;
2) Not more than one sign per street frontage is displayed;
3) Every sign is located on the same premises as the subject property; and
4) Every sign is removed seven days after the closing or execution of the lease.
c) Signs advertising the sale, lease, or rent of nonresidential property, provided:
1) No sign shall exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area for
properties from zero to ten acres; thirty-two (32) square feet in area for properties from eleven to twenty acres; forty-eight square feet in area for properties twenty-one to forty (40) acres; and sixty-four (64) square feet for properties forty-one (41) acres and above;
2) Not more than one sign per street frontage is displayed, except in cases of properties forty-one (41) acres and above which may have two;
3) Every sign is located on the same premises as the subject
property; and
4) Every sign is removed seven days after the closing or execution of the lease.
d) Signs identifying a real estate open house, provided:
1) No sign shall exceed six square feet in area,
2) Not more than four signs per property shall be displayed,
3) The signs shall be displayed only between the hours of 9:00 AM and 6:00 PM, and
4) The signs may be located at any intersection within one square mile of the subject property, but only one sign per intersection per property shall be allowed.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 43
17. Construction Signs. Not more than two construction signs each with a sign surface area not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet per sign identifying the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction and announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, but not including the advertisement of any product. The signs shall be confined to the site of the construction and shall be removed within fourteen days after the issuance of an occupancy permit. Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.
18. Temporary Window Signs. In all commercial districts, two temporary window signs per window with the total sign area for both temporary window signs and permanent window signs not to exceed forty percent of the window surface area. A series of windows that are separated by frames and supporting material of less than six inches in width shall be considered as a single window for the purposes of area computation.
19. Political Signs. Political signs are permitted, however, such signs shall comply with the following regulations:
a) No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way, on utility poles, on municipally owned property, or in any other area prohibited by this Ordinance.
20. Garage Sale Signs. Signs informing the public of a private garage sale for a maximum of five (5) days per year at any one residence and the sign shall not be larger than four square feet or more than forty inches tall and shall be placed only on the premises where the garage sale is to be held.
21. Auction Signs. Signs advertising or informing the public of an auction of real or personal property are permitted only between the hours of 5:00 PM on Friday and 6:00 PM on Sunday. Such signs shall be no larger than four square feet in area nor forty inches in height.
22. Menu Board Signs. Menu board signs, such as those for drive-through restaurants are permitted as long as they are not visible from the public right-of-way.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 144
23. Sandwich Board Signs. Sandwich board or A-frame signs are permitted; however all such signs shall comply with the following regulations:
a) Sign must be located on the same property it is advertising or on a public sidewalk adjacent to the property.
b) Sign must only be displayed during hours of operation and must be removed at the close of business every day.
24. Yard Card Signs. Yard cards are exempt in residential zoning districts only when they are not used for advertising.
25. Temporary Window Signs. Temporary window signs, as long as they do not cover more than 40% of the window area in any single window, in combination with any permanent window sign(s) in the same window.
26. Contractor Yard Signs. Contractor yard signs include signs for such contractors as remodeling, plumbing, landscaping, and similar businesses. One sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet per contractor may be placed on a lot where work is underway or has recently been completed for a period of not more than 30 days per calendar year.
B. Changing Sign Copy. For the purposes of this Section, the changing of the copy of a sign, bulletin board, display encasement, marquee or maintenance where no structural changes are made or changing of interchangeable letters on signs designed for use of interchangeable letters shall not require a permit.
12.5 GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS
A. General Limitations on Sign Location
1. All signs requiring a permit shall be located on the premises they serve.
2. No sign shall be erected or maintained at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct the free and clear vision of a driver of a vehicle or a pedestrian.
3. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent the free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, and no signs shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
4. No sign shall have more than two sign faces.
5. No persons shall permit, maintain, or display any sign painted directly on an exterior wall, fascia or parapet of a building, fence, or chimney; except however, mural signs and existing signs
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 45
advertising a business operating on the same premises may be retained, provided the sign receives regular maintenance, including painting every two years.
6. No sign shall be allowed or maintained if the sign shall, in any way, violate existing state or federal regulations governing such signs. Signs controlled by these provisions shall be in compliance therewith and no such sign shall exceed a height of thirty-five feet above ground level.
7. No person shall place, paste, print, or affix, in any manner, a handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind in any public right-of-way on any trees, light standards, telephone poles or other supporting structure.
8. Except as otherwise permitted in this Section, no sign shall be located so as to project above the top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette and in no case exceed a height of twenty feet, whichever is lower.
9. Signs shall be permitted on awnings, canopies and marquees. However, such signs shall not exceed a height of twenty feet above the average surrounding grade. The area of such signs shall be counted against the maximum sign surface area permitted by this Section.
B. Specific Limitations on Sign Location.
1. Residential Districts. In the residential districts, permitted signs may be located anywhere on the property, provided they are no closer than ten feet to any lot line and are not located in the public right-of-way, except for Home Occupation signs conforming to Section 4.4.B.
2. Commercial Districts
a. No sign shall be placed or project into the public right-of-way, nor shall a sign attached to a building extend more than twenty-four inches from the face of the building or be less than eight feet above grade.
b. Except as otherwise noted in this Section, no building-mounted sign shall extend above the top line of the face of the building or exceed a height of twenty feet, whichever is lower.
c. Pole or monument signs, as permitted herein, shall be set back from every lot line one foot for each foot in height above average surrounding grade. For properties with
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 146
frontage along Old US 36/E. Main Street (between the 800 block of E. Main Street and CR 400 East) signs may be placed or project in the public right-of-way of Old US 36/E. Main Street to the extent that they are not within 40 feet of that road’s centerline.
3. Office and Industrial Districts.
a. No sign shall be placed or project into the public way nor shall a sign attached to a building extend more than twelve inches from the face of the building.
b. Except as otherwise permitted by this Section, no building-
mounted sign shall extend above the top line of the face of the building or exceed a height of twenty feet, whichever is lower.
c. Freestanding or ground signs, as permitted herein, shall be set back from every lot line 0.5 feet for each foot in height above average surrounding grade. For properties with frontage along Old US 36/E. Main Street (between the 800 block of E. Main Street and CR 400 East) signs may be placed or project in the public right-of-way of Old US 36/E. Main Street to the extent that they are not within 40 feet of that road’s centerline.
C. Illumination.
1. Location and Design of Light Source. Whenever an external artificial light source is used to illuminate a sign, such source shall be located, shielded and directed so as to not be visible from any public street or private residence. No receptacle or device housing a permitted light source which is attached to the sign itself shall protrude more than twelve inches from the face of the sign or building to which it is attached. If ground lighting is used to illuminate a sign, the receptacle or device should not protrude more than twelve inches and must be fully screened from view by landscaping.
2. Level of Illumination. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any internal or external artificial light source, exceed one hundred foot-lamberts at the sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of direct light upon adjacent property or streets. No exposed reflective type bulb or incandescent lamp,
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 47
which exceeds fifteen watts, shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. All sources of light, whether by direct exposure, surface reflection or transmission, having an intrinsic brightness greater than two (2) foot-candle shall be shielded so that the source of light cannot be seen at any point within a residential district.
3. Signs Adjacent to Residential Areas. Signs located on a lot abutting a residential district or a sign within one hundred feet of any residentially zoned area shall be so designed, located, shielded, and directed so as to prevent the casting of direct light upon adjacent properties or streets.
D. Sign Area Computation.
The following principals shall control the computation of sign area.
1. Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background or the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing unless such framework or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign.
2. Computation of Area of Multiple-Faced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
E. Construction and Design Standards. All signs shall meet the construction and design standards set forth for signs in the Town of Danville's Building Code.
F. Litter Control. All signs and the premises surrounding the sign shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 148
G. Maintenance. Every sign established in the Town of Danville shall, at all times, be maintained in good structural condition, and be painted at least once every two years, including all metal parts and supports thereof that are not galvanized or of rust resistant metals. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to inspect any sign pursuant to Section 12.9 below, and order any remedial action authorized thereunder.
H. Landscaping Requirements. Every permit application for a monument or pole sign shall be accompanied by a landscape plan meeting the standards hereinafter specified.
1. For every square foot of sign surface area, there shall be provided one and one-half square feet of landscape area.
2. Sodded or seeded areas shall not qualify as a landscaped area.
3. The required landscaped areas shall be improved with such plantings as hedges, conifers, flowering plants, evergreens, etc., of a size and in quantity proportionate to the size and height of the sign as judged by the Zoning Administrator.
4. In addition to the plantings herein described, the landscaped areas shall also include ground protection such as, but not limited to, ground cover plants, landscaping bark, decorative stone or landscape timbers.
5. It shall be the duty of each party owning any lot or parcel improved with the landscaping required herein to maintain said landscaping including, but not by way of limitation, the replacement of any dead or diseased vegetation, the trimming of any overgrown vegetation and the maintenance of any groundcover or protection provided in accordance with the terms hereof.
I. Wind Pressure and Dead Load Requirements. All signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressures and dead loads as required by the Town's Building Code.
J. Identification and Marking. Each sign hereafter erected or remodeled shall bear in a prominent position thereon a clearly legible identification plate, stating the name of the person responsible for its construction and erection. Electrical signs shall be marked with input amperes at full load input.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 49
12.6 TEMPORARY SIGNS
The following signs shall be permitted in the Town, provided that they first obtain a permit in accordance with Section 12.3 Sign Permits. Temporary signs shall, in all respects, comply with the applicable regulations contained in this Section.
A. Temporary Promotional Signs. Portable signs, banners, pennants, feathers, inflatables, streamers, festoon lights or other promotional signs related to a specific promotion of a commercial business, specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator, and then only for the location(s) designated by the Zoning Administrator shall be permitted as follows:
1. Each applicant may be permitted a maximum of seventy-five (75) days of temporary signage within one calendar year as follows:
a) When different temporary signs are used for a commercial business, the maximum number of days shall never exceed 75 days. For example, 30 days of inflatable sign use would be deducted from the maximum 75 days for banners, leaving 45 days remaining and available for banner use in that calendar year.
b) A temporary sign permit may be issued for a the maximum number of days; however, no temporary sign permit shall be issued for less than five (5) days.
c) Schools, churches, and parks that receive a sign area bonus per Section 12.7.A.2 Sign Area Bonus, are limited to 30 days per calendar year for any type of temporary sign.
Temporary Sign Type Maximum Number of Days per Calendar Year
Pennants, inflatables, streamers, feathers, festoon lights
30 days
Banners
75 days
Portable Signs
75 days
Yard Card containing commercial message
30 days
Temporary Window Signs (see Section 12.4 Exemptions)
No limit, but may not cover more than 40% of the surface area of any window in combination with any permanent window signs.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 150
B. Change of Business Status Signs. Portable signs, banners, inflatables, streamers, festoon lights or other signs related to special events specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator such as the initial grand opening, reopening, or closing of a business shall be permitted at a location(s) designated by the Zoning Administrator as follows:
1. The change of business status signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed thirty days.
2. Only one thirty day period shall be permitted during each calendar year per tenant.
C. Public Event Signs. In order to control the proliferation of public event signs and to ensure their greatest visibility within the Town, public event signs shall be restricted to certain designated locations provided that the applicant has first obtained permission to locate the sign on the property and in such a manner as to allow complete vision clearance for passing motorists:
1. Designated locations:
a) Urban Street and Main Street
b) Phi Delta Kappa Drive and East Main Street
c) Town Hall campus for municipally sponsored events only.
2. One public event sign may be permitted at each designated location.
3. All signs shall be good quality and of weatherproof construction with supports suitable to maintain the sign for the permit period.
4. No public event sign shall exceed a maximum of 32 square feet for a portable sign or 120 square feet for a banner sign.
5. In addition to the public event signs approved by the Zoning Administrator, two floating directional signs shall be allowed for each public event. The directional signs shall be located on the secondary or local streets closest to the public event location. The Town of Danville reserves the right to remove any public event sign summarily without notice that creates a visual obstruction or impedes the orderly flow of traffic.
6. The Town of Danville may allow banners or similar signs to be suspended across US 36 provided any necessary permits are first obtained from INDOT.
7. The Town of Danville may allow banners or other temporary signage to be placed near the entrance of Ellis Park provided the public event being promoted takes place within park grounds.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 51
D. Application Information. In addition to the requirements of Section 12.3 Sign Permits, applications for temporary promotional sign permits shall include the number, location, size and other information identifying any proposed signage and conform to the following regulations:
1. No more than two signs may be included within the temporary promotional signage permit;
2. All said signs may not exceed 32 square feet per face for a portable sign or 120 square feet for a banner sign, and if illuminated, must be internally illuminated but not flashing;
3. All said signs shall not exceed ten feet in height if freestanding or remain one foot below the roofline if placed on a principal building; and
4. Inflatable devices shall not exceed twenty feet in height and shall be properly secured.
12.7 REGULATION BY ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION
A. Residential Zoning Districts.
1. Subject to the requirements of Section 12.3 Sign Permits, the following signs are allowed in Residential Zoning Districts:
a) Exempt signs, in accordance with Section 12.4, Exemptions
b) Temporary signs, in accordance with Section 12.6 Temporary Signs
c) Monument or wall signs, in accordance with the following table:
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 152
Monument or Wall Sign for: Maximum Number per Street Frontage Maximum Sign Area Maximum Height Minimum Landscaping Minimum Distance from any Lot Line Single-Family Subdivision
2 (per entrance)
20 sq ft maximum sign, attached to 100 sq ft maximum supporting structure
6 ft
For monument signs: in accordance with Section 12.5.H Landscaping Requirements
10 ft Multi-Family Schools, Parks or Churches
24 sq ft maximum sign, attached to 100 sq ft maximum supporting structure
2. Sign Area Bonus—Schools, parks, and churches that agree to incorporate a manual non-electric changeable copy message board in their monument sign will be awarded a twelve (12) square foot monument sign area bonus, but are limited to 30 days per calendar year for any type of temporary signs.
3. Landscaping—All monument signs shall include landscaping in accordance with Section 12.5.H, Landscaping Requirements.
B. Non-Residential Zoning Districts
1. Permitted Signs—Subject to the requirements of Section 12.3, Sign Permits, the following signs are allowed in all non-residential zoning districts:
a. Exempt signs, in accordance with Section 12.4 Exemptions.
b. Temporary signs, in accordance with Section 12.6 Temporary Signs.
c. Permanent Window Signs, with the maximum sign area not exceeding 25% of the window area of each window, or not exceeding 40% of the window area when there are both permanent and temporary window signs in a window, whichever is less.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 53
d. Wall signs, with one wall sign allowed per business (if there are multiple tenants) or one wall sign per street frontage (for a single tenant). Lots with multiple street frontages are allowed a wall sign on each street frontage. Maximum wall sign area is one (1) square foot of sign area per each lineal foot of front building façade, with the total of all wall signs not to exceed 300 square feet. Note that window signs are not included in the wall sign area maximum.
e. Pole sign or monument sign. Except as may be provided for through Section 12.8 Localized Alternative Sign Regulations, the use of monument signs and pole signs together on the same street frontage is prohibited.
2. Bonus Signs
a. Properties in the Corridor Protection Overlay District or Central Business Districts with required off-street parking located directly behind the building shall be allowed one (1) wall sign on the back of the building, provided that no sign established exceeds 50% of the permitted square foot requirement for the allowed wall signage on the front of the building. Buildings with multiple tenants shall be allowed one (1) sign per tenant, with the total of all wall sign on the back of the building not to exceed 50% of the total wall sign area permitted for the front of the building.
b. Properties with lot frontage on both US 36 and a local collector or arterial road shall be allowed two (2) signs for each sign type, provided that no sign established exceeds the permitted square foot requirement for the particular sign type.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 154
3. Non-Residential Freestanding Sign Standards
a. Monument sign standards
Building Type Lot Size Maximum Number of Monument Signs Maximum Monument Sign Area¹ Maximum Monument Sign Height Minimum Separation from Other Signs Single Tenant
2.5 acres or less
1 per street frontage (unless qualifying for Bonus Sign in Section 12.7.B.2
90 sq ft
8 ft
30 ft
more than 2.5 acres
150 sq ft
12 ft Multiple Tenant
2.5 acres or less
125 sq ft
10 ft
more than 2.5 acres
150 sq ft
12 ft
¹allowed one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of the front building façade up to maximum sign area listed
b. Pole sign standards
Building Type Lot Size Maximum Number of Pole Signs Maximum Pole Sign Area² Maximum Pole Sign Height Minimum Separation from Other Signs Single Tenant
2.5 acres or less
1 per street frontage (unless qualifying for Bonus Sign in Section 12.7.B.2
75 sq ft
Office = 12 ft Commercial = 16 ft Industrial = 16 ft
30 ft
more than 2.5 acres
150 sq ft Multiple Tenant
2.5 acres or less
100 sq ft
more than 2.5 acres
150 sq ft
²allowed one (1) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of the front building façade up to maximum sign area listed
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 55
c. Landscaping—All freestanding signs shall include landscaping in accordance with Section 12.5.H, Landscaping Requirements.
12.8 LOCALIZED ALTERNATIVE SIGN REGULATIONS.
A. Authority. Commercial shopping centers, office parks, universities, colleges, medical centers, and institutions having multi-building campuses may establish a localized alternative sign regulation plan for their property subject to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals, pursuant to the procedures for special exceptions found in Section 5.
B. Application. Applications for a localized alternative sign regulation plan shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.
C. Sign Plan. No localized alternative sign regulation plan shall be approved by a special exception unless the regulations set forth in the plan and made part of the special exception are binding on all real property and premises in the plan area.
D. Adherence. If approved, the localized alternative sign regulation plan shall be observed by the persons affected in lieu of compliance with Section 12.7, Regulation by Zoning District Classification.
12.9 ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement Authority. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of Section 12.
B. Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect, at such times as deemed necessary, each sign or sign structure regulated by this Section for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign is in compliance with this Section or any other relevant Town code, law or Ordinance.
C. Unsafe and Unlawful Signs.
1. Duty to Remove or Repair.
a. Should the Zoning Administrator find any sign regulated by this Section to be unsafe, unlawful, or a menace to the public, or constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section, he shall cause notice to be given to the holder of the permit.
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 156
b. If the holder of the permit should fail to remove the sign or bring the sign or other advertising structure in compliance, the Zoning Administrator may cause, at the holder's or property owner's expense, the sign or other advertising structure to be removed or brought into compliance.
c. If the holder or owner fails to pay the costs and expenses of such repair or removal within thirty days of the notice, then such costs and expenses shall become a lien against the property. In addition, the Zoning Administrator shall refuse to issue a Sign Permit to any holder or owner who refuses to pay the costs and expenses assessed under this provision.
2. Unlawful signs. Unlawful signs, regardless of type, shall be removed within twenty-four hours of the time when notice was perfected.
3. Signs Causing Immediate Peril. The Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or other advertising structure that is in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily without notice.
D. Signs No Longer in Use.
1. Removal. Any sign advertising a defunct business, or an unavailable product or service, shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the control of the premises upon which the sign is located.
2. Notice. The Zoning Administrator shall give notice to the owner or to any person occupying the property that the sign on the premises is in violation.
3. Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with the notice within the time specified shall cause the Zoning Administrator to authorize removal. Expenses related to removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises upon which such sign is located.
4. Lien. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner or occupant of the premises of the total costs incurred for such repair or removal of the sign. If the owner or occupant fails to pay the costs and expenses of such repair or removal within
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 57
thirty days of the notice, then such costs and expenses shall become a lien against the property.
E. Signs Not Conforming to This Section.
1. Authority to Continue. Any lawful sign located within the Town at effective date of this Ordinance or which shall come to be located in the Town as a result of annexation after effective date of this Ordinance, which does not conform to the provisions of this Section, may continue provided, the sign remains in conformance with the provisions of this Section.
2. Conditions of Lawful Status. For the purposes of this Section, legal, nonconforming status shall be conferred only on signs authorized by a sign permit or variance of a preceding Ordinance, title, code, or law; or if no sign permit was required under the applicable preceding Ordinance, code, or law.
3. Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this Section shall relieve the owner or beneficial user of a legal nonconforming sign, or the owner of the property on which the legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this Section regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. Normal maintenance, including repainting, cleaning, or routine repair of a legal nonconforming sign shall not be deemed to a condition which triggers a loss of lawful status described below, unless such maintenance increases, in fact, the nonconforming aspects of the sign.
4. Repairs Pursuant to Public Order. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a legal nonconforming sign in accordance with a reasonable order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such a sign to be unsafe and order its restoration to a safe condition, provided such restoration is not otherwise in violation of the various provisions of this Section prohibiting the repair or restoration of partially damaged or destroyed signs.
5. Loss of Lawful Status.
a) Legal nonconforming status shall terminate under the following conditions:
Section 12
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 158
1) if the use of a sign is discontinued for a period of sixty days it shall be deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished; or
2) if a sign is structurally altered such that its nonconforming aspects increase; or
3) if a sign is relocated, replaced, or moved in any way; or the sign is damaged and the cost of repair is fifty percent of its replacement value.
b) Upon the happening of any of the aforementioned events, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with this Section in conjunction with a new sign permit or the sign shall be removed. For the purposes of this Section, the changing of copy shall not be considered the replacement of an existing legal nonconforming sign.
12.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this Section 12, Signs, are mere licenses and are revocable at any time by the Town. Revocation of a sign permit will be in accordance with Section 19.6, Enforcement of Violations.
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 59
SECTION 13 LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, AND FENCES
13.1 INTENT
The intent of this Section is to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses and in doing so, minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust and other debris; motor vehicle headlight glare and other artificial light intrusions; and other such harmful impacts that may be created by adjacent uses.
13.2 APPLICATION
The provisions of this section shall apply to each of the following situations.
A. All parking areas containing fifteen (15) or more spaces;
B. All refuse disposal dumpsters; and
C. Required buffer areas between incompatible uses, as specified in subsection 13.7.
13.3 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
The following landscaping requirements shall apply for all parking areas containing fifteen (15) or more parking spaces.
A. Interior Landscaping. A minimum of five percent (5%) of the gross area of the interior vehicular use area of a parking lot shall be landscaped. Perimeter parking lot landscaping and/or buffering shall not be included toward satisfying this requirement.
1. One hundred percent (100%) of said landscaping area shall be planted with ground cover.
2. Appropriate ground cover may include shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubbery, hedges, and grasses. However, at least one shade tree shall be provided for every 120 lineal feet of landscaped area.
3. Required trees shall have a trunk with a diameter of at least two and one half (2 ½) inches and shall be at a height of at least five (5) feet at the time of planting and shall be of a species characterized by rapid growth and by suitability and hardiness for location in a parking lot.
B. Perimeter Landscaping. All parking lots regulated by this section shall have a perimeter landscaped area of at least five (5) feet in width and extending the full length of the parking lot.
1. One hundred percent (100%) of said landscaping area shall be planted with ground cover exclusive of walkways.
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 160
2. At least one shade tree shall be planted in the perimeter landscaping area for every ten (10) parking spaces in the parking lot. However, if shade trees already exist in the right-of-way adjacent to the parking area, such trees may be counted to satisfy this requirement.
Note: When determining the number of trees required, fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
3. Required trees shall have a trunk with a diameter of at least two and one half (2 ½) inches and shall be at a height of at least five (5) feet at the time of planting and shall be of a species characterized by rapid growth and by suitability and hardiness for location in a parking lot.
C. Maintenance. All required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy condition and whenever necessary replaced with new plant materials to insure continued compliance with the landscaping requirements.
13.4 PARKING LOT SCREENING
A. Applicability
1. Screening by a berm, fence or wall may replace or supplement the perimeter landscaping requirements of subsection 13.4.E. Such screening shall meet the requirements of this subsection.
2. Where a parking lot abuts a residential district or is located within a residential district, the following provisions shall apply to the length of the parking lot adjacent to those residential uses or districts.
B. Width. Screening shall be in a strip of landscaped open space at least five (5) feet wide.
C. Location. Screening may only be installed behind the front setback line.
D. Maintenance. All required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy condition and whenever necessary replaced with new plant materials to insure continued compliance with the screening requirements. All required fences and walls shall be permanently maintained in good repair and presentable appearance, and whenever necessary, they shall be repaired or replaced.
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 61
E. Screening Materials
Screening may consist of both natural and man-made materials. The following screening types may be used.
1. Plant Materials. Plant materials shall be characterized by dense growth and shall form an effective year-round screen.
2. Fences and Walls. Fences and walls shall be solid and opaque and shall be made of wood, brick, or masonry materials.
3. Berms. Berms shall not exceed a slope of thirty degrees (30o) and shall be completely covered with shrubs, grass, or other living cover.
F. Height. Parking lot screening shall reach a minimum height of three (3) feet.
13.5 SCREENING OF REFUSE DISPOSAL DUMPSTERS
All refuse disposal dumpsters shall be screened on all sides by a solid screening material such as those listed in subsection 13.4.E. Such screening shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and a maximum of eight (8) feet in height, and be gated.
13.6 ADDITIONAL SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
A. The following uses shall be screened in accordance with the regulations of subsection 13.4.E and to the heights as prescribed in the following table.
TABLE 13-1: ADDITIONAL SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Use Screen Height
Motor Vehicle storage associated with a service station or motor vehicle repair operation
6 feet
Nursery School, Kindergarten, or Day Care Center
4 feet
Junk Yard
Sufficient to hide from view
Mineral Extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and storage areas
6 feet
Outdoor Commercial Establishment, if accessible to public
6 feet
Outdoor Theater
8 feet
Public or Commercial Sewage Disposal Plant
6 feet
Wholesale Produce Terminal
6 feet
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 162
B. When the following uses are located adjacent to a residential district or use, they shall require a screen that is effective in all seasons to block them from view. Such screening shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 13.4.E and shall be built to the height and width as prescribed in the following table.
TABLE 13-2: SCREENING REQUIREMENTS ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND USES
13.7 BUFFER AREAS BETWEEN INCOMPATIBLE USES
A. Multi-Family Development. Where a multi-family development built in an R3 or R4 district abuts an RC1, RE1, R1 or R2 district or a single family use, a landscape buffer of at least five (5) feet in width shall be provided and shall be subject to the following regulations.
1. All fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13.8
2. Trees shall be planted within the landscaped area at a rate of one tree for every thirty (30) feet of buffer.
3. Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or other living ground cover.
B. General Business, Local Business, and Office Districts. Where a GB, LB or OD lot abuts a residential district or use, a landscape buffer of at least fifteen (15) feet in width shall be provided and shall be subject to the following regulations.
Use Screen Height Screen Width
Mineral Extraction, borrow pit, topsoil removal, and storage areas
6 feet
3 feet
Motor Vehicle storage associated with a service station or motor vehicle repair operation
6 feet
3 feet
Private Recreational Development
8 feet
3 feet
Private Camp or Campground
8 feet
3 feet
Public or Commercial sanitary fill, refuse dump, garbage disposal plant or trash transfer station
6 feet
6 feet
Truck Terminal
6 feet
6 feet
Wholesale Produce Terminal
6 feet
6 feet
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 63
1. All fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13.8.
2. Trees shall be planted within the landscaped area at a rate of one tree for every thirty (30) feet of buffer.
3. A continuous hedge or other screening element as proscribed in Section 13.4.E shall be planted/placed along the entire length of the landscape buffer.
4. Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or other living ground cover.
C. Industrial Districts. Where an IO, IL, IG, or IP lot abuts a residential district or use, a landscape buffer of at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided and shall be subject to the following regulations.
1. All fences shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Section 13.8.
2. Trees shall be planted within the landscaped area at a rate of one tree for every thirty (30) feet of buffer.
3. A continuous hedge or other screening element as proscribed in Section 13.4.E shall be planted or placed along the entire length of the landscape buffer.
4. Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or other living ground cover.
13.8 FENCES AND WALLS
A. Permitted Fence Types. The following types of fences shall be permitted in the zoning districts of the Town of Danville, subject to the regulations herein.
 Masonry Walls
 Ornamental Iron Fences (at least 80% open)
 Woven Wire (at least 80% open) or Chain Link
 Wood or Other Materials (at least 50% open)
 Solid fences, wood or other materials (less than 50% open)
 Hedges
B. Measuring
1. All fences and/or wall heights shall be measured along the fence or wall locations.
2. All locations for distance measurements shall be measured from lot lines.
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 164
C. Fences in Utility Easements. Fences shall be permitted in utility easements pursuant to Section 4.7 of this Ordinance.
D. Fences in Residential Districts
1. Residential Uses—Front Yards.
a) The following types of decorative fences shall be permitted in front yards:
1.) Wrought Iron
2.) Wood Split Rail
3.) Wood or Vinyl Picket
4.) Masonry or Stucco Wall
5.) Live continuous dense hedge of a non-noxious nature.
b) Fences, walls, or like structural barriers located in a front yard shall be limited to a maximum height of four (4) feet (48 inches), except for live continuous dense hedges which shall be limited to a maximum height of three (3) feet (36 inches).
c) Fence posts or support framework may exceed these height limitations by three (3) inches.
d) Fences in front yards of corner lots shall comply with Section 4.8 of this Ordinance. For corner lots, any yard adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard. Solid fences that do not exceed six (6) feet in height may be erected on corner lots provided they are constructed behind the building setback line and comply with Section 4.8 of this Ordinance.
2. Residential Uses—Side and Rear Yards.
a) The following types of fences shall be permitted in the rear and side yards of residential uses in residential districts, provided they do not exceed the maximum height prescribed by the following table:
TABLE 13-3: FENCES AND WALLS ACCESSORY TO RESIDENTIAL USES
Permitted Fence Type Maximum Height
Masonry Walls
4 feet
Ornamental Iron (at least 80% open)
4 feet
Woven Wire (at least 80% open) or Chain Link
4 feet
Wood or Other Materials (at least 50% open)
4 feet
Solid fences, wood or other materials (less than 50% open)
6 feet
Hedges
Any height
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 65
3. Nonresidential Uses
a) Fences Permitted in Front Yards. Only eighty percent (80%) open fences such as ornamental iron, woven wire, or chain link are permitted in the front yard of a nonresidential use in a residential zone. Such fences shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. For a corner or double frontage lot, any yard adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard.
b) Fences Permitted in Side and Rear Yards. All fences listed in subsection 13.8.A are permitted in the side and rear yards of nonresidential uses in residential districts. Such fences shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet, except as provided for below.
c) Exceptions. Fences in recreational areas located in residential districts may be erected to a height up to eight (8) feet, although fences used to enclose tennis courts or used as backstops for ball fields may reach a maximum height of twelve (12) feet.
E. Fences in Commercial and Industrial Districts
1. Commercial Districts. All fences listed in subsection 13.8.A shall be permitted in the LB, GB, OD, and CB (primary and secondary) districts. However, fences within the required vision clearance triangle (see Section 4.8) must be at least 80% open. Fences in the Commercial Districts shall not be higher than six (6) feet in the side and rear yards and no higher than four (4) feet in the front yard. For a corner or double frontage lot, any yard adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard.
2. Industrial Districts. All fences listed in subsection 13.8.A shall be permitted in the IL, IG, and IP Districts. Such fences shall not exceed seven (7) feet in the side and rear yards and four (4) feet in the front yard. However, fences in the front yard may be extended to six (6) feet in height if they are at least 80% open.
F. Barbed Wire and Sharp Pointed Fences. In all zones, no barbed wire or sharp points shall be placed at any position on a fence that is less than five (5) feet above the ground level.
G. Fences on Retaining Walls. Combinations of retaining walls and fences shall be permitted. The retaining wall portion may be erected up to the level of the higher finished grade. The fence portion must be of the type and height permitted within this section for its respective zone. Said measurement shall be made at and along the location of the fence and retaining wall.
Section 13
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 166
H. Structural Elements of Fences. Fences shall be constructed so that all structural members shall be located on the inside of the fence. The inside shall be the side that faces the property where the fence is being built.
I. Safety Fencing
The Zoning Administrator may require safety fencing for all construction sites that present an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Section 14
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 67
SECTION 14 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
14.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section is to regulate the placement, construction, and modification of wireless facilities within the corporate limits of the Town of Danville. This Section is designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, while at the same time, not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace within the corporate limits of the Town of Danville.
14.2 APPLICATION
A. Application for the installation of a wireless communication facility shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. In addition, applications for wireless service facilities shall include the following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the wireless communication facility is to be situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, documentation that the owner of the property has granted, by agreement, use of the property for the proposed facility must be provided. The agreement shall also reflect who shall have maintenance responsibility for the facility and that the applicant shall be required to remove the facility or any portion thereof upon cessation of operation.
(2) A report signed by an Engineer licensed in the State of Indiana, which:
a) Describes the facility’s height and design and includes cross sections and elevations for the proposed facility;
b) Provides landscape screening plans drawn to scale;
c) Describes the facility’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate;
d) Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for all antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas;
e) Documents the steps that the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications;
f) States that the facility is designed in accordance with the Town’s Building Code, in addition to all other state and federal laws and regulations applicable thereto including:
Section 14
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 168
i) A copy of the FAA’s response to the submitted ―Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration‖ (FAA Form 7460-1) shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator; and
ii) Proof of compliance with all applicable FCC regulations;
g) Any other relevant data the Zoning Administrator deems necessary to a complete review of the application; and
(3) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the lot lines, land uses, and tree coverage, including average tree height, for all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed site.
(4) A map showing all existing wireless service facilities within the service area of the proposed facility, including the name, address, and telephone number of all owners of such facilities.
(5) Where a wireless communication facility is not collocating, an affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful efforts to receive permission to install or collocate the applicant’s facility on another service provider’s facility within the service area desired by the applicant because:
a) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved facility, and the existing or approved facility cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned equipment at a reasonable cost;
b) The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting other service providers, and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost;
c) An existing or approved facility within the search area cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to provide service to the applicant’s service area; or
d) Other unforeseen reasons make the subject site of practical necessity for the applicant.
14.3 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation study that provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference problems. Before introduction of a new service or changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the
Section 14
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 69
Town at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of such changes so that the Town may monitor interference levels during the testing process.
14.4 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
A. Wireless communication facilities may be either freestanding monopoles, roof mounted towers, or building mounted antennas. No guyed or latticed personal wireless service facilities shall be permitted.
B. All wireless communication facilities shall be designed in accordance with the Town’s Building Code, in addition to all state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all tower structures shall be constructed with at least one release point so as to bend and fold over on themselves.
C. Wireless communication facilities shall be designed to accommodate more than one personal wireless antenna.
D. Wireless communication facilities shall be designed to be compatible with neighboring buildings and uses. All facilities including building and structures accessory thereto, shall be designed to blend or match with a host building or the environment. Support structures and antennas shall be of a single blue, gray, or similar color and have a flat, non-gloss, non-florescent finish. The color scheme for the facility shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
E. Advertising, logos, or corporate symbols shall not be permitted on any wireless communication facilities or any building or structure accessory thereto.
F. No signals or lights or other illumination shall be permitted on the wireless communication facilities unless required by the Federal Communication Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or by the Town of Danville.
G. Every wireless communication tower shall be separated from all other personal wireless communication towers a minimum of 1,000 lineal feet.
H. Every wireless communication facility shall be fully automated. No employee of the service provider shall be stationed at the site, except for the completion of periodic maintenance.
I. The maximum height of any freestanding monopole facility shall be 125 feet.
Section 14
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 170
(1) To decrease the unnecessary proliferation of wireless communication towers within the Town of Danville, the Town shall encourage the collocation of wireless communication antennas on existing or planned wireless communication facilities. Therefore, a height bonus may be granted to an applicant that incorporates two or more antennas upon the applicant’s facility at a rate of twenty-five (25) feet per additional antenna, however, no facility shall exceed a height of two hundred (200) feet.
(2) The height of roof and building mounted facilities and antennas shall be subject to the limitations set forth in Section 14.5.
J. Screening techniques such as landscaping, berming, screening, and fencing shall be incorporated into each site as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. A fence or wall of 8 feet in height shall be required to encompass a free standing wireless communication facility, including any associated accessory building or structure.
K. Building and structures accessory to wireless communication facilities shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet, nor exceed four hundred fifty (450) square feet.
L. All wireless communication facilities, including any associated accessory building or structure, shall meet the setback requirements of the district in which they are located. All wireless communication facilities, including any associated accessory building or structure, shall be setback a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any residential use or district.
14.5 PERMITTED LOCATIONS
Subject to site plan approval, the location of wireless communication facilities shall be regulated as follows:
A. Permitted Uses. The following wireless communication facilities shall be considered permitted uses:
(1) Wireless communication facilities and antennas collocated on existing towers and facilities;
(2) Wireless communication facilities and antennas located on municipally owned property pursuant to an executed agreement with the Town;
(3) Roof and building mounted wireless communications facilities and antennas located in the GB, IO, IL, IG, and IP districts are subject to the limitation that the height of any such facility or
Section 14
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 71
antenna shall not exceed a height of one hundred percent (100%) of the host building.
B. Special Exceptions. Wireless communications facilities shall be considered special exceptions and require approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals subject to Section 5 of the Ordinance in the following districts:
(1) (LB) Local Business District, and
(2) (OD) Office District.
(3) Where the wireless commercial facility or antenna is roof and building mounted, the height of any such facility or antenna shall not exceed a height in excess of one hundred percent (100%) of the host building.
14.6 TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
A temporary wireless communication facility designed for use while a permanent wireless communication facility is under construction, or for a special event may be permitted subject to the facility receiving a temporary use permit prior to construction and installation. A temporary wireless communication facility shall not be permitted longer than thirty (30) days in cases of new construction and no longer than seven (7) days in cases of special events. All temporary wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the applicable requirements of this section.
14.7 COMPLIANCE
All wireless communication facilities shall maintain compliance with the plans and specifications approved and made part of the application for the installation of the facility. Noncompliance, including but not limited to, discoloration, cracking, missing components, rusting, settling damage or general disrepair shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and subject to the enforcement procedures herein.
14.8 ABANDONMENT
Abandoned, obsolescent, or unused wireless communication facilities or portions thereof shall be removed within three months of notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations at a site, unless the Zoning Administrator grants an extension. In the event that a wireless communications facility, or portions thereof, is not removed within three months of such notice, or other agreed time, the Town may, in addition to any other remedy provided by this Ordinance, remove the facility or portion thereof, at the applicant’s expense.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 172
SECTION 15 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
15.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) is to encourage flexibility in the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design, character and quality of new developments; to encourage a harmonious and appropriate mixture of uses; to facilitate the adequate and economic provision of streets, utilities and town services; to preserve the natural environmental and scenic features of the site; to encourage and provide a mechanism for arranging improvements on sites so as to preserve desirable features; and to mitigate the problems which may be presented by specific site conditions. It is anticipated that Planned Unit Developments will offer one or more of the following advantages:
A. Reflect the policies of the Comprehensive Plan specific to the neighborhood in which the PUD is to be located;
B. Provide substantial buffers and transitions between areas of different land use and development densities;
C. Enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by conserving areas of natural beauty, and natural green spaces;
D. Counteract urban monotony and congestion on streets;
E. Promote architecture that is compatible with the surroundings;
F. Buffer differing types of land use and intensities of development from each other so as to minimize any adverse impact which new development may have on existing or zoned development;
G. Promote and protect the environmental integrity of the site and its surroundings and provide suitable design responses to the specific environmental constraints of the site and surrounding area; and
H. Effectuate implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
15.2 DEFINITION
A Planned Unit Development is an area under single ownership or control to be developed in conformance with an approved site plan, consisting of a map showing the development area and all improvements to the development area, a text which sets forth the uses and the development standards to be met, and exhibits setting forth any aspects of the site plan
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 73
not fully described in the map and text. The map, exhibits, and text constitute a site plan. The uses and standards expressed in the site plan constitute the use and development regulations for the Planned Unit Development site in lieu of the regulations for the underlying district.
15.3 REQUIREMENTS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. The area designated in the Planned Unit Development map must be a tract of land under single ownership or control. Single control of property under multiple ownership may be accomplished through the use of enforceable covenants and commitments, which run to the benefit of the Zoning Jurisdiction.
B. The Concept plan shall indicate the land use, development standards, and other applicable specifications of the Town of Danville Code, which shall govern the Planned Unit Development. If the Concept plan is silent on a particular land use, development standard, or other specification of the Town of Danville Code, the standard of the underlying district or the applicable regulations shall apply.
C. The Planned Unit Development map shall show the location of all improvements. The location of Planned Unit Developments shall be designated on the Zoning Map and adopted pursuant to this Ordinance.
D. The Planned Unit Development must comply with all required improvements, construction standards, design standards, and all other engineering standards contained within the Town of Danville Code and other pertinent regulations, except where specifically varied through the provision of this Section of the Ordinance.
E. Designation and Conveyance of Permanent Open Space.
1. Definition. Permanent open space shall be defined as parks, playgrounds, landscaped green space, and natural areas, not including schools, community centers or other similar areas in public ownership.
2. Designation. No plan for a Planned Unit Development shall be approved, unless such plan provides for permanent landscaped or natural open space. A minimum of 25 percent of the proposed Planned Unit Development area shall be designated as Permanent Open Space.
3. In the case of mixed uses, permanent open space shall be allocated to the property in proportion to the uses assigned to the Planned Unit Development and shall be located in reasonable proximity to those uses. Provided, however, the permanent open space need not
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 174
be located in proximity to the use in the case of preservation of existing features.
4. If the Concept Plan provides for the Planned Unit Development to be constructed in stages, open space must be provided for each stage of the Planned Unit Development in proportion to that stage.
5. Conveyance. Permanent open space shall be conveyed in one of the following forms:
a) To a municipal or public corporation; or
b) To a not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of benefiting the owners and tenants of the Planned Unit Development or, where appropriate and where approved by the Plan Commission and the Town Council, adjoining property owners, or both. All conveyances hereunder shall be structures to insure that the grantee has the obligation and the right to effect maintenance and improvement of the common open space; and that such duty of maintenance and improvement is enforced by the owners and tenants of the Planned Unit Development and, where applicable, by adjoining property owners; or
c) To owners other than those specified in Subsections (a) and (b) above, and subject to restrictive covenants describing and guaranteeing the open space and its maintenance and improvement, running with the land for the benefit of residents of the Planned Unit Development or adjoining property owners, or both; or
d) Included in single family residential lots under the control of lot owners.
F. Uses permitted in a Planned Unit Development may be any use which is found in Appendix A, subject to the approval of the Plan Commission and Town Council of the Town of Danville.
15.4 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. Introduction. Application shall be accompanied by all plans and documents required by Section 15.5. A three-step application process shall be used. The steps in the process are:
1 Pre-Design Conference;
2 Concept Plan Approval; and
3 Site Plan Approval.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 75
B. Pre-Design Conference. Prior to filing a formal application for approval of a Planned Unit Development, the applicant shall schedule a pre-design conference with the Planning Director. The purpose of the pre-application conference shall be to:
1. Allow the applicant to present a general concept and to discuss characteristics of the development concept in relation to adopted Town policies.
2. Allow the Planning Director to inform the applicant of applicable policies, standards and procedures for the Planned Unit Development.
3. The pre-design conference is intended only for the above purposes; neither the Developer nor the jurisdiction is bound by any decision made during a pre-application conference.
C. Procedure for Concept Plan Approval:
1. The Concept Plan and application for the Planned Unit Development shall be submitted to the Planning Director who, after certifying the application to be complete, shall initiate a review by the Planning Director and Town Engineer.
2. The application and the results of the review shall then be forwarded to the Plan Commission for its consideration, public hearing and recommendations together with the Planning Director’s report and such other documents as may be pertinent to the Planned Unit Development.
3. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with its Rules of Procedure.
4. Where there are environmentally sensitive features on the site or the site plan is expected to be complex, or there are other important planning implications involved, the Plan Commission may reserve the right to review the site plan. And, where the Plan Commission recommends denial of a Concept Plan and the Town Council approves the plan, the Plan Commission shall review the site plan.
5. Upon completion of its review, the Plan Commission shall certify the application to the Town Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable recommendation or no recommendation.
6. The Town Council shall vote on the proposal within 90 days after the Plan Commission certifies the proposal. The Council may adopt or reject the proposal. If the Plan Commission has given the proposal a favorable recommendation and the Council fails to act on the proposal within 90 days, the Ordinance takes effect as if it
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 176
had been adopted as certified 90 days after certification. If the Plan Commission has failed to make a recommendation or has given the proposal an unfavorable recommendation and the Council fails to act on the proposal within 90 days, the proposal is defeated.
D. Effect of Approval of Concept Plan:
1. When a Concept Plan for a Planned Unit Development has been approved by the Council, the Plan shall become effective and its location shall be shown on the Zoning Map. The Zoning Map shall be amended to designate the site as a Planned Unit Development.
2. Upon such amendment of the Zoning Map, the use and development of the site shall be governed by the Planned Unit Development Concept Plan, subject to approval of a site plan.
3. No permit of any kind shall be issued until the site plan has been approved.
E. Site Plan:
1. Purpose of Site Plan Approval. The purpose of the site plan is to designate the controls for development of the Planned Unit Development. The site plan shall show the exact location of each building and improvement to be constructed and a designation of the specific internal use or range of uses to which each building shall be put.
2. Time Limit for Approval of Site Plan. The site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Director not more than 18 months following Town Council approval of the Concept Plan. The Concept and Site Plans may be submitted as a single plan if all requirements of Sections 15.5.B and C are met. The site plan may be submitted and approved in stages, with each stage representing a portion of the Concept Plan, at the discretion of the Plan Commission. The time limit for submitting each stage for approval may be set forth in the Concept Plan, in which case that schedule shall control the timing of development, rather than the time period contained in this paragraph. The Plan Commission may extend the time for application for approval of site plan for good cause, consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance.
3. Expiration of Time Limit. Periodically, the Planning Director shall report to the Plan Commission on Planned Unit Developments whose time limits have expired. The applicants shall be notified. The Plan Commission shall determine whether to consider extending the time or to initiate action to amend the Zoning Map so as to rescind the Planned Unit Development designation.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 77
4. Relationship of Site and Concept Plan. The site plan shall conform to the Concept Plan as approved.
5. Procedure for approval of a site plan shall be:
a) Site Plan Submission. The site plan and supporting data shall be filed with the Planning Director.
b) Director Review. The Planning Director shall review the site plan to include site plan review, in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
c) Director Approval. It shall generally be the responsibility of the Planning Director to review Site Plans unless the Plan Commission reviews the Site Plans as provided in Section 15.4.C.4, or where a new site plan is required.
d) Plan Commission Review. If the Plan Commission has retained site plan approval authority, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with its Rules of Procedure. The Commission may approve, deny or approve with modifications.
6. Expiration of Site Plan. The site plan shall expire 2 years after approval, unless grading and/or building permits have been obtained and are still current and valid on that date. This rule shall also apply to each stage of a site plan approved in stages. The applicant may request an extension of time in writing, and the approving authority may extend the time limit where appropriate. Such extension may be considered at the time of site plan approval.
7. Effect of Approval of Site Plan. No permit of any kind shall be issued for any purpose within a Planned Unit Development except in accordance with the approved site plan, and after acceptance by the Town of all required guarantees for improvements pursuant to Section 15.5.C.6.
15.5 SPECIFIC CONTENT OF PLANS
Planned Unit Site Plans and supporting data shall include all documentation listed in this Section of the Zoning Ordinance unless certain documentation is deemed superfluous by the Planning Director due to the specific circumstances of the particular request.
A. Pre-Design Conference Requirements
1. A written letter of intent from the applicant describing the applicant’s intention for developing the site.
2. A scaled drawing of the site, in simple sketch form, showing the
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 178
proposed location and extent of the land uses, major streets, and the approximate location of any existing easements, natural features, and topographic or geologic constraints.
B. Concept Plan Requirements
1. A drawing of the Planned Unit Development shall be prepared at a scale not less 1‖ = 50’, or as considered appropriate by the Planning Director, and shall show in concept major circulation; generalized location and dimensions of buildings, structures, and parking areas; open space areas, recreation facilities, and other details to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission shall include:
a) A site location map.
b) The name of the development, with the words ―Concept Plan‖.
c) Boundary lines and acreage of each land use component.
d) Existing easements, including location, width and purpose.
e) Existing land use on abutting properties.
f) Other conditions on adjoining land: topography (at 2-foot contours) including any embankments or retaining walls; use and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other influences; name of any adjoining subdivision plat.
g) Existing streets on and adjacent to the tract, including street name, right-of-way width, walks, curbs, gutters, and culverts.
h) Proposed public improvements; streets and other major improvements planned by the public for future construction on or adjacent to the tract.
i) Existing utilities on the tract.
j) Any land on the tract within the 100-year floodplain.
k) Other conditions on the tract, including water courses, wetlands, sinkholes, wooded areas, isolated trees 6 inches or more in diameter, existing structures and other significant features.
l) Existing vegetation to be preserved and the locations, nature, and purpose of proposed landscaping.
m) Map data such as north point, scale and date of preparation.
2. Miscellaneous: The Planning Director shall inform the applicant of any additional documents or data requirements after the pre-application conference.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 79
3. Written Statement of character of the Planned Unit Development: An explanation of the character of the Planned Unit Development and the reasons why it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations. The written statement shall include:
a) A specific explanation of how the proposed Planned Unit Development meets the objectives of all adopted land use policies which affect the land in question.
b) Ownership: A statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project including the beneficial owners of a land trust.
c) Development scheduling indicating:
1) Stages in which the project will be built, including the area, density, use, public facilities, and open space to be developed with each stage. Each stage shall be described and mapped.
2) Projected dates for beginning and completion of each stage.
d) Proposed uses:
1) Residential Uses: gross area, architectural concepts (narrative, sketch, or representative photo), number of units, bedroom breakdown, and proposed occupancy limits for each residential component;
2) Nonresidential Uses: specific nonresidential uses, including gross areas, architectural concepts (narrative, sketch, or representative photo), and building heights.
e) Facilities Plan: Preliminary concepts and feasibility reports for:
1) Roads
2) Sidewalks
3) Sanitary sewers
4) Stormwater management
5) Water supply system
6) Street lighting
7) Public utilities
4. Traffic Analysis: If requested by the Planning Director or the Plan Commission, a study of the impact caused by the Planned Unit Development and any measures proposed to accommodate that impact may be required.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 180
C. Site Plan Requirements. The application for site plan approval shall include, but not be limited to, the following documents:
1. Such additional information as may have been required by the Concept Plan approval.
2. An accurate map exhibit of the entire phase for which site plan approval is being requested, showing the following:
a) Precise location of all buildings to be constructed, and a designation of the specific use or range of uses for each building. Single family residential development on individual lots need not show precise locations of buildings on each lot, but plans shall show setback and other bulk constraints.
b) Design and precise location of all streets, drives, and parking areas, including construction details, centerline elevations, pavement type, curbs, gutters and culverts.
c) Location of all utility lines and easements.
d) A final detailed landscape plan, in conformance with Section 13.
e) Tabulation on each separate subdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings, number of dwelling units per acre, type of unit, bedroom breakdown, and limits on occupancy.
3. If lands to be subdivided are included in the Planned Unit Development, a subdivision plat meeting the requirements of a preliminary plat, as modified by the Concept Plan approval, is required where platting is to be done concurrent with the site plan approval.
4. Projected construction schedule.
5. Agreements and covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the Planned Unit Development and its common spaces, shared facilities, and private roads.
6. Guarantee of Performance for Completion of Improvements: A bond or other guarantee acceptable to the Town shall be provided for all required improvements and shall be executed at time of permit application or platting, whichever comes first.
Improvements that must be guaranteed include facilities which shall become public, and may include other facilities or improvements as may be specified in the Concept or Site Plan approval. If the project is to be built in phases, the guarantee shall be posted prior to the commencement of work on each phase. The guarantee shall specify the time for completion of improvements,
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 81
and shall be in an amount of 125 percent of the estimated cost of the improvements.
15.6 REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS
A. In his/her consideration of a Planned Unit Development Concept Plan, the Planning Director in his/her report to the Plan Commission, the Plan Commission in its recommendation, and the Town Council in its decision, shall consider as many of the following as may be relevant to the specific proposal:
1. The extent to which the Planned Unit Development meets the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, and any other adopted planning objectives of the Town.
2. The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements, standards, and state purpose of the Planned Unit Development regulations.
3. The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not limited to, the density, dimension, bulk, use, required improvements, and construction and design standards, and the reasons which such departures are or are not deemed to be in the public interest.
4. The proposal will not be injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare.
5. The physical design of the Planned Unit Development and the extent to which it makes adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic, provides for and protects designated permanent open space, and furthers the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
6. The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent properties and neighborhood, and whether the proposed plan would substantially interfere with the use or diminish the value of adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
7. The desirability of the proposed plan to the Town’s physical development, tax base and economic well being.
8. The proposal will not cause undue traffic congestion, and can be adequately served by existing or programmed public facilities and services.
9. The proposal preserved significant ecological, natural, historical, and architectural resources to the extent possible.
Section 15
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 182
15.7 CHANGES IN THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
A. Changes Requiring New Concept Plan Approval. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the Planned Unit Development including but not limited to:
1. Significant increases in density;
2. Significant changes in the proportion or allocation of land uses;
3. Changes in the list of approved uses;
4. Changes in the location of uses;
5. Changes in functional uses or open space, where such change constitutes an intensification of use of the open space; and/or
6. Changes in the final governing agreements where such changes conflict with the Concept Plan approval.
B. Changes Requiring New Site Plan Approval. These changes shall include the following:
1. Changes in lot arrangement, or addition of buildable lots which do not change approved density of the development;
2. Changes in site design requirements, such as location of required landscaping, signage, building height, cube and/or footprint, or other such requirements of this Ordinance;
3. Changes to the internal street system or off-street parking areas;
4. Changes in drainage management structures;
5. Changes in access to the development site, where such change amounts to an intensification in the traffic patterns of roadways of classification higher than local; and/or
6. All other changes not expressly addressed under Section 15.7.A shall require new site plan approval.
Section 16
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 83
SECTION 16 WRITTEN COMMITMENTS
16.1 AUTHORITY OF PLAN COMMISSION AND BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
The Danville Town Council, Danville Plan Commission or the Danville Board of Zoning Appeals may, when authorized by this Ordinance or state statute, require or permit the owner(s) of a parcel of property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of that property in connection with a map amendment, planned unit development, site plan, variance, or special exception.
16.2 STANDARD FORM
A. The appropriate standard form shall be used whenever a written commitment is permitted or required. When necessary, the standard form may be modified in order to conform to the type of commitment needed. An otherwise modified form may be rejected by a majority vote of the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.
16.3 BINDING EFFECT
A. Unless modified or terminated as described in Section 16.9, a written commitment is binding on:
1. the owner of the parcel;
2. a subsequent owner of the parcel; and
3. a person who acquires an interest in the parcel.
B. A written commitment shall be binding on the owner of the parcel even if the commitment is unrecorded (see Section 16.8 on Recording); however, an unrecorded commitment is binding on a subsequent owner or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if that subsequent owner or other person has actual notice of the commitment.
16.4 EFFECTIVE DATE OF COMMITMENT
A written commitment shall take effect upon the approval of the map amendment, planned unit development, site plan, special exception, or zoning variance related to the commitment.
16.5 COVENANT RUNNING WITH THE LAND
A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and shall bind all subsequent owners to its terms and conditions and to any subsequent modification thereto made pursuant to this instrument, statutes of the State of Indiana, or Ordinances of the Town of Danville.
Section 16
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 184
16.6 ENFORCEMENT
Written commitments may be enforced jointly and severally by:
A. The Danville Plan Commission
B. The Danville Board of Zoning Appeals; and
C. Owners of all parcels of ground adjoining the real estate involved in the relevant commitment to a depth of 300 feet. The identity of such owners shall be determined from the records of the Office of the Hendricks County Auditor which lists the current owners of record. For purposes of this paragraph, the cutoff date for such determination shall be at twelve (12) o’clock noon on the date of filing for enforcement.
16.7 RECORDING
A. Commitments shall be recorded in the office of the Hendricks County Recorder.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall require the owner of the parcel giving a written commitment to provide proof that the commitment was recorded.
C. Commitments shall be recorded upon the granting of the approval.
16.8 MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION
A written commitment may be modified or terminated only by a decision of the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals made at a public hearing after notice as provided by Section 16.9, or upon change in zoning classification of the affected land.
16.9 PUBLIC NOTICE
When notice of a public hearing is desired or required by this Section, such notice shall be given in the following manner:
A. Newspaper
Notice by publication shall be given by the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals in one (1) newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Danville, and shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. A proof of publication affidavit from each publisher shall be submitted at least three (3) days prior to the hearing.
Section 16
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 85
B. Mail
Written notice of the public hearing shall also be given by the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals to all interested parties or property owners by certified return receipt mail post marked at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. For purposes of notice given under this Section, ―interested parties or property owners‖ shall mean the owner(s) of the real estate giving the relevant commitment and the owners of all parcels of ground adjoining said real estate.
16.10 VALIDITY OF OTHER LAND USE RESTRICTIONS
This Article does not affect the validity of any covenant, easement, equitable servitude, or other land use restriction created in accordance with law.
16.11 NO OBLIGATION FOR APPROVAL
By permitting or requiring commitments, the Town Council, Plan Commission, or Board of Zoning Appeals does not obligate itself to favorably recommend or grant the relevant development application or approval.
16.12 POST-PLAN COMMISSION/BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS APPROVAL PROCESS
A. During the time when a proposal to change the zone maps incorporated by reference into the Danville Zoning Ordinance is being considered by the Town Council, the owner of a parcel of land may make a new written commitment or modify the terms of a written commitment made when the proposal was before the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals. No further action of the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals is required for a new written commitment described in this Section to be effective.
B. An owner who makes or modifies a written commitment under subsection A above must comply with these Rules.
C. If a written commitment made when the proposal was before the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals is later modified:
1. No further action is required by the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals for the commitment to be effective if the effect of the commitment modification is to make the commitment more stringent; or
2. The modified commitment must be ratified by the Plan Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals if the effect of the commitment modification is to make the commitment less stringent.
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 186
SECTION 17 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
17.1 AUTHORITY OF THE PLAN COMMISSION TO REVIEW SITE PLANS
The Danville Plan Commission is hereby authorized to review and make findings on all Site Plans that are required by this Ordinance.
Uses For Which Site Plans Shall be Required:
A. Residential Districts
1. Residential 3: Site Plans shall be required for all multi-family developments, schools, and churches developed in the R3 District.
2. Residential 4: Site Plans shall be required for all multi-family developments, schools, and churches developed in the R4 District.
B. Commercial Districts
1. Local Business: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in the LB District.
2. General Business: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in the GB District.
3. Primary and Secondary Central Business: Site Plans shall be required for any development permitted in the Central Business Districts except for a single-family residential use.
C. Airport Development District: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in the AD District.
D. Corridor Protection Overlay District: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in the CPOD District.
E. Office District: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in the OD District.
F. Industrial Districts: Site Plans shall be required for all uses developed in any industrial district.
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 87
17.2 SITE PLANS REQUIRED
Site plan approval shall be required for those projects as listed above. Land Alteration Permits and Building Permits shall not be issued until the conditions and requirements of this Ordinance have been met.
17.3 APPLICATION
All applications for site plan review shall be made on application forms prescribed by the Plan Commission and follow established submittal deadlines.
17.4 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIREMENTS
Requirements, standards and specifications for engineering design for construction of improvements for Site Plans shall be equal to or greater than the minimum requirements, standards, and specifications established for design and improvements in the Danville Subdivision Control Ordinance. In addition to the plan sheets specified below, the applicant shall submit a complete drainage report, including calculations and justifications. The Town Engineer may approve other engineering designs or practices when deemed necessary.
17.5 CONTENTS OF SITE PLANS
All Site Plans shall be submitted under the seal and signature of a Professional Engineer or Registered Land Surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Indiana. All sheets shall be 24‖ x 36‖ size drawn to scale at a minimum 1‖=50’ and a maximum 1‖=10’ with the exception of the maps on Sheet One, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer. Site Plans submitted for review shall observe the following format:
A. Sheet One (Title Sheet)
The following information shall be submitted as part of Sheet One:
1. Full legal description with sufficient reference to section corners and boundary map of the subject project, including appropriate benchmark references;
2. Name of the Project;
3. Name and address of the owner, Developer, and person who prepared the plans;
4. Total acreage within the project and the number of residential dwelling units or the gross square footage of nonresidential buildings whichever is applicable;
5. Existing zoning of the subject land and all adjacent lands;
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 188
6. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of land, showing owners of record;
7. A key or vicinity map at a scale of one inch equals four hundred feet or less, showing the boundaries of the proposed project and covering the general area within which it is to be located;
8. A statement of the proposed uses, stating the type and size of residential and nonresidential buildings, and the type of business, commercial or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the project on traffic, fire hazards, or congestion of population;
9. Proposed covenants, restrictions, by-laws, or articles of incorporation affecting property owners and/or homeowners associations; and
10. Statement of proposed starting and completion dates for the project, including any proposed phasing and sequencing;
B. Sheet Two (Existing Site Conditions)
The following information shall be submitted as part of Sheet Two:
1. Location, widths, and type of construction of all existing streets, street names, alleys, or other public ways and easements, street classifications as per the Thoroughfare Plan, railroad and utility rights-of-way or easements, parks, wooded areas, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, designated wetlands, low areas subject to flooding, permanent buildings, bridges, and other data considered pertinent by the commission or the administrator for the subject land, and within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed project;
2. Existing water mains, fire hydrants, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, and other utility structures or facilities within, adjacent to, or serving the subject land, including pipe sizes, grades, and exact locations, as can best be obtained from public or private records;
3. Existing contours based in U.S.G.S. datum with intervals of not more than five (5) feet where the slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and not more than two (2) feet where the slope is less than ten percent (10%). Elevations shall be based on sea level datum; and
4. The water elevation at the date of the survey of lakes, streams, or designated wetlands within the project or affecting it, as well as the approximate high and low water elevation of such lakes, streams, or designated wetlands. The plan shall also show the contour line of the regulatory flood (100-year flood) elevation and the contour
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 89
line for the floodway fringe boundary. All elevations shall be based on sea level datum;
C. Sheet Three (Proposed Site Conditions)
The following information shall be submitted as part of Sheet Three:
1. Location, widths, and type of construction of all existing and proposed streets, street names, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way or easements, parks, wooded areas, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, designated wetlands, low areas subject to flooding, permanent buildings, bridges, and other data considered pertinent by the commission or the administrator for the subject land, and within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed project;
2. Existing and proposed water mains, fire hydrants, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, and other utility structures or facilities within, adjacent to, or serving the subject land, including pipe sizes, grades, and exact locations, as can best be obtained from public or private records;
3. Building setback lines, showing dimensions;
4. Full description and details, including engineering calculations, for provision of storm water drainage plans and facilities, including basin mapping. The standard for drainage detention is that the run-off rate of a 100-year post-development event cannot exceed the rate for a 10-year pre-development event;
5. Internal and perimeter sidewalk system/pedestrian circulation plan; and
6. Proposed contours with intervals of not more than five (5) feet where the slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and not more than two (2) feet where the slope is less than ten percent (10%). The plan shall also show the contour line for the floodway fringe boundary.
7. Show the location and detail plans for all trash dumpsters.
D. Sheet Four (Erosion Control Plan)
The following information shall be submitted as part of Sheet Four:
1. Location, widths, and type of construction of all existing and proposed streets, street names, alleys, or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way or easements, parks, wooded areas, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, designated wetlands, low areas subject to flooding, permanent buildings, bridges, and other data considered pertinent by the commission or the administrator for the subject land, and within
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 190
three hundred (300) feet of the proposed project;
2. Proposed contours with intervals of not more than five (5) feet where the slope is greater than ten percent (10%) and not more than two (2) feet where the slope is less than ten percent (10%).
3. Details of terrain and area drainage, including the identity and location of watercourses, intermittent and perennial streams, receiving waters, and springs, and the total acreage of land that will be disturbed.
4. The direction of drainage flow and the approximate grade of all existing or proposed streets.
5. Detailed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs, and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as part of, the proposed project, together with a map showing drainage area, the complete drainage network, including outfall lines and natural drainage ways which may be affected by the proposed development, and the estimated runoff of the area served by the drains.
6. A description of the methods to be employed in disposing of soil and other material that is removed from the grading site, including the location of the disposal site.
7. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which must meet of exceed the methods and standards adopted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and/or set forth in the Indiana Handbook For Erosion Control in Developing Areas and which must comply with the design principles, performance standards, and requirements set forth in this chapter.
8. A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and sediment control measures as related to the progress of the project, including the total area of soil surface that is to be disturbed during each stage, the anticipated starting and completion dates, and a schedule for the maintenance of such measures.
9. Include the following notes on the sheet:
a) ―All erosion control practices shall be in accordance with the IDNR ―Indiana Handbook For Erosion Control In Developing Areas‖ dated October 1992 and the SCS ―Field Office Technical Guide.‖
b) ―The Town Engineer has the right to require additional erosion control measures in the field as conditions warrant.‖
10. Copies of the letter of intent and response from the Hendricks County Soil and Water Conservation District office for Rule 5 compliance, when required.
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 91
11. Any other information reasonably required by the Commission or Administrator to properly evaluate the plan.
E. Sheet Five (Landscape Plan)
A landscape plan prepared to the standards specified in this Section 13 of this Ordinance.
F. Sheet Six (Plat-like dedication sheet, if necessary)
The following information shall be submitted as part of Sheet Five if a plat-like dedication document for easements and rights-of-way is deemed necessary by the Plan Commission or its authorized designee:
1. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or reserved for common use of all property owners within the project, with the proposed conditions and maintenance requirements, if any, shall be designated as such and clearly labeled on the plans;
2. Radii, internal angles, points of curvature; tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs, chord, and chord bearings; and
3. Accurate location of all survey monuments erected, corners and other points established in the field in their proper places.
G. All sheets shall contain the following information:
1. The proposed name by which the project shall be legally and commonly known;
2. Date of survey, scale, and north point;
3. All lots or outlots intended for sale or lease shall be designated with boundary lines and numbered or labeled for identification purposes;
4. Private parks, common areas, or excluded parcels shall be designated as such and clearly labeled on the plans;
5. Such other information as may be deemed necessary for proper review of the site plan by the administrator, Town Engineer, or commission; and
6. All necessary reference points tying the subject property to the appropriate section corners.
7. Each sheet shall be sealed and signed by the professional preparing the drawings.
8. All sheets shall be tied to state plane coordinates for horizontal and vertical controls.
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 192
17.6 OTHER REQUIRED SUBMITTALS
The Applicant shall be required to submit written documentation of the following, when applicable:
A. A complete set of building elevations, a landscape plan, a lighting plan, and a signage plan must be submitted for any development occurring in the Corridor Protection Overlay District;
B. Utility encroachment approvals;
C. Hendricks County Drainage Board approval;
D. Other local, state, and federal approvals, including other Town boards, commissions, or departments;
E. Inspection and testing agreements as required by the Town;
F. Outside reviews as required by the Town; and
G. Easements and rights-of-ways not on a plat-like document shall be submitted in the form prescribed by the Town and include both a full legal description and a drawing exhibit.
17.7 RE-SUBMITTAL OF PLANS
Submit five (5) complete sets of the final, revised plans showing conditions required by the Plan Commission. Final revised plans shall be submitted at least ten working days prior to issuance of a land alteration permit.
17.8 REJECTION STATEMENT
The Administrator may reject any submittal for the following reasons:
A. Incomplete application;
B. The drawing set or supporting documents not complete nor stapled; or
C. Poor legibility.
17.9 DEVIATION FROM THE APPROVED SITE PLAN AND ADDITIONS TO EXISTING STRUCTURES
If the installation of the elements on the site plan materially deviate from the approved site plan (as determined by the Planning Director or Town Engineer), the site plan shall be resubmitted to the Commission for a new site plan approval in accordance with the procedures and requirements for
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 93
site plan approval. For purposes of this section, material deviation is one that:
A. adds, removes, or reconfigures an internal street or relocates an access point;
B. affects a condition of site plan approval that was established by the Commission during the site plan approval stage;
C. reduces the area devoted to open spaces or buffer landscaping;
D. involves the enlargement of a nonresidential building footprint on the site due to future additions that are more than 10 percent of the gross floor area or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
Minor changes that do not constitute material deviation shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Planning and Engineering staff.
17.10 ENGINEERING ASSURANCES
Each application for approval of a site plan shall be accompanied by:
A. A Certificate of Obligation to Observe; both properly executed in the form prescribed by the Commission by the licensed engineer, or surveyor preparing the site plan.
17.11 FINANCIAL ASSURANCES
The Town of Danville reserves the right to require financial assurances to guarantee construction according to plans of all public improvements proposed in a site plan and for certain private improvements, including but not limited to site grading, drainage improvements, erosion control, sanitary sewers, private streets, landscaping and buffering, or other improvements which may directly impact adjacent properties or the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. Such assurances of performance shall be in an amount and form as prescribed by the Town. Maintenance bonds shall be required for public improvements. Public improvements shall be dedicated within two years of the date of Planning Commission approval unless time extensions are granted by the Town. If public improvements are not dedicated within two years, the Town may take any action deemed necessary to insure completion to a point of dedication.
17.12 RECORD DRAWINGS AND CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION AND COMPLIANCE
The Developer or Owner shall cause record drawings to be prepared and
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 194
submitted to the Administrator for all streets, drainage ditches and facilities, utility pipes and structures, and finished grade elevations for the project. Said record drawings shall be filed with the Administrator prior to the release of any performance assurances. The record drawings plans shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Completion and Compliance properly executed in the form prescribed by the commission by the licensed engineer, or surveyor preparing the site plan and/or record drawings. Record drawings, including the approved final plat shall be submitted in the forms specified by the Plan Commission.
A. General Requirements:
Plans are to contain a certification statement that the improvements have been installed in reasonable compliance with the original design plans with respect to horizontal locations and grades and any deviations of locations, grade or material used are shown in these record drawings. Said certification is to be sealed and signed.
B. Specific Requirements:
1. Grading on site plan(s)
a) Grades:
1.) Major drainage swales and percents of slope;
2.) Pad grades;
3.) Street grades; Centerline and curb if street is bituminous pavement with concrete curb. Centerline only if streets are concrete and placed with electronic control. (Maximum 50 ft. spacing) All sag and crest points.
4.) Paved swales if any, at 50 ft. intervals;
5.) Lake or pond if applicable;
6.) Locations of sidewalk ramps.
2. Plan and Profiles
a) Sanitary Sewers:
1.) Invert elevations and percents of slope;
2.) Top of casting elevations;
3.) Lateral locations based on distances along main from manholes;
4.) Locations of each manhole or structure (to make sure they are sufficiently within designated easements to permit future excavation to system if needed) ;
5.) Designate any material change from design plans; where plans show any alternatives, indicate alternative actually used.
Section 17
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 95
b) Storm Sewers:
1.) Invert elevations and percents of slope;
2.) Top of casting elevations;
3.) Location of pipe and structures (to make sure they are within designated easements);
4.) Designate any material change from design plans; where plans show any alternatives, indicate alternate actually used.
c) Streets:
1.) Grades
2.) All low and high points;
3.) All percents of slope;
4.) Any deviation of alignment;
5.) Grades and dimensions on acceleration and deceleration lanes if applicable.
17.13 EXPIRATION DEADLINES
A. Approval of Site Plans shall expire two years from the date of Plan Commission approval if necessary land improvements have not been completed. Plan Commission, at its discretion, may grant extensions for a period up to two years.
B. Bonded improvements must be completed within two years of issuance of Improvement Location Permit.
Request for extension must be submitted in writing stating the justification for the extension.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 196
SECTION 18 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
18.1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES
A. Statutory Authorization
The Indiana Legislature has in IC 36-7-4 and IC 14-28-4 granted the power to local government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Danville does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations.
B. Findings of Fact
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Town of Danville are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.
C. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and,
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 97
(6) Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for structures and their contents in the Town of Danville by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
D. Objectives
The objectives of this ordinance are:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and;
(7) To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
18.2 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
A zone means portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The definitions are presented below:
Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
Zone AE and A1-A30: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 198
purchase requirements apply. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones A1-A30.)
Zone AO: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are 1-3 feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
Zone A99: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.
Addition (to an existing structure) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 1 99
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the one-percent annual chance flood.
Basement means that portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see "Structure."
Community means a political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.
Community Rating System (CRS) means a program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.
Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to:
(1) construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any addition to a structure;
(2) installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;
(3) installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;
(4) construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc.;
(5) mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations;
(6) construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts;
(7) storage of materials; or
(8) any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 200
"Development" does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent structures.
Elevated structure means a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
Elevation Certificate is a certified statement that verifies a structure’s elevation information.
Emergency Program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM.
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
Existing Construction means any structure for which the ―start of construction‖ commenced before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Five-hundred year flood (500-year flood) means the flood that has a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 01
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been identified as Zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) is the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain means the channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe districts.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
Floodplain management regulations means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management requirements.
Flood Protection Grade (FPG) is the elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (see ―Freeboard‖)
Floodproofing (dry floodproofing) is a method of protecting a structure that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces.
Floodproofing certificate is a form used to certify compliance for non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above the FPG. This certification must be by a Registered Professional Engineer or Architect.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 202
Floodway is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream.
Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.
Fringe is those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Hardship (as related to variances of this ordinance) means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure means any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC) means the cost to repair a substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) means an amendment to the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 03
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means an official revision to the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and elevations.
Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means an official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.
Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation, after completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure.
Lowest floor means the lowest of the following:
(1) the top of the lowest level of the structure;
(2) the top of the basement floor;
(3) the top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the structure;
(4) the top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars;
(5) the top of the first floor of a structure constructed with a crawl space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is at or above the BFE and construction meets requirements of 6. a.; or
(6) the top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:
a). the walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) having a total net area of one (1) square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and,
b). such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of vehicles and building access.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Map amendment means a change to an effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map that showed the
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 204
structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).
Map panel number is the four-digit number followed by a letter suffix assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has been revised. (The letter ―A‖ is not used by FEMA, the letter ―B‖ is the first revision.)
Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values.
Mitigation means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is two fold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance industry.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
New construction means any structure for which the ―start of construction‖ commenced after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) as adopted in 1993 is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 05
One-hundred year flood (100-year flood) is the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance flood. See ―Regulatory Flood‖.
One-percent annual chance flood is the flood that has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance flood. See ―Regulatory Flood‖.
Participating community is any community that voluntarily elects to participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.
Physical Map Revision (PMR) is an official republication of a community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1-percent annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.
Post-FIRM construction means construction or substantial improvement that started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
Pre-FIRM construction means construction or substantial improvement, which started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.
Probation is a means of formally notifying participating communities of violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the local floodplain management regulations.
Public safety and nuisance, anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regular program means the phase of the community’s participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 206
Regulatory flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is as defined in Section 18.3(B) of this ordinance. The "Regulatory Flood" is also known by the term "Base Flood‖, ―One-Percent Annual Chance Flood‖, and ―100-Year Flood‖.
Repetitive loss means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event.
Section 1316 is that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in flood-prone areas.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) means those lands within the jurisdictions (including extraterritorial jurisdictions) of the Town of Danville subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the Town of Danville are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Hendricks County and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 25, 2009. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement or permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 07
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historic structure".
Suspension means the removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD), or other datum where specified of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
X zone means the area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2 percent.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 208
Zone means a geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
Zone A (see definition for A zone)
Zone B, C, and X means areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.)
18.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies
This ordinance shall apply to all SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the Town of Danville.
B. Basis for Establishing Regulatory Flood Data
This ordinance’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory flood data is listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed engineering study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit it to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.
(1) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the studied SFHAs of the Town of Danville shall be as delineated on the 100 year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Hendricks County and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding FIRM prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 25, 2009.
(2) The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each of the unstudied SFHAs of the Town of Danville delineated as an "A Zone" on the FIRM of Hendricks County and Incorporated Areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
C. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas of special flood hazard.
D. Compliance
No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 09
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Discrepancy between Mapped Floodplain and Actual Ground Elevations
(1) In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern.
(2) If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly.
(3) If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner should be advised to apply for a LOMA.
G. Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
H. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this ordinance does not create any liability on the part of the Town of Danville, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
I. Penalties for Violation
Failure to obtain a Floodplain Development Permit in the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of a Floodplain Development Permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500.00.
(1) A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation continues to exist.
(2) The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 210
(3) Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
J. Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC)
In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC coverage as a ―repetitive loss structure‖, the National Reform Act of 1994 requires that the building be covered by a contract for flood insurance and incur flood-related damages on two occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event.
18.4 ADMINISTRATION
A. Designation of Administrator
The Town Council of the Town of Danville hereby appoints the Town Manager or an appointee to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Permit Procedures
Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required:
(1) Application stage.
a). A description of the proposed development;
b). Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and streams;
c). A legal description of the property site;
d). A site development plan showing existing and proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades;
e). Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD;
f) Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;
g). Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or related as a result of proposed development, and;
(2) Construction stage.
Upon placement of the lowest floor; or floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 11
When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holders’ risk. (The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation survey data submitted.) The permit holder shall correct deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this ordinance, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.
Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied;
(2) Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and complete substantial damage determinations;
(3) Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to Section 18.5(E) and Section 18.5(G)(1) of this ordinance, and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment.)
(4) Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain development permit;
(5) Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;
(6) Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letters of Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents, and ―as-built‖ elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject to this ordinance.
(7) Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Revision (LOMR) or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the community.
(8) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished;
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 212
(9) Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with Section 18.4(B);
(10) Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with Section 18.4(B);
(11) Review certified plans and specifications for compliance.
(12) Stop Work Orders
a). Upon notice from the floodplain administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall immediately cease.
b). Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.
(13) Revocation of Permits
a). The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the ordinance, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
b). The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit upon determination by the floodplain administrator that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this ordinance.
18.5 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
A. General Standards
In all SFHAs the following provisions are required:
(1) New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;
(2) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces;
(3) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG;
(4) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(5) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 13
(6) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(7) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(8) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
(9) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of ―new construction‖ as contained in this ordinance; and,
(10) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further, extended, or replaced.
B. Specific Standards
In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:
(1) In addition to the requirements of Section 18.5(A), all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:
a).Construction or placement of any new structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet;
b). Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:
i. where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land);
ii. with a previous addition or improvement constructed since the community’s first floodplain ordinance.
c). Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;
d). Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days;
e). Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This ordinance does not apply to returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and
f). Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss structure.
(2) Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 214
facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of Section 18.5(B)(4).
(3) Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Structures located in all ―A Zones‖ may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:
a). A Registered Professional Engineer or Architect shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 18.4(C)(10).
b). Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.
(4) Elevated Structures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
a). Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
(i) provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; and
(ii) the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation or higher than the exterior foundation grade); and
(iii) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
(iv) access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 15
connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and
(v) the interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and
(vi) portions of the building below the flood protection grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
(5) Structures Constructed on Fill. A residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
a). The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than 1 foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the Standard Proctor Test method.
b). The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.
c). The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
d). The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
e). The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above the FPG.
(6) Standards for Structures Constructed with a Crawlspace. A residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood protection grade provided that the following conditions are met:
a). The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
b). Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of the openings shall be no more than one foot above grade; and
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 216
c). The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace
to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point; and
d). Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the flood protection
grade.
e). An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event; and
f). Portions of the building below the flood protection grade must be constructed with
materials resistant to flood damage.
g). The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or above the base flood elevation.
(7) Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following requirements:
a). The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site;
(i) outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred ―substantial damage‖ as a result of a flood.
b). The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood.
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 17
c). Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:
(i.) be on site for less than 180 days; and,
(ii.) be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions); or
(iii.) meet the requirements for ―manufactured homes‖ as stated earlier in this section.
C. Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and;
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of fifty lots or five acres.
D. Critical Facility
Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.
E. Standards for Identified Floodways
Located within SFHAs, established in Section 18.3(B), are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of IC 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (IC 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial additions/ improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 218
fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in a floodway permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)
No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in a floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in Section 18.5 of this ordinance have been met. The Floodplain Development Permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.
No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot; and
For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees) the Town shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.
F. Standards for Identified Fringe
If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit provided the provisions contained in Section 18.5 of this ordinance have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.
G. Standards for SFHAs Without Established Base Flood Elevation and/or Floodways/Fringes
(1) Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile:
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.
No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100 year flood elevation and the recommended Flood Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a Floodplain Development Permit
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 19
may be issued provided the conditions of the Floodplain Development Permit are not less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in Section 18.5 of this ordinance have been met.
(2) Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile:
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodway, fringe and 100 year flood elevation for the site.
Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in Section 18.5 of this ordinance have been met.
(3) The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not increase flood damages or potential flood damages.
18.6 VARIANCE PROCEDURES
A. Designation of Variance and Appeals Board.
The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by Town Council of the Town of Danville shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this ordinance.
B. Duties of Variance and Appeals Board.
The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the Hendricks County Circuit Court, as provided by Statute.
C. Variance Procedures.
In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and;
(1) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(4) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(5) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 220
(6) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(7) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(8) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(9) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and,
(10) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
D. Conditions for Variances
(1) Variances shall only be issued when there is:
a). A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b). A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and,
c). A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(2) No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to Section 18.5(E) or Section 18.5(G)(1) of this ordinance may be granted.
(3) Any variance granted in a floodway subject to Section 18.5(E) or Section 18.5(G)(1) of this ordinance will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
(4) Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction of Section 18.5(B), may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(6) Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.
(7) Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (See Section 18.6(E)).
Section 18
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 21
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (See Section 18.6(E)).
E. Variance Notification
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and;
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall by recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
F. Historic Structure
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of ―historic structures‖ upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an ―historic structure‖ and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
G. Special Conditions
Upon the consideration of the factors listed in Section 18.6, and the purposes of this ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.
18.7 SEVERABILITY
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of the Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance.
18.8 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall take effect upon its passage by the Town Council.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 222
SECTION 19 ADMINISTRATION
19.1 AUTHORITY OF PLAN COMMISSION, BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS, AND STAFF
The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and staff shall have the following authority, respectively:
A. The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to perform those duties and functions specified in IC 36-7-4-400 et seq. and other applicable sections of Indiana law and such other responsibilities as may be assigned to it from time to time by the Town Manager or Town Council. The Commission shall adopt written rules of procedure for the administration of the affairs of the commission and its staff for investigations and hearings.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby authorized to perform those duties and functions specified in IC 36-7-4-900 et seq. and other applicable sections of Indiana law. The Board shall adopt written rules of procedure pertaining to the administration of this Chapter and the conduct of hearings.
19.2 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
There is hereby re-established an Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals to be known as the BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS OF THE TOWN OF DANVILLE, INDIANA. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be a continuation of the present Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Danville heretofore established under IC 36-7-4-900 Series.
A. Membership. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members appointed as follows:
1. Three (3) members appointed by the Town Council President, of whom one (1) must be a member of the Plan Commission and two (2) must not be members of the Plan Commission.
2. One (1) member appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Danville, must not be a member of the Plan Commission.
3. One (1) member appointed by the Plan Commission from the Plan Commission’s membership who must be a citizen member of the Plan Commission other than a member appointed under subsection 19.2.A.1.
Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals may not hold other elective office in municipal, county or state government, except as permitted in this section; and all members must be residents of the Town of Danville.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 23
B. Terms of Office. Following adoption of this Ordinance, each of the above members shall be re-appointed for the balance of the term being served on the present Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Danville. Thereafter each member shall be for a term of four (4) years. Each term shall expire on the first Monday in January of the year of termination.
C. Territorial Jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have jurisdiction over all the land subject to the Zoning Ordinance.
D. Subject Matter Jurisdiction. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have exclusive jurisdiction for the following:
1. To review, approve or deny Special Exceptions.
2. To review, approve, or deny variances of use from the terms of this Ordinance.
3. To review, approve, or deny variances from the development standards (such as height, bulk, or area) of this Ordinance.
4. To review, hear and determine appeals from:
a) Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or staff member under the Zoning Ordinance; and
b) Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative board or other body except the Plan Commission in relation to the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
E. Staff. The Staff of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of the Administrator as defined in this Ordinance and any other employees of the Town of Danville that he may direct from time to time to assist him or the Board of Zoning Appeals.
1. Authority. The staff shall have the authority to take those lawful actions necessary to enforce the terms of this Ordinance on behalf of the Plan Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. Duties. The authority to perform inspections, review applications, and issue permits is hereby delegated to the staff.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 224
F. Rules and Procedures
1. Rules and By-Laws. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have sole authority to adopt rules as permitted by IC 36-7-4-916 as well as by-laws concerning organization, selection of officers, forms for applications, filing requirements, procedures, and notices for and conduct of meetings. Upon adoption of such rules and by-laws they shall be applicable to the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall be printed and made available to applicants and other interested parties.
2. Facilities and Funding. The Town of Danville shall provide suitable facilities for the holding of Board of Zoning Appeals hearings and the storage of its recorded documents and accounts. The Town shall, in its annual budget, provide sufficient funds for the functioning of said Board and its staff.
3. Minutes. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of all of its proceedings and keep a record of all votes and actions taken. All minutes and records shall be considered public records.
4. Filing. All applications for variances, special exceptions, and requests for appeal shall be filed by the applicant with the Planning Director.
5. Hearings. All hearings required for variances and appeals shall be by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Procedures for public notice setting forth time and place for all hearings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be established by the Board of Zoning Appeals, except that public notice and due notice to all interested parties shall be given at least ten days before the date set for the hearing, and shall comply with the regulations set forth in IC 5-3-1-2 and IC 5-3-1-4.
19.3 DESIGNATION OF THE ADMINISTRATOR
The Danville Plan Commission hereby designates its Town Manager or his designated appointee as the Administrator for the purposes of implementing this Ordinance.
19.4 FILING OF FEES
Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be accompanied by the filing of fees hereinafter specified. For each petition or application for a permit or certificate required by this Ordinance, the Town Board of Trustees shall establish a schedule of fees. Said fees shall be paid to and collected by the Clerk-Treasurer, to be deposited in the General Fund. No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this Section shall be returnable to the applicant or petitioner.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 25
19.5 VARIANCES
A. Findings of Fact.
1. Variances of Use. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a variance of use from the terms of this Ordinance only upon the determination in writing that:
a) The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
b) The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner;
c) The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to the property involved;
d) The strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the variance is sought; and
e) The approval does not interfere substantially with the Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Danville.
2. Variance of Development Standards. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve a variance of the development standards (such as height, bulk, or area) of this Ordinance only upon the determination in writing that:
a) The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;
b) The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and
c) The strict application of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property.
B. Conditions on Variances.
1. The Board may impose such specific conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening, and other matters relating to the purposes and objectives of this Ordinance upon any lot benefited by a variance as may be necessary or appropriate. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the Ordinance or order granting the variance. Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a violation of this Ordinance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variance.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 226
2. The Board may permit or require the Owner of a parcel of property to make written commitments concerning the use or development of that parcel as per IC 36-7-4-921 and Section 16 of this Ordinance.
C. Effect of Grant of Variance. The grant of a variance shall not authorize the establishment or extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be required by this Ordinance or other Ordinances of the Town of Danville.
D. Failure to Comply. Where an Owner has failed to comply with any terms of this Ordinance or condition and/or commitment permitted or required by approval of the variance, such failure shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and the Board may authorize such action, including the revocation of the variance, as it deems appropriate.
19.6 ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS
A. Authority. The designated Administrator has the principal responsibility for enforcing this Ordinance.
B. Responsibility for Compliance. The Owner and occupier of all land, structures, buildings, businesses, and residences shall be responsible and liable for compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Complaints Regarding Violations. Any person may file a complaint whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs or is alleged to have occurred. Such complaint shall be filed in writing with the Administrator and shall state fully the causes and basis of the complaint.
D. Investigation of Violations. The Administrator shall, on receipt of information of the violation of this Ordinance, make an investigation of the alleged violation. If acts elicited by the investigation are sufficient to establish a reasonable belief that a violation has occurred on the part of the party investigated, the Administrator may file a complaint against the person and prosecute the alleged violation.
E. Right of Entry. The Administrator or his authorized representatives may make inspections of all buildings, structures, and premises located within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance to determine their compliance
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 27
with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such inspections shall be made between the hours of 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM on any day except Sunday. All inspections shall be subject to the following standards and conditions.
1. An inspection may only take place if a complaint has been received by the Administrator pursuant to this Section, and such complaint, in the opinion of the Administrator, provides reasonable grounds for the belief that a violation exists; or an inspection may be undertaken as part of a regular inspection program whereby certain areas of the Town are being inspected in their entirety under the direction of the Administrator.
2. The Administrator or his authorized representative shall furnish to the Owner, tenant, or occupant of the building, structure, or premises sought to be inspected, sufficient identification and information to enable the Owner, tenant, or occupant to determine the purpose of the inspection and that the person is a representative of the Town.
3. The Administrator or his authorized agent may apply to any court of law for a search warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing entry to any premises into which the Owner, tenant, or occupant shall refuse to grant entry.
F. Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations. If the Administrator finds that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, he shall provide written notice to the persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
In cases where delay would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this Ordinance or pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the Administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any penalties or remedies authorized under this Section.
Pursuant to IC 36-1-6-2, as amended, when a condition exists on real property in violation of this Ordinance, the Administrator or his authorized representative may enter onto the subject property and take the appropriate action to bring the property into compliance. However, before such compliance action shall be taken, the Administrator shall provide notice to all persons holding a substantial interest in the property of his intentions and provide such persons reasonable time to bring the subject property into compliance. If the Administrator is required to take appropriate action under this Section, the Town’s expenses involved in such action shall be made to become a lien against the subject property.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 228
19.7 PENALTIES & REMEDIES FOR ACTION
A. Declaration as a Public Nuisance. A structure erected, raised or converted, or land or premises used that violates this Ordinance or regulation made as a part of this Ordinance shall be treated as if it were a common nuisance, and the Owner or possessor of the structure, land, or premises upon which the use is maintained shall be liable for maintaining a common nuisance.
B. Penalties. Any person or corporation, whether Owner or possessor, who shall violate, or who permits or allows a violation, of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, or who fails to comply therewith or with any requirements thereunder, or who shall build, reconstruct, or structurally alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted upon which an approval or grant is given under this Ordinance, shall, upon complaint filed in any court of the county and upon judgment finding such violation, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation.
Each day that such violation or noncompliance shall be permitted to exist may constitute a separate violation, and further, any such judgment for a fine hereunder shall include an amount sufficient to pay the Town’s reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the enforcement of the Ordinance and the procurement of judgment.
C. Removal of the Violation. The Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Zoning Administrator, the Building Inspector, or any designated enforcement official or any person or persons, firm or corporation, jointly or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit or superior courts of Hendricks County against the Owner or possessor of the real estate.
The Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals may also institute a suit for mandatory injunction directing the removal of a structure erected in violation of this Ordinance, or the removal of any use or condition existing in violation of this Ordinance.
D. Grievances. Any person who is a resident of Danville, who is aggrieved or whose property has been damaged by a violation of this Ordinance may, by suit in a circuit or superior court of the county, enjoin in the violation of this Ordinance.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 29
19.8 APPEALS
A. A decision of the Administrator enforcing this Ordinance may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person who is adversely affected by the decision
B. Stay of Work Pending Appeal
1. When an appeal from the decision of an official or board has been filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals, proceedings and work on the premises affected shall be stayed unless the official or board certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, proceedings or work may not be stayed except by restraining order.
2. After notice to the officer or board and to the Owner of the premises affected, and after due cause is shown, the Circuit or Superior Court of the County in which the premises affected are located may grant the restraining order necessary to require a stay of work under subsection 19.8.C.1.
3. After the Owner of, or a person in charge of the work on, the premises affected has received notice that an appeal has been filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals, the official or board charged with the enforcement of the Ordinance may order the work stayed and call on the police power of the municipality to give effect to that order.
19.9 ATTORNEY’S FEES
If the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Town of Danville is required to utilize the services or the Town Attorney or any other attorney in investigating a possible violation of this Ordinance or in enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to this Section or any other Section; and such investigation results in a determination that a violation has occurred, or if the Board of Zoning Appeals or Town is successful in its enforcement of the Ordinance by way of suit, appeal or other appropriate proceeding; the respondent, defendant or party investigated for a violation shall pay the Town’s reasonable attorney fees and all costs related to the investigation of the violation and/or the enforcement of this Ordinance, unless such attorney fees or the costs are specifically waived by the Town Council of the Town of Danville.
19.10 AMENDMENTS
From time to time, after the initial adoption of this Ordinance, it may become necessary to amend the text of this Ordinance or to amend the
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 230
Zoning Map. This amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships or to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make adjustments necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy.
A. Parties Entitled to Initiate Amendments. Amendments to the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by the Plan Commission or by the Town Council in accordance with IC 36-7-4-602(b). Amendments to the Zoning Map may be initiated by the Plan Commission, by the Town Council, or by a petition signed by property owners owning at least fifty percent (50%) of the land involved. Such Zoning Map amendments shall adhere to the requirements of IC 36-7-4-602(c).
B. Standards for Amendments. The wisdom of amending the text of this Ordinance or the Zoning Map is a matter committed to the sound legislative discretion of the Town Council and is not controlled by any one standard. However, in preparing and considering amendments to the Ordinance, the Plan Commission and the Town Council shall pay reasonable regard to:
1. The Comprehensive Plan,
2. The current conditions and the character of current structures and uses in each district,
3. The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted,
4. The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction, and
5. The need for responsible growth and development within the Town of Danville.
19.11 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS
A. Definition
An improvement location permit is a document issued by the provisions listed hereunder, permitting a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure within its jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done, or to change the use or condition of the land.
B. Applicability
1. Circumstances in which an Improvement Location Permit must be issued. No change in the use of land that involves a change in the condition of the land or in any structure on the land, including special exceptions under Section 5 and changes in flood
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 31
plain districts under Section 18, may be made unless the Administrator issues an improvement location permit authorizing such a change.
2. Exceptions for agricultural land, uses, and structures. Agricultural land, farm barns, farm outbuildings, and other farm buildings, other than the farm residence structure, which are adapted for agricultural purposes, shall not be subject to the requirements for improvement location permits.
C. General Provisions
1. Certificate of Occupancy Required. No application for an improvement location permit under this Section may be considered unless the applicant has also applied for a certificate of occupancy.
Furthermore, no land or structure for which an Improvement Location Permit has been issued may be used for the purpose stated in the permit until the Administrator, after the change is completed, issues a certificate of occupancy stating that the change complies with this Ordinance and with the permit. Said certificate of occupancy shall be issued following an inspection by the Administrator or his designee within ten (10) days of the completion of the change authorized by the Improvement Location Permit.
2. Failure to Obtain an Improvement Location Permit. Failure to obtain an Improvement Location Permit shall be a violation of this Ordinance and therefore shall be punishable under the provisions of Section 19.7 of this Ordinance.
3. Limitations of the Improvement Location Permit. Improvement Location Permits issued on the basis of the plans and applications approved by the Administrator authorize only the use or arrangement set forth in such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use, arrangements, or construction. Any use, arrangement or construction contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and shall be punishable under the provisions of Section 19.7.
D. Site Plan Review
In addition to all other required applications, information and permits from other governmental agencies, any person who applies for an improvement location permit under Section 19.11 must furnish the Administrator with a site plan.
1. Site Plan Requirements. The following items shall be portrayed on plans drawn to scale:
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 232
a) The location of the land concerned, including property lines and right-of-way lines;
b) The location and size of all buildings and structures already on the land as well as those to be erected, including parking, signage, open space, landscaping, screening, and sidewalks where applicable;
c) The size and location of all entrances to and exits from the land, both vehicular and pedestrian, including all adjacent streets and highways;
d) Detailed drawings showing all construction and materials;
e) Elevations of all buildings to be constructed; and
f) Drainage and/or erosion solutions, where applicable.
g) Plans so furnished shall be kept by the Administrator as permanent records.
2. Action of the Administrator. The Administrator shall either approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications, the site plan submitted, except in cases which require a public hearing in which the Administrator shall forward his findings to the body conducting the hearing.
As a condition of the issuance of the Improvement Location Permit, the Administrator may require changes in the site plan in the interest of the public welfare, public safety, or to balance the interests of the persons in the vicinity of the property under consideration.
E. Issuance or Denial
With the exception of the longer period of time required for industrial uses as specified in subsection 19.11.I.1, the Administrator shall either accept the application and issue the improvement location permit or deny the application together with a statement of reasons for the denial, within a period of eight (8) working days following application.
F. Expiration
The work or use authorized by an Improvement Location Permit must be commenced within one (1) year of the issuance of the permit. After such time, if the work or use has not begun, said permit shall lapse and become null and void.
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 2 33
With the exception of temporary uses, if work or the use authorized by the permit has begun within one (1) year of the issuance of the permit, the Improvement Location Permit shall remain in full force and effect.
G. Appeals
A decision of the Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals subject to the provisions of Section 19.2.D.
H. Public Record
A record of each improvement location permit and each certificate of occupancy shall be kept by the Administrator and shall become part of the public record.
I. Special Cases
1. Industrial Uses: Certificate of Compliance. If an application for an improvement location permit relates to an industrial use, it must be accompanied by a certificate of compliance, certified by a registered professional engineer of the state, stating that the use will meet the performance standards of the district concerned.
If, after ten (10) working days, the Administrator has not required additional information or objections in writing, the Administrator shall issue the permit.
2. Mobile Homes
a) Mobile homes shall be permitted as temporary uses only, subject to Section 4.5.
b) In the event that a single family home has been destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy and an improvement location permit has been issued for its replacement or reconstruction, the property owner may make application for an improvement location permit for a mobile home to be placed on the same property for a period not to exceed one (1) year. No extensions of time shall be permitted by the Administrator.
c) Application procedures and requirements shall be the same as for any other improvement location permit.
d) Placement of the mobile home shall be subject to all use requirements and restrictions applicable to a single family home.
e) In addition to all other requirements, the property owner shall post a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) cash bond in favor of
Section 19
Zoning Ordinance of Danville, IN 234
the Town of Danville to be held by the Town Clerk. Said cash bond shall be returned without interest upon the removal of the mobile home and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the constructed or reconstructed single family home. Said cash bond may be drawn on by the Trustees of the Town of Danville, at the Trustees discretion, upon the advice of the Administrator that the property owner has failed to remove the mobile home either at the end of one (1) year or within two (2) weeks of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the constructed or reconstructed single family home, whichever comes first. Said cash bond may be used to defray expenses incurred by the Town for the removal of the mobile home and/or legal costs and attorney fees directly associated with the enforcement of Section 19.11.I.2 of this Ordinance.
19.12 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. Requirement. It is unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of any structure hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged, except for structures other than residences incidental to agricultural operations, until an certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Inspector.
B. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six (6) months during alterations or partial occupancy of a structure pending its completion; provided, that such temporary certificate of occupancy includes such conditions and safeguards as will protect the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants and the public.
C. When an certificate of occupancy is requested and all landscaping screens or buffers as required by Section 13 of this Ordinance have not and cannot be installed due to weather or other conditions, the staff may issue an certificate of occupancy, provided that the party requesting such occupancy shall first submit a detailed landscaping plan. Such landscaping plan shall contain a schedule for the installation of all materials, and the applicant shall certify in writing that such schedule will be followed unless an extension is granted by the staff. 
 
 
 
 




 


