
Decatur, IN Code of Ordinances


DECATUR, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-18, passed 8-21-2018;
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Service,



2018 Acts, Pamphlet No. 5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 2015-9



   SHORT TITLE:   AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
DECATUR, INDIANA WHICH ENACTS A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF DECATUR,
INDIANA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING OR NEW GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA DEALING
WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND WHICH DECLARES AN
EMERGENCY REGARDING ITS EFFECTIVE DATE.



   WHEREAS, the City of Decatur, Indiana last codified its Code of
Ordinances in 2007; and



   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of
Decatur, Indiana, are inadequately arranged and classified and are
insufficient in form and substance for the complete preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Indiana empower
and authorize the Common Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana, to revise,
amend, restate, codify and compile any existing ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate such
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, the Common Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana, as the
legislative body of such municipality, has authorized a general compilation,
revision, and codification of the ordinances of the City of Decatur, Indiana,
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance to book
form; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City of Decatur, Indiana, and for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, that this ordinance take effect at an early date;



   NOW THEREFOR, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
DECATUR, INDIANA, AS FOLLOWS:



   Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to revise, amend,
restate, codify and compile all ordinances of the City of Decatur, Indiana,
whether existing or new, and to incorporate such ordinances into one
ordinance in book form.



   Section 2. Adoption. The general ordinances of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, as revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form
are hereby adopted as and shall constitute the “Decatur Code of Ordinances
of 2015".



   Section 3. Titles. Such Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 as adopted
in Section 1 shall consist of the Titles shown in Exhibit “A” attached
hereto, made a part hereof and incorporated herein by reference.



   Section 4. Effect of Adoption. All prior ordinances pertaining to the
subjects treated in such Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 shall be deemed
repealed, from and after the effective date of this ordinance except as they
are included and reordained in whole or in part in such Code, provided, such
repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall
such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating
money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting
special rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements,
authorizing the issuances of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the
purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or accepting
easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, vacating or setting the
boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal affect
any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.



   Section 5. Publication. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the
day of its adoption and approval by the Common Council and the
Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Decatur, Indiana, is hereby authorized and
ordered to file a copy of such Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 in the
Office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   Section 6. Full Force and Effect. Such Code shall be in full force and
effect as provided in Section 7, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence
in all courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections,
penalties and regulations, thereto contained and of the date of passage, and
that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that
any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law have been given.



   Section 7. Emergency Declaration and Effective Date. This ordinance is
declared to be an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation
of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of
Decatur, Indiana, and shall take effect immediately upon adoption by the
Common Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana, and approval by the Mayor.



   ALL OF WHICH IS DULY PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA, THIS   7th  DAY OF   JULY  , 2015.



                     COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
DECATUR, INDIANA



                     Cameron D. Collier  /s/ 



                     Cameron D. Collier



                     William L. Crone  /s/ 



                     William L. Crone



                     Tyler P. Fullenkamp  /s/ 



                     Tyler P. Fullenkamp



                     Kenneth L. Meyer  /s/ 



                     Kenneth L. Meyer



                     Matthew J. Dyer  /s/ 



                     Matthew J. Dyer



                     John L. Schultz  /s/ 



                     John L. Schultz, Mayor and
Presiding Officer



ATTEST:   Phyllis J. Whitright  /s/ 



      Phyllis J. Whitright, City Clerk-Treasurer



   Presented to me, John L. Schultz, Mayor of Decatur, Indiana, and
approved this   7th  day of   July  , 2015.



                     John L. Schultz  /s/ 



                     John L. Schultz, Mayor



Attest:      Phyllis J. Whitright  /s/ 



      Phyllis J. Whitright, City Clerk-Treasurer



   EXHIBIT “A”



   DECATUR, INDIANA



   CODE OF ORDINANCES



   TABLE OF CONTENTS



   Chapter



   TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty



   11.   City Boundaries



   TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   30.   General Provisions



   31.   Legislative Authority



   32.   City Organizations



   33.   City Funds; Financial Regulations



   TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   50.   Construction of Public Works Facilities and Improvements



   51.   Sanitation Service and Regulations



   52.   Storm Water Regulations



   53.   Water



   54.   Sewers



   55.   Koos Ditch Trunk Sanitary Sewer



   TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   70.   General Provisions



   71.   Traffic Regulations



   72.   Toy Vehicles



   73.   School Property



   74.   Bicycles



   75.   Parking Rules



   76.   Parking Meters



   77.   Traffic Schedules



   78.   Parking Schedules



   TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   90.   Animals



   91.   Fire Prevention; Fireworks



   92.   Nuisances



   93.   Streets and Sidewalks; Drainage Structures



   94.   Parks



   95.   Assemblies; Parking Facilities



   96.   Trees, Shrubs and Vegetation



   97.   Fair Housing



   TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   110.   Peddlers



   111.   Sexually Oriented Businesses



   TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   130.   Miscellaneous Offenses



   TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   150.   Zoning



   151.   Building Code; Standards



   152.   House Numbering



   153.   Improvement Location Permits



   154.   Subdivision Control



   155.   Flood Hazard Areas



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



   I.   Zoning Changes



   II.   Vacations



   III.   Annexations



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



   References to Indiana Code



   References to Indiana Administrative Code



   References to Prior Code



   References to Ordinances



   INDEX



ORDINANCE NO. 2016-3



SHORT TITLE:   AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DECATUR,
INDIANA WHICH ENACTS AND ADOPTS A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA, AND WHICH DECLARES AN EMERGENCY REGARDING THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH SUPPLEMENT.



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2016 S-l Supplement to the Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015,
which Supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the adoption of the Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Decatur Code of Ordinances of
2015 which are based on or make reference to sections of the Indiana Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, which is the legislative body of the City of Decatur, to accept
these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State
of Indiana; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City of Decatur, Indiana, and it is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the City of Decatur, Indiana, that this ordinance take effect at
the earliest possible date;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
DECATUR, INDIANA, AS FOLLOWS:



   Section 1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015.



   Section 2. 2016 S-l Supplement. The 2016 S-l Supplement to the Decatur
Code of Ordinances of 2015 as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 3. Publication of Supplement. Such Supplement shall be deemed
published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the Common Council of
the City of Decatur, Indiana, and the Decatur Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Decatur
Code of Ordinances of 2015 kept on file in the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer
and to cause such supplement to be inserted into the copy of the Decatur Code
of Ordinances of 2015 which is published online at the official website of
the City of Decatur, Indiana.



   Section 4. Effect of Ordinance. This Ordinance shall amend the Decatur
Code of Ordinances of 2015. Provisions of said Code which are in conflict
with the provisions of the 2016 S-l Supplement adopted herein, if any, shall
be deemed repealed and superceded by the provisions of the 2016 S-l
Supplement. Unless otherwise amended herein, all other provisions of the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 shall remain in full force and effect.



   Section 5. Effective Date. This Ordinance is declared to be an
emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by law.



   ALL OF WHICH IS DULY PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA, ON THIS   17th  DAY OF   MAY  , 2016.



                  COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DECATUR,
INDIANA



                     Matthew J. Dyer  /s/ 



                     Matthew J. Dyer



                     W. Craig Coshaw  /s/ 



                     W. Craig Coshaw



                     Tyler P. Fullenkamp  /s/ 



                     Tyler P. Fullenkamp



                     Cameron D. Collier  /s/ 



                     Cameron D. Collier



                     Wylie Sirk  /s/ 



                     Wylie Sirk



                     Kenneth L. Meyer  /s/ 



                     Kenneth L. Meyer



 



ATTEST:   Phyllis J. Whitright  /s/ 



      Phyllis J. Whitright, City Clerk-Treasurer



   Presented to Kenneth L. Meyer, Mayor of Decatur, Indiana, and approved
this   17th  day of   May  , 2016.



                     Phyllis J. Whitright  /s/ 



                     Phyllis J. Whitright, City
Clerk-Treasurer



   Approved by me, Kenneth L. Meyer, Mayor of Decatur, Indiana, and
approved this   17th  day of   May , 2016, at   8:05  o’clock P.M.



                     Kenneth L. Meyer  /s/ 



                     Kenneth L. Meyer, Mayor



ORDINANCE 2017-13



SHORT TITLE:   AN ORDINANCE OF THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF DECATUR,
INDIANA WHICH ENACTS AND ADOPTS A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA, AND WHICH DECLARES AN EMERGENCY REGARDING THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF SUCH SUPPLEMENT



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2017 S-2 Supplement to the Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015,
which Supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature
enacted since the adoption of the Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 as
supplemented in 2016; and



   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the
revision or addition of certain sections of the Decatur Code of Ordinances of
2015 which are based on or make reference to sections of the Indiana Code; and



   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Common Council of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, which is the legislative body of the City of Decatur, to accept
these updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State
of Indiana; and



   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of
the City of Decatur, Indiana, and it is necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the City of Decatur, Indiana, that this ordinance take effect at
the earliest possible date;



   NOW, THEREFORE, BE ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
DECATUR, INDIANA, AS FOLLOWS:



   Section 1.   Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to amend the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015, as supplemented by the 2016 S-l
Supplement.



   Section 2.   2017 S-2 Supplement. The 2017 S-2 Supplement to the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 as submitted by American Legal Publishing
Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its entirety.



   Section 3.   Publication of Supplement. Such Supplement shall be
deemed published as of the day of its adoption and approval by the Common
Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana, and the Decatur Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and to cause such supplement to be inserted into the copy of
the Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015 which is published online at the
official website of the City of Decatur, Indiana.



   Section 4.   Effect of Ordinance. This Ordinance shall amend the
Decatur Code of Ordinances of 2015, as supplemented in the 2016 S-l
Supplement. Provisions of said Code which are in conflict with the provisions
of the 2017 S-2 Supplement adopted herein, if any, shall be deemed repealed
and superceded by the provisions of the 2017 S-2 Supplement. Unless otherwise
amended herein, all other provisions of the Decatur Code of Ordinances of
2015, as supplemented in the 2016 S-l Supplement, shall remain in full force
and effect.



   Section 5.   Effective Date. This Ordinance is declared to be an
emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, and shall take effect at the earliest date provided by law.



   ALL OF WHICH IS DULY PASSED, ADOPTED AND ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF DECATUR, INDIANA, ON THIS 3RD DAY OCTOBER, 2017.



                                 Common
Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana



                                 Matthew J.
Dyer  /s/                                           



                                 Matthew J.
Dyer



                                 W. Craig
Coshaw  /s/                                         



                                 W. Craig
Coshaw



                                 Tyler P.
Fullenkamp  /s/                                     



                                 Tyler P.
Fullenkamp



                                 Scott D.
Murray  /s/                                           



                                 Scott D.
Murray



                                 Wylie
Sirk  /s/                                           
       



                                 Wylie Sirk



                                 Kenneth L.
Meyer  /s/                                       



                                 Kenneth L.
Meyer, Mayor and Presiding Officer



   ATTEST:Phyllis J. Whitright  /s/                         
 



           Phyllis J. Whitright, City Clerk-Treasurer



      Presented to Kenneth L. Meyer, Mayor of the City of Decatur,
Indiana, for approval on this   3rd  day of October , 2017.



                                 Phyllis J.
Whitright  /s/                                       



                                 Phyllis J.
Whitright, City Clerk-Treasurer



      Approved by me, Kenneth L. Meyer, as Mayor of the City of
Decatur, Indiana, on this   3rd  day of   October , 2017, at 7:45
o’clock P .M.



                                 Kenneth L.
Meyer  /s/                                       



                                 Kenneth L.
Meyer, Mayor



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   CITY BOUNDARIES



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title; general rule of interpretation



   10.02   Application to future legislation



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Definitions and rules of construction



   10.05   Rule of severability



   10.06   Reference to other sections



   10.07   Reference to offices



   10.08   Errors and omissions



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE; GENERAL RULE OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   This code shall be known and may be designated and cited as
“The Decatur Code of 2015”. The codification has been made in one
ordinance under appropriate titles, chapters and sections by authority of the
laws of the state.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the acts of the General Assembly of the state.



   (C)   When a section of this code is followed by a parenthetical
reference to the Indiana Code, such reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to such section of the Indiana Code. Footnotes,
cross-references and other comments are by way of explanation only and should
not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



(Prior Code, § 10.01)



§ 10.02  APPLICATION TO FUTURE LEGISLATION.



   All the provisions of Title I, not incompatible with future
legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted, amending or
supplementing this code, unless otherwise specifically provided.



(Prior Code, § 10.02)



§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter
and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not
be deemed a part of the text of any section.



(Prior Code, § 10.03)



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning. The following rules of construction shall apply
throughout the code.



      AND or OR. Includes the other as if written “and/or”.



      CITY, TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of
Decatur, Indiana.



      CODE or CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Decatur Code of 2015 as set out
herein and as hereafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption
of new titles, chapters or sections.



      COUNTY. Adams County, Indiana.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      PERSON. Includes a natural person, partnership or a corporate
body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, PERSON, as applied to any
unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



   (B)   Rules of construction.



      (1)   Words used in the past or present tense includes the
future as well as the past and present.



      (2)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders.



      (3)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular.



      (4)   A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.



      (5)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within
which an act is required by law to be done shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last; except that, the last shall be excluded if
it be a Sunday or holiday.



(Prior Code, § 10.04)



§ 10.05  RULE OF SEVERABILITY.



   Each chapter, section or, whenever divisible, part of a section of this
code of ordinances is hereby declared to be severable and the invalidity of
any chapter, section or divisible part of the section shall not be construed
to affect the validity of any other chapter, section or part of a section of
this code.



(Prior Code, § 10.05)



§ 10.06  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever reference is made in one section to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(Prior Code, § 10.06)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



(Prior Code, § 10.07)



§ 10.08  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error be discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary
to express the intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or
words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such
spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted, as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No such alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.



(Prior Code, § 10.08)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this code for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not more than $2,500.



(I.C. 36-1-3-8(10))  (Prior Code, § 10.99)



CHAPTER 11:  CITY BOUNDARIES



Section



   11.01   City boundaries



§ 11.01  CITY BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The following is declared and defined as the corporation
boundaries of the city: commencing at a stone at the southwest corner of the
northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 34, Township 28 North,
Range 14 East, Adams County, Indiana; thence north along the section line
between Sections 33 and 34 in Township 28 North, Range 14 East, to a stone at
the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of Section 34 in Township 28
North, Range 14 East; thence east along the one-half section line of Section
34, Township 28 North, Range 14 East, a distance of 152.84 feet to an iron
stake in the center of U.S. Highway No. 27, also known as North Thirteenth
Street in the city; thence north zero degrees 29 minutes east along the
center of the highway a distance of 985.75  feet; thence north two degrees
two minutes east along the centerline of the highway a distance of 987.5 feet
to an iron stake on the centerline of Winchester Road, also known as River
Road, and also designated as North Second Street in said city; thence south
53 degrees 15 minutes east on the centerline of said North Second Street a
distance of 1,207.78 feet to the west line of the Pennsylvania Railroad
right-of-way, in the northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 28 North,
Range 14 East, in Adams County, Indiana; thence northwest on said west
right-of-way line a distance of 1,858 feet to the Saint Mary’s River;
thence east and southeast following the meanderings of the south and west
banks of the Saint Mary’s River to a point 222.5 feet south of the
centerline of East Monroe Street in said city; thence north 76 degrees 20
minutes east a distance of 970 feet (being parallel with East Monroe Street
extended in said city); thence south 42 degrees 12 minutes east a distance of
eight feet to an iron stake, being the northwest corner of lot number 55 in
the Stratton Place Addition to the city; thence north 47 degrees 48 minutes
east a distance of 127.8 feet; thence northwesterly by a deflection left of
101 degrees 30 minutes a distance of 181.2 feet to a point situated 30 feet
south of the centerline of Monroe Street as it extends eastward from the
city, being further designated as U.S. Highway No. 224; thence northwesterly
by a deflection right of 26 degrees 32 minutes a distance of 30.7 feet to a
point of intersection of the aforesaid Monroe Street centerline with the
centerline of said U.S. Highway No. 224 at the point of its departure from
said Monroe Street; thence northeasterly on the centerline of said Highway
No. 224, by a deflection right of 64 degrees a distance of 319.7 feet to the
north line of Section 2, Township 27 North, Range 14 East; thence east on the
north line of said Section 2 a distance of 662.87 feet; thence south on a
line normal to the aforesaid line a distance of 164.0 feet; thence
southeasterly by a deflection left of 14 degrees 27 minutes a distance of 246
feet; thence southeasterly by a deflection left of eight degrees five minutes
a distance of 266.2 feet; thence southeasterly by a deflection right of two
degrees 44 minutes a distance of 551.8 feet; thence southwesterly by a
deflection right of 90 degrees a distance of 670 feet; thence northwesterly
by a deflection right of 89 degrees four minutes a distance of 403.0 feet;
thence northwesterly by a deflection left of 16 degrees a distance of 684.5
feet; thence south 76 degrees 20 minutes west a distance of 970 feet to a
point on the west bank of the Saint Mary’s River which point is 237.5 feet
south of the centerline of East Monroe Street; thence southeasterly along the
west bank of the Saint Mary’s River to the south line of Section 2,
Township 27 North, Range 14 East, in Adams County, Indiana; thence west on
the south line of said Section 2 to a stone at the southwest corner of said
Section 2; thence west along the north line of Section 10 in Township 27
North, Range 14 East, a distance of 20 feet; thence south parallel with the
east line of said Section 10 a distance of 2651.5 feet to an iron stake on
the south line of the northeast quarter of said Section 10, the same being 20
feet west of the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of said Section
10; thence west a distance of 1,292.2 feet along the south line of the
northeast quarter of said Section 10 to a stone at the southwest corner of
the east half of the northeast quarter of said Section 10; thence north along
the west line of the east half of the northeast quarter of said Section 10 a
distance of 2,621.6 feet to an iron stake, the same being 25 feet south of
the northwest corner of the east half of the northeast quarter of said
Section 10; thence west parallel and 25 feet south of the north line of the
west half of the northeast quarter of Section 10 to the west line of Russell
Street extended in said city; thence north 25 feet to the north line of said
Section 10; to the west along the north line of said Section 10 to the
northwest corner of said Section 10; thence west along the south line of
Section 4 of Township 27 North, Range 14 East, to the southwest corner of the
east half of said Section 4; thence north along the west line of the east
half of said Section 4 to the north line of said Section 4; thence north a
distance of 1,320 feet to the north line of the southeast quarter of Section
33, Township 28 North, Range 14 East; thence east to the place of beginning.



   (B)   All lands lying within these corporate boundaries are
conclusively deemed to be in and a part of the city. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, the boundaries of the city shall also include
that territory annexed to the city subsequent to 12-27-1951.



(Prior Code, § 11.01)



Cross-reference:



   Annexations, see TSO Table III



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY



      32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   CITY FUNDS; FINANCIAL REGULATIONS



      34.   INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Elective officers



   30.02   Worker’s compensation coverage



   30.03   Salaries



   30.04   Gifts to elected officials



   30.05   Reflective symbols



 



   30.99   Penalties



Statutory reference:



   Removal from office, see I.C. 35-50-5-1.1



§ 30.01  ELECTIVE OFFICERS.



   (A)   The elective officers of the city shall be:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer;



      (3)   The members of Common Council; and



      (4)   All others provided for by state law.



   (B)   Such officers shall be elected in accordance with the
provisions of the state election laws.



(Prior Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. 1978-47, passed 12-19-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Clerk-Treasurer, see I.C. 36-4-10-2



   Legislative body, see I.C. 36-4-6-2



   Mayor, see I.C. 36-4-5-2



§ 30.02  WORKER’S COMPENSATION COVERAGE.



   Pursuant to I.C. 22-3-2-1 et seq., the city elects to purchase and
procure Worker’s Compensation Insurance in order to insure the employees of
the city, including members of the Fire Department and Police Department of
the city who are also members of the Firemen’s Pension Fund and the
Policemen’s Pension Fund.



(Prior Code, § 30.02)



§ 30.03  SALARIES.



   Salaries of elected officers and appointed officials and employees of
the city shall be established as set forth by I.C. 36-4-7-2 and 36-4-7-3.



(Prior Code, § 30.03)



§ 30.04  GIFTS TO ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purposes of this section are:



      (1)   To prohibit the solicitation of gifts for personal
pecuniary benefit;



      (2)   To limit gifts which may be made to city elected
officials and employees; and



      (3)   To establish other gifting which is permissible.



   (B)   Solicitation. No city elected official or employee may
directly or indirectly solicit any gift resulting in a pecuniary benefit to
such elected official or employee.



   (C)   Gifts. No elected official or employee may accept or receive
any gift, or multiple gifts from the same donor, having an annual aggregate
value of $100 or more when:



      (1)   The gift reasonably appears to be intended to influence
the official or employee in the exercise or performance of his or her
official powers or duties;



      (2)   The gift could reasonably be expected to influence the
official or employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties; or



      (3)   The gift is intended as a reward for any official action
on the part of the official or employee.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit any other gift, including:



      (1)   Gifts made to the city;



      (2)   Gifts from a person with a family or personal
relationship with the officer or employee when the circumstances make it
clear that the personal relationship, rather than the recipient's status as
an elected official or employee, is the primary motivating factor for the
gift;



      (3)   Gifts given on special occasions, such as marriage,
illness, retirement, or death, which are modest, reasonable and customary;



      (4)   Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of
little intrinsic value, such as pens, pencils, note pads, and calendars;



      (5)   Awards and plaques having a value of $75 or less which
are publicly presented in recognition of service as an elected official or
employee, or other service to the community; or



      (6)   Meals and refreshments provided when an elected official
or employee is a speaker or participant at a job-related professional or
educational conference or program and the meals and refreshments are made
available to all participants.



(Ord. 2018-10, passed 5-15-2018)



§ 30.05  REFLECTIVE SYMBOLS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect emergency
and Fire Department personnel in the event of a fire at a Class 1 and Class 2
structure which was constructed with advanced structural components.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ADVANCED STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS. Light weight I-joists or
lightweight roof trusses that:



         (a)   Have less mass cross-sectional area than sawn
lumber of equivalent proportions used in an equivalent application; and



         (b)   Are assembled from combustible or noncombustible
materials, or both.



         (c)   The term does not include a structural assembly,
joist, or truss that provides at least one hour of fire resistance when
tested in accordance with the ASTM Standard E119.



   (C)   Reflective symbol. All structures constructed with advanced
structural components after June 30, 2018, must have a reflective symbol
affixed to each electrical meter serving the structure. The reflective symbol
shall be in the form of a sticker, issued by the city, that states that the
structure is constructed with advanced structural components.



   (D)   Violations of this section. Removal of a reflective symbol
from an electrical meter, warning of the use of advanced structural
components, is prohibited and a violation of this section unless such removal
is authorized by the Building and Planning Department. Refusal by an owner of
a structure to allow a reflective symbol to be affixed to the electrical
meter of such structure, if required herein, is prohibited and a violation of
this section.



   (E)   Voluntary compliance. The owner of any structure that was
constructed with advanced structural components prior to the effective date
of this section is requested to place the reflective symbol on the electrical
meter serving the structure on a voluntary basis.



   (F)   Collection and notification of information. The Building and
Planning Department shall comply with collection of information regarding the
use of advanced structural components as required under I.C. 22-11-21 and
shall notify the local Fire Department and emergency 911 call center of such
use.



(Ord. 2018-18, passed 8-21-2018)  Penalty, see § 30.99



§ 30.99  PENALTIES.



   Any unauthorized person who removes a reflective symbol from an
electrical meter shall be subject to a fine in an amount of $250, as per §
30.05,  per violation. Any owner who refuses to allow such reflective symbol
to be affixed to an electrical meter, if required herein, shall be subject to
a fine in an amount of $100. Each day an owner continues to refuse to allow a
reflective symbol to be affixed to an electrical meter shall constitute a
separate violation, subject to a separate fine.



(Ord. 2018-18, passed 8-21-2018)



CHAPTER 31:  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY



Section



   31.01   Legislative authority vested in Common Council



   31.02   Councilmanic districts



   31.03   Rules and regulations of Council



   31.04   Adoption of form of city government



   31.05   Fees for audio and video recordings of Common Council
meetings



§ 31.01  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY VESTED IN COMMON COUNCIL.



   The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in Common Council.



(I.C. 36-4-4-4)  (Prior Code, § 32.01)



Statutory reference:



   City legislative body, see I.C. 36-4-6-1 et seq.



§ 31.02  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The term PRECINCTS, as used herein, shall mean and refer to
the precincts in the city as they are comprised by ordinance of the Board of
County Commissioners.



   (B)   The Council districts of the city are hereby established as
follows pursuant to the election by the city of provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-5.



      (1)   The First Council District shall consist of all that
territory south of a line along Nuttman Avenue running east from the
intersection of Nuttman Avenue and Eleventh Street to the intersection of
Nuttman and Eleventh Street to the intersection of Nuttman Avenue and Fifth
Street; thence south along Fifth Street to the intersection of Fifth Street
and Jackson Street; thence east along Jackson Street to the intersection of
Jackson Street and the St. Mary’s River; thence east to the intersection of
Bellmont Road and Monroe Street; thence east along Monroe Street to the
corporate limits of the city; the said territory bounded on the west and
south by a line running south along Eleventh Street commencing at the
intersection of Eleventh Street and Nuttman Avenue to the intersection of
Eleventh Street and Adams Street; thence east running along Adams Street to
the intersection of Adams and First Street; thence easterly along an
extension of Adams Street to the St. Mary’s River; all in the city.



      (2)   The Second Council District shall consist of all that
territory lying south of a line commencing at the intersection of Eleventh
Street and Adams Street; thence east along Adams Street to the intersection
of Adams Street and First Street; thence easterly along as extension of Adams
Street to the St. Mary’s River; the St. Mary’s River being the east
boundary of the Second Council District; said territory bounded on the west
by Eleventh Street south along Eleventh Street to Bollman Street; thence
continuing south along Village Green Drive commencing at the intersection of
Village Green Drive and Bollman Street south along Village Green Drive to the
intersection of Village Green Drive and Winchester Street; all in the city.



      (3)   The Third Council District shall consist of all that
territory lying west of a line commencing at the intersection of the St.
Mary’s River and Thirteenth Street; thence south along Thirteenth Street to
the intersection of Thirteenth Street and Nuttman Avenue; thence east along
Nuttman Avenue to the intersection of Nuttman Avenue and Eleventh Street;
thence south along Eleventh Street to the intersection of Eleventh Street and
Bollman Street; thence continuing south along Village Green Drive commencing
at the intersection of Village Green Drive and Bollman Street south along
Village Green Drive to the intersection of Village Green Drive and Winchester
Street; all in the city.



      (4)   The Fourth Council District shall consist of all that
territory lying north of a line commencing at the intersection of Thirteenth
Street and Nuttman Avenue; thence east along Nuttman Avenue to the
intersection of Nuttman Avenue and Fifth Street; thence south along Fifth
Street to the intersection of Fifth Street and Jackson Street; thence east
along Jackson Street to the intersection of Jackson Street and the St.
Mary’s River; thence east to the intersection of Bellmont Road and Monroe
Street; thence east along Monroe Street to the corporate limits of the city;
said territory bounded on the west by a line commencing at the intersection
of Thirteenth Street and Nuttman Avenue; thence north along Thirteenth Street
to the intersection of Thirteenth Street and St. Mary’s River, and the St.
Mary’s River; all in the city.



   (C)   The above Council districts shall be used in all city
elections commencing 1-1-2013.



   (D)   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall file a copy of this section
with the Clerk of the county and the Secretary of the County Election Board.



(Prior Code, § 32.02)  (Ord. 2002-7, passed - -2002; Ord. 2012-13, passed
10-16-2012)



§ 31.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS OF COUNCIL.



   (A)   Meetings.



      (1)   The regular meetings of the Common Council shall be held
on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 7:30 p.m. at the city hall
in the City Council chamber, 172 N. 2nd Street; provided that, the regular
meetings may be held at a different time and/or place as designated by the
Mayor or any three members of the Common Council; and, provided further that,
each member of the Common Council be notified of the changes in the same
manner as hereinafter required for special meetings. At the hour fixed, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall call the roll of members, noting those present and
those absent. If the Mayor is absent at the time of first roll call, the
presiding officer pro tem shall act as presiding officer at such meetings
until the arrival of the one entitled to preside.



      (2)   Special meetings of the Council may be held upon call
made as follows: by the Mayor or by any three members of the Common Council.
In case of a call for a special meeting, in whatever manner made, it shall be
the duty of the persons authorizing the same to notify the Clerk-Treasurer
thereof and it shall be the duty of that officer to cause notice of such
meetings to be served upon each member and to be served as otherwise required
by law.



   (B)   Presiding officer.



      (1)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum.
The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order subject to an
appeal to the Council.



      (2)   The presiding officer shall appoint all standing
committees as well as special committees that may be ordered by the Council.
All standing committees shall be appointed at the commencement of term of the
Council; provided that, the standing committees shall survive only during the
term of the presiding officer appointing same. He or she shall also fill all
vacancies that may occur in any of said committees.



   (C)   Clerk-Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Clerk-Treasurer
to keep an accurate journal of the proceedings of the Common Council. He or
she shall keep a proper file of all papers and documents of every kind or
character and hold them subject to the orders of the Common Council. He or
she shall arrange a roll call in alphabetical order. It shall be his or her
duty to have all necessary papers delivered to chairpersons of committees
within seven days after the adjournment of any meeting of the Council, which
shall have been referred to the committees.



   (D)   Chief of Police. At the direction of the presiding officer,
the Chief of Police or officer designated by him or her shall preserve order
in the Council room and lobby.



   (E)   Officers and employees. It shall be the duty of all officers
and employees of the city to be present at any stated meeting, upon the
request of the presiding officer.



   (F)   Rules of order.



      (1)   Robert’s Parliamentary Rules shall be  authority on
all questions of parliamentary law and procedure not specifically covered by
these rules.



      (2)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of all members
elected, but no ordinance or resolution shall be passed, or ordinance
engrossed, which shall not have received the votes of a majority of all
members constituting the Council.



      (3)   Upon objection of any member of the Common Council, no
one not a member thereof shall be permitted to address the Council, except on
a majority vote of the members present.



      (4)   The presiding officer shall decide whether any question
is carried by affirmative or negative vote. In cases of a rising vote, those
voting in the affirmative shall first arise and be counted and afterwards
those voting in the negative.



      (5)   The Finance Committee shall be a standing committee
consisting of at least three members of the Common Council and shall be
appointed, as herein provided, by the presiding officer. The duties of the
Finance Committee shall be the same as in legislative bodies, except as
herein modified or changed, and shall include the review of all claims
submitted to the city for payment. All other matters relating to finances of
the city shall be referred to the Committee.



   (G)   Ordinances.



      (1)   Ordinances shall be of three distinct classes:



         (a)   Appropriation ordinances;



         (b)   Special ordinances relating to special matters; and



         (c)   General ordinances relating to the government of
the city.



      (2)   All ordinances shall be read at least once by the City
Attorney and no ordinance shall be passed on the same day, or at the same
meeting, that it is introduced, except by unanimous consent, and then only in
case there are present and voting at least four-fifths of all the
members-elect of the Council.



      (3)   Ordinances, upon introduction, shall be read by short
title, which title shall clearly set forth the subject matter of the
ordinance. After being read the second time, the ordinance is then open for
amendments or for referring to proper committee. After the second reading,
all ordinances shall be ordered engrossed by the Common Council and placed
upon passage, but it shall be proper to include an order for engrossment in a
motion for passage, in which case the proper form of motion shall be as
follows: to “I move Ord.           be ordered engrossed and placed
upon its passage” or “tabled to the next regular meeting”.



      (4)   No amendment, except to strike out, shall be in order
after an ordinance has been ordered engrossed, unless by unanimous consent.
Any ordinance failing to receive a majority of the votes upon order for
engrossment shall be considered as still upon its second reading and awaiting
engrossment, unless stricken from the files or otherwise disposed of by the
Common Council. All votes upon the passage of ordinances and resolutions and
motions to reconsider shall be by roll call.



      (5)   Any ordinance may be stricken from the files at any time
by a vote of four-fifths of all members elected or by a majority vote after
the ordinance shall have passed a second reading.



      (6)   Any ordinance failing to receive a sufficient number of
votes on final passage will be considered as lost and stricken from the
files; provided that, the vote not be reconsidered within the time and manner
authorized by rule under division (I) below.



      (7)   Any amendment to an ordinance may be referred, delayed
or otherwise disposed of without delay or prejudice to the ordinance itself.



      (8)   Ordinances reported back to the Council by the person or
officer to whom the ordinance was returned will take their proper place in
first, second or third reading.



      (9)   Upon call of the roll on any question after any one
member shall have voted, it shall not be in order for any member to offer
remarks, except in explanation of his or her vote; and no explanation shall
be in order under the operation of “the previous question” or “motion
to lay on the table”.



   (H)   Motions.



      (1)   When any motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated
by the presiding officer and shall be entered upon the journal with the names
of the member making it and the member who seconded the meeting.



      (2)   Every motion shall be reduced to writing, except to
adjourn; to adjourn to a day certain; to reconsider the previous question or
the seconding thereof; to lay on the table; to postpone to a certain day; to
postpone indefinitely; to amend; to suspend the rules or to concur; and every
other motion not so reduced to writing shall, upon the objection of any one
member, be considered out of order.



      (3)   When any question is under debate, no motion shall be
received but to lay on the table, for the previous question or to postpone,
which motions shall have preference in the order in which they are herein
arranged.



      (4)   A motion to lay on the table or for the previous
question shall not be in order if prefaced by any speech or remarks.



      (5)   Any motion or resolution which, in effect, contemplates
a violation of law or is in conflict with any ordinance shall be ruled out of
order.



      (6)   A motion to adjourn cannot be repeated unless other
business has intervened between the motions.



      (7)   A motion to adjourn cannot be reconsidered, unless by
unanimous consent of the members present.



      (8)   Any matter laid upon the table may be taken up by a vote
of the Council at any time; provided, a motion to reconsider, once laid upon
the table, cannot be again taken up.



      (9)   A motion to “reconsider” is a privileged question
and is debatable.



   (I)   Reconsideration of questions. When any question has been once
decided in the affirmative or negative, any member voting with the majority
may move to reconsideration thereof on the same or next regular meeting. A
resolution, once adopted, may be rescinded by subsequent resolutions. An
ordinance, once adopted, may be rescinded by subsequent ordinance(s).



   (J)   Previous question. The “previous question” shall be put in
this form, “Shall the main question now be put?” It shall be admitted
only when decided by a majority of the members present and, until decided,
shall preclude all motions or amendments, except the motion to adjourn. If
the motion be sustained, the chair shall at once put the question, first upon
the pending amendments in their order and then upon the main question.



   (K)   Order of business.



      (1)   The following order of business shall be observed by the
Common Council at its meetings:



         (a)   Call meeting to order;



         (b)   Calling of roll;



         (c)   Pledge of allegiance;



         (d)   Reading the correcting journal of preceding
meetings;



         (e)   Old business (including tabled resolutions and
ordinances);



         (f)   New business (including intro- duction of new
resolutions and ordinances);



         (g)   Mayor’s report;



         (h)   Reports from department heads and officers;



         (i)   Comments from Council;



         (j)   Comments from general public;



         (k)   Consideration of claims; and



         (l)   Adjournment.



      (2)   The reading of the journal may be dispensed with at any
time by order of the presiding officer.



      (3)   The Council may order a return to any order of business
after the call of the regular order of business.



      (4)   The chairperson of each standing committee or, in his or
her absence, some delegated member of the committee shall have the privilege
of asking for action upon all matters reported by his or her committee before
reports of other committees are considered, unless a majority of the members
present decide to the contrary.



   (L)   Decorum.



      (1)   Unless recognized by the Chair as having the floor, any
member may speak or deliver any matter to the Council; provided, he or she
shall confine himself or herself to the question in debate and avoid
personality.



      (2)   When two or more members wish to speak at the same time,
the presiding officer shall decide who shall speak first.



      (3)   While the presiding officer is putting a question or
addressing the Council or when any member is speaking, no member shall engage
in any private discourse or walk across or leave the room unnecessarily.



      (4)   No member shall impugn the motives of any other.



      (5)   Any member may change his or her vote before the
announcement of the result by the Chair. Every member must vote upon every
question unless excused from voting by a majority of the members present.



      (6)   If any member, in any way, transgresses the rules of the
Council, the presiding officer may call him or her to order; in which case,
the alleged offender shall immediately yield the floor unless permitted to
explain and proceed.



   (M)   Communications. When the reading of any paper is called for,
if objection be made, the Council shall decide whether the paper shall be
read; and no paper shall be read, if objected to, without the consent of the
Council.



   (N)   Amendments. No matter or proposition on a subject different
from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of an amendment.



   (O)   Postponed matters.



      (1)   When any matter is postponed indefinitely, it shall not
again be voted upon during that or the next two succeeding meetings.



      (2)   Any member may demand the “ayes and nays” upon any
question to be voted upon by the Council and, when such demand is made, the
Clerk- Treasurer shall call the roll.



      (3)   Any member may demand a division of the question when
the question is capable of division.



   (P)   Amending rules. These rules may be amended or annulled by a
majority vote of all members of the Common Council. Any member of the Common
Council may offer an amendment for consideration.



(Prior Code, § 32.03)  (Ord. 1983-4, passed 2-1-1983)  (Amended - -2008;
Amended 4-15-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Majority vote required to pass ordinance, see I.C. 36-4-6-12



   Meetings, see I.C. 36-4-6-7



   Passage of ordinance on day of introduction, see I.C. 36-4-6-13



   Presiding officer, see I.C. 36-4-6-8



   Quorum, see I.C. 36-4-6-10



§ 31.04  ADOPTION OF FORM OF CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   This section applies only to third-class cities having a
population of less than 10,000. The Common Council of such a city may, by
ordinance adopted before 9-1-1982, decide to be governed by this section
instead of I.C. 36-4-6-4. If this section is later repealed, then I.C.
36-4-6-4 again applies to the city. The Clerk-Treasurer of the Common Council
shall send a certified copy of any ordinance adopted under this division (A)
to the Secretary of the County Election Board.



   (B)   (1)   The Common Council shall divide the city into four
districts that:



         (a)   Are composed of contiguous territory;



         (b)   Are reasonably compact; and



         (c)   Contain, as nearly as is possible, equal
population.



      (2)   This division shall be made in 1982, in 1992 and in
2002, and then every ten years after 2002.



   (C)   The Common Council is composed of four members elected from
the districts established under division (B) above and one at-large member.



   (D)   Each voter of a city having a population of 5,000 or more may
vote for one candidate for at-large membership and one candidate from the
district in which he or she resides. The at-large candidate receiving the
most votes from the whole city and the district candidates receiving the most
votes from their respective districts are elected to the legislative body.



   (E)   Each voter of a city having a population of less than 5,000
may vote for one candidate for at-large membership and one candidate from
each of the districts established under division (B) above. The at- large
candidate and the candidate from each district receiving the most votes from
the whole city are elected to the Common Council.



(Prior Code, § 32.04)  (Ord. 1982-8, passed 8-17-1982)



§ 31.05  FEES FOR AUDIO AND VIDEO RECORDINGS OF COMMON COUNCIL MEETING.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a fee for
production of a copy of a combined or merged audio and/or video copy of a
recorded meeting of the Common Council, or such other municipal board or
commission meetings, if recorded.



   (B)   Copy fee. The city shall charge a fee of $25 for each copy of
a combined or merged audio and/or video recording of a meeting recorded by
the city as requested by an individual or organization. The fee must be paid
into the office of the Clerk-Treasurer before the city has an obligation to
honor such request. The fee shall be paid in U.S. dollars by cash, check or
money order. Credit or debit payment shall also be allowed if such means of
payment is available through such office. All fees collected shall be
receipted into the city’s General Fund.



   (C)   Format of copy. The recorded copy purchased shall be in
digital format on a hard disk drive containing a combined or merged audio
and/or video recording of the meeting.



   (D)   Request for a copy of a recording. All requests for a copy of
a recorded meeting, whether for a combined or merged audio copy or a combined
or merged audio and video copy, shall be made in writing and submitted to the
Clerk-Treasurer in person, by e-mail or regular U.S. mail. The request must
include the name, address, phone number and email address of the requesting
party and the particular meeting and date of the meeting for which a
recording is being requested, as well as whether only an audio copy is being
requested or whether an audio and video copy is being requested. Upon payment
of the copy fee, the city shall have a reasonable amount of time to produce
the copy requested, not to exceed two weeks. Once the copy has been produced
by the city and is available at the Clerk-Treasurer office, the
Clerk-Treasurer or his or her deputy shall notify the requesting party by
email of such availability. Such copy may be picked up in person by the
requesting party at the Clerk-Treasurer office. If the requesting party
desires that the copy be delivered by mail, the requesting party shall be
responsible for providing a self addressed, postage prepaid, envelope
sufficiently sized to allow for a hard disk to be mailed to the requesting
party.



   (E)   Refund policy. Once the copy fee has been paid to the city,
such payment is non-refundable, unless due to technical difficulties the
audio and/or video feeds of a meeting did not properly record or audio and/or
video recordings cannot be properly combined or merged. In such case, the
requesting party shall be so notified by the Clerk-Treasurer office and a
full refund shall be mailed to the requesting party within two weeks of such
notification.



(Ord. 2015-4, passed 3-17-2015)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   32.001   Establishment of departments




Police and Fire Departments




   32.015   Auxiliary police



   32.016   Use of fire equipment outside the city limits




City Plan Commission




   32.030   City Plan Commission established



   32.031   Advisory Planning Law




Department of Parks and Recreation




   32.045   Department of Parks and Recreation




Department of Redevelopment




   32.075   Purpose



   32.076   Creation of Commission



   32.077   Special taxing district



   32.078   Appointments



   32.079   Meetings, rules, duties and powers




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 32.001  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS.



   All city departments now in existence, inclusive of, but not by way of
limitation, the Department of Law, Department of Sanitation, Street
Department, Department of Public Works and Safety (Board of Public Works and
Safety) and the Department of Building Code Compliance (Office of Building
and Planning Director) are hereby re-established and re-created in the nature
and form as they exist at the time of the passage of this section, and such
departments shall have the same powers and duties and be subject to the same
authority, restrictions and limitations as such departments are subject to at
the time immediately preceding the passage and adoption of this section, and
any and all sections of the Decatur Code of 2015 are hereby amended in
conformity herewith.



(Prior Code, § 33.01)  (Ord. 1982-9, passed 8-17-1982)




POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS




§ 32.015  AUXILIARY POLICE.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city is authorized
to appoint special police officers to act as an auxiliary police force. The
members of the auxiliary police force shall be subject to the supervision and
direction of the Chief of Police of the city, and they shall be subject to
removal or discharge at any time by the Board of Public Works and Safety,
upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police.



   (B)   (1)   The Chief of Police of the city is made immediate
commanding officer of the auxiliary police force, with power to appoint such
subordinate officers as he or she deems suitable and necessary.



      (2)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is further directed
to require each member, before admission to the auxiliary police force, to
sign and swear to an application setting forth his or her age, description,
residence, occupation and a release by which the applicant releases the city
from all right of action for damages from personal injury and from all loss,
costs, expense and liability, incurred either directly or indirectly through
his or her work as a member of the auxiliary police force, and such other
information as the Board shall deem desirable.



      (3)   Each member of the auxiliary police force shall serve
under the direction of the Chief of Police and his or her subordinate
officers and is required to obey his or her directions.



   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to furnish
each member of the auxiliary police force with a membership card, but no
member of the auxiliary police force shall be construed to be an employee of
the city.



      (2)   Members of the auxiliary police force shall  act
without compensation; provided  that, the Board of Public Works and Safety
may, in its discretion, pay compensation to any member or members of such
auxiliary police force as the Board may deem advisable.



   (D)   Each member of the auxiliary police force, before admission,
shall take and subscribe to the same oath administered to regular police
officers.



(Prior Code, § 33.10)



Statutory reference:



   Special fire and police officers, see I.C. 36-8-3-7



§ 32.016  USE OF FIRE EQUIPMENT OUTSIDE THE CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   The City Fire Department shall respond with sufficient
equipment to mitigate the incident or emergency safely as deemed necessary by
the incident commander, the nature of the call and the availability of
personnel and equipment. The incident commander shall be that person defined
under National Incident Management System regulations.



   (B)   Costs of a response to an incident outside of the city limits
shall be covered under annual contracts entered into by the city and
surrounding townships, except for costs incurred related to the response to a
hazardous spill incident governed under federal law; in which case, the city
shall be entitled to recover its costs related to such response from the
responsible parties.



   (C)   Compensation for volunteer firefighters shall be established
annually by City Council as set forth in the city’s salary ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 33.11)  (Amended - -2008)




CITY PLAN COMMISSION




§ 32.030  CITY PLAN COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   In order to improve the present health, safety, convenience
and welfare of the citizens and to better plan for the future development of
our community to the end that the street and highway systems may be carefully
planned, that the community centers shall grow with adequate highway, street,
utility, health, educational, religious and recreational facilities and
environments, that the needs of agriculture, industry and business may be
recognized along with the future growth of the city, that residential areas
may provide healthy and pleasant surroundings for the family life, and that
the growth of the city may be commensurate with and promotive of more
efficient and economical use of public funds, there shall be and there is
created a Planning Commission for the city, all as provided for by I.C.
36-7-4-200 et seq.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to
the present established boards and officials.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall be composed of nine members,
appointed as follows:



      (1)   One member appointed by the city legislative body from
its membership;



      (2)   One member appointed by the Park Board from its
membership;



      (3)   One member or designated repre- sentative appointed by
the City Works Board;



      (4)   The City Engineer or a qualified assistant appointed by
the City Civil Engineer; and



      (5)   Five citizen members, of whom no more than three may be
of the same political party, appointed by the city executive.



   (D)   The Planning Commission shall have such powers, and do and
perform such duties as are conferred upon planning commissions.



(Prior Code, § 33.20)  (Ord. 2013-2, passed 2-5-2013)



Statutory reference:



   Related provisions, see I.C. 36-7-4-207



§ 32.031  ADVISORY PLANNING LAW.



   The City Advisory Plan Commission, as reorganized, shall continue to
have all statutory authority conferred upon an advisory municipal plan
commission and shall have the right to exercise such planning and zoning
powers as are necessary and appropriate for the development of the city and
surrounding areas.



(Ord. 2013-2, passed 2-5-2013)




DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION




§ 32.045  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   Creation of Department. There is created and established for
the city a Department of Parks and Recreation, consisting of a Park and
Recreation Board, a Superintendent and such other personnel that the Board
determines, established pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-3.



   (B)   Adoption of enabling legislation. I.C. 36-10-3-1 through
36-10-3-39, as such pertains to third-class cities, is hereby adopted by
reference the same as if set out verbatim herein.



   (C)   Board membership. The Park and Recreation Board shall be known
as the “Decatur Park and Recreation Board” and shall consist of four
members to be appointed by the Mayor of the city and two ex- officio members,
those being:



      (1)   A member of the North Adams Community Schools Board of
School Trustees, selected by such body; and



      (2)   A member of the Library Board of the Decatur Public
Library, selected by such body.



   (D)   Initial terms. The terms of the initial appointments to the
Park and Recreation Board shall be as follows.



      (1)   One member appointed by the Mayor shall be for a term of
one year.



      (2)   One member appointed by the Mayor shall be for a term of
two years.



      (3)   One member appointed by the Mayor shall be for a term of
two years.



      (4)   One member appointed by the Mayor shall be for a term of
four years.



      (5)   Terms of ex-officio members shall be for a term of four
years.



   (E)   Term expirations and filling vacancies. As a term expires,
each new appointment will be for a four-year term. All terms will expire on
the first Monday in January, but a member continues in office until his or
her successor is appointed. In making initial appointments, the appointing
authority, in order to provide for continuity of experience, shall give
special consideration to the appointment of members from previous park or
recreation boards. If a vacancy occurs, the appointing authority shall
appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (F)   Salary. The Common Council shall fix the salary of members of
the Park and Recreation Board, not to exceed $300 per year.



   (G)   Powers and duties. The Park and Recreation Board shall have
such powers and duties as are set out in the statute to which reference was
heretofore made and which has been incorporated by reference herein.



   (H)   Meetings and offices. At its first regular meeting in each
year, the Board shall elect a President and a Vice-President. The
Vice-President shall have authority as the President during the absence or
disability of the President.



   (I)   Park Non-reverting fund.



      (1)   There is hereby established a Park Non-Reverting Fund,
whereby expenditures can be made without appropriations for the use of the
City Parks and Recreation Department and the City Parks and Recreation Board.
The moneys of this Fund shall be dispersed only on approved claims.



      (2)   The moneys for this Fund shall be obtained from fees
collected for bus trips provided by an approved bus transportation company
and sponsored by the City Parks and Recreation Department and the City Parks
and Recreation Board.



      (3)   Expenditures from this Fund shall be for bus trips
provided by an approved bus transportation company and sponsored by the City
Parks and Recreation Department and the City Parks and Recreation Board.



   (J)   Parks and Recreation Department Non-Reverting Operating Fund.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this division (J) is to
establish a second non-reverting operating fund for the Parks and Recreation
Department to be used for the purposes hereinafter established.



      (2)   Fund. There is hereby established a Parks and Recreation
Department Non- Reverting Operating Fund for Ball Parks maintenance and
improvements.



      (3)   League fees. Donations for Ball Parks maintenance and
improvements and League fees established by the Parks and Recreation Board
for use of its Ball Parks, upon collection, shall be deposited into the
Non-Reverting Operating Fund established herein.



      (4)   Use of funds. Expenditures can be made from this Fund by
the Parks and Recreation Board, without appropriation, for Ball Parks
maintenance and improvements. The monies of this Fund shall be dispersed only
upon claims approved by the Decatur Parks and Recreation Board.



   (K)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect
on 1-3-1983, and until such time the existing Department of Parks and
Recreation is hereby re-created in its form, at the time of the passage of
this section, and such Department shall have the same powers and duties as
such existing Board has at the time of the passage of this section.



   (L)   Affect on prior contracts and actions. This section shall not
affect, in any manner or means, any rights, privileges, duties or
responsibilities created by the Board of Parks and Recreation in existence at
the time of the passage of this section, whether created by contract or
otherwise, and all such existing rights, privileges, duties and
responsibilities created by such prior Board shall inure to the benefit or
obligation of the Department hereby created.



(Prior Code, § 33.25)  (Ord. 1982-9, passed 8-17-1982; Ord. 2013-11, passed
10-15-2013; Ord. 2015-8, passed 6-16-2015)




DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT




§ 32.075  PURPOSE.



   The Common Council of the city now deems it to be in the best interest
of the city and its citizens to afford a maximum opportunity for
rehabilitation or redevelopment of areas in need of redevelopment by private
enterprise, and the Common Council further deems it to be in the best
interest of the city and its citizens to perform as public and governmental
functions the assessment, planning, replanning, remediation, development and
redevelopment of economic development areas.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 32.076  CREATION OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   In order to further such interests of the city and its
citizens, the Common Council hereby establishes the Department of
Redevelopment of the city.



   (B)   The Department shall be controlled by a Board of five members
known as the “City Redevelopment Commission”.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 32.077  SPECIAL TAXING DISTRICT.



   Pursuant to the Act, all of the territory within the corporate
boundaries of the city will be a special taxing district to be known as the
“Decatur Redevelopment District” for the purpose of levying and
collecting special benefit taxes for redevelopment and economic development
purposes as provided in the Act. The Common Council finds and determines that
all of the taxable property within this special taxing district will be
considered to be benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic
development projects carried out under the Act to the extent of the special
taxes levied under the Act.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 32.078  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the Act, the following appointments shall be made.



      (1)   The Mayor of the city shall appoint three of the five
members of the City Redevelopment Commission.



      (2)   The Common Council of the city shall appoint two of the
five members of the City Redevelopment Commission.



   (B)   The initial City Redevelopment Commission members shall serve
from the date of their appointment until 1-1-2013. Thereafter, members shall
be appointed for one year terms, commencing on January 1 of each year.



   (C)   Each member must be qualified to serve as required under the
Act, shall be bonded and shall take an oath of office in accordance with the
Act.



   (D)   In addition to the member appointments by the Mayor, the Mayor
shall also appoint an individual to serve as a non-voting advisor to the City
Redevelopment Commission. The non-voting advisor shall serve without
compensation, must be a member of the school board of a school corporation
that includes all or part of the territory served by the Redevelopment
Commission and shall serve for a term of two years and until a successor is
appointed.



   (E)   Members of the Redevelopment Commission and the non-voting
advisor serve at the pleasure of the appointing entity and may be summarily
removed from office at any time.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011)



§ 32.079  MEETINGS, RULES, DUTIES AND POWERS.



   In accordance with the Act, the Redevelopment Commission:



   (A)   Shall hold meetings at least annually for the purpose of
organizing and shall meet at such other times as necessary to conduct
business;



   (B)   May adopt rules and by-laws governing the manner in which it
shall conduct business; and



   (C)   Shall carry out the duties required of it under the Act and
may exercise all powers conferred upon it under the Act in order to perform
such duties.



(Ord. 2011-4, passed 6-21-2011)



CHAPTER 33:  CITY FUNDS; FINANCIAL REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   33.001   Accident report account



   33.002   Warrants drawn on city treasury



   33.003   Employee credit cards



   33.004   Payment of claims in advance of allowance



   33.005   Video service franchise fee



   33.006   Bond amounts for certain officers, employees and contractors




Purchasing Policies




   33.015   Purpose



   33.016   Purchasing agencies



   33.017   Purchasing agents



   33.018   Policy



   33.019   Rules for purchases under $150,000



   33.020   Rules for purchases of $150,000 or more



   33.021   Statutory reference



   33.022   Effective date




Fire Vehicle Non-Reverting Fund




   33.035   Establishment



   33.036   Source of moneys



   33.037   Expenditures




Public Employees’ Retirement Fund




   33.050   City’s election to participate



   33.051   City’s contribution



   33.052   Employees covered



   33.053   Positions not covered



   33.054   Beginning date for participation



   33.055   Effective date




Cumulative Capital Development Fund




   33.070   Establishment



   33.071   Ad valorem property tax levy



   33.072   Use of funds



   33.073   Effect of Fund




Police Equipment and Training Fund




   33.085   Fee received for vehicle inspection; receipt issued



   33.086   Fee remitted to Clerk-Treasurer



   33.087   Fund established



   33.088   Use of funds; Chief of Police and Council to approve
disbursements



Local Option Income Tax Public Safety Fund



   33.100   Established



General Fund



   33.110   Uses of the General Fund to promote economic development
and tourism




LOIT Special Distribution Fund




   33.120   Established




Fire Department Non-Reverting Operating Fund




   33.130   Established




Train Depot and Ancillary Railroad Structures Non-Reverting Operating Fund




   33.140   Established




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 33.001  ACCIDENT REPORT ACCOUNT.



   (A)   In all instances where a police officer of the city prepares a
written accident report, pursuant to I.C. 9-3-1-3, any applicant requesting a
photocopy of the report shall pay, to the city, a fee of $8 for each report,
which shall be collected by the Police Department.



   (B)   The Police Department shall issue a receipt for each fee
collected.



   (C)   Each fee collected shall be deposited in a separate account
known as the “Accident Report Account”.



   (D)   Pursuant to I.C. 9-3-1-3, the funds so deposited may be
expended at the discretion of the Chief of Police for any department purpose
reasonably related to the keeping of accident reports and records or the
prevention of street and highway accidents.



(Prior Code, § 34.40)  (Ord. 1988-10, passed 5-17-1988)  (Amended
7-29-2008)



§ 33.002  WARRANTS DRAWN ON CITY TREASURY.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3-5 (Home Rule Legislative Authority), the Common
Council does hereby authorize the Mayor, as the Fiscal Officer of the city,
to draw warrants on the city treasury for miscellaneous city expenditures not
made under the discretion of a department and not specifically fixed by
statute.



(Prior Code, § 34.20)  (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-1984)



§ 33.003  EMPLOYEE CREDIT CARDS.



   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer, as the financial officer of the
city, is authorized to establish a credit card account in the name of the
City of Decatur, Indiana with a financial institution under terms and
conditions deemed acceptable by the city Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   Individual account credit cards may be issued to employees of
the following city departments:



      (1)   City of Decatur Fire Department;



      (2)   City of Decatur Police Department;



      (3)   City of Decatur Utilities Department;



      (4)   City of Decatur Mayor's Department;



      (5)   City of Decatur Building/Planning Department; and



      (6)   City of Decatur Public Works Department.



      (7)   No more than four individual account credit cards may be
issued to employees within each department.



   (C)   Issuance of an individual account credit card to a department
employee shall not be permitted unless and until such employee executes a
credit card use agreement on file in the city Clerk-Treasurer's office. 
Such agreement identifies that use of an account credit card shall be limited
to business purposes authorized by the city. Such agreement further exposes
the employee to personal liability for misuse of an account credit card
issued to such employee and establishes city remedies in the event of misuse.
Under such agreement, unauthorized use or misuse of an account credit card by
an employee shall result in such employee being held personally liable for
such charges, ancillary charges related thereto such as interest and
penalties, and any costs of enforcement and collection, including but not
limited to reasonable attorney fees. In the agreement, the city reserves the
right to unilaterally revoke the employee's use of the city's line of credit
at any time upon delivery to the employee of written notice of revocation
signed by the city Clerk-Treasurer. In the event an employee's use of an
account credit card is so revoked or in the event the employee's employment
with the city, Indiana is terminated for any reason, such account credit card
issued to such employee shall be immediately surrendered to the city
Clerk-Treasurer's office. Upon delivery of revocation or termination of
employment, such employee shall be prohibited from further use of the city's
line of credit.



   (D)   An employee who is issued an account credit card may use such
card for permitted business travel expenses identified in the city's Employee
Handbook regarding meetings, conferences and conventions, regarding mileage,
parking and tolls, regarding meals, regarding lodging and regarding airfare.
In addition, use of an account credit card may be made by an employee for
additional, limited on-line business purchases if pre-approved by the city
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (E)   A claim filed by an employee with the Common Council of the
city in connection with use of an account credit card must be itemized as
provided in I.C. 5-11-10 and timely submitted for Common Council
consideration, approval and payment by the city. If a claim is not itemized
or properly documented by an employee and is rejected or denied by the Common
Council, the employee shall be personally responsible for payment of the
claim until such time as the claim is resubmitted with proper itemization or
documentation. If any interest or penalty is incurred due to a claim being
rejected or denied because the claim is inadequately itemized or due to late
filing for timely consideration by the Common Council to avoid interest or
late charges being assessed to the city under its agreement with a financial
institution, the employee shall be personally liable for any such interest or
penalty charged to the city arising from such employee's use of the city's
line of credit.



   (F)   In addition to any remedies available to the city under the
credit card use agreement in the event of unauthorized use or misuse of an
account credit card by an employee, such employee may be subject to
disciplinary action pursuant to the city's Employee Handbook.



   (G)   The city Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to seek an account line
of credit of up to $50,000 with the financial institution selected by the
city Clerk-Treasurer. Each individual credit card issued to an employee as an
authorized city card holder shall have an individual number assigned to such
employee and shall have a maximum limit of $2,000 against said line of
credit. Upon recommendation by the city Clerk-Treasurer and consent of the
financial institution, the maximum line of credit or the limit per card, as
herein established, may be adjusted from time to time by a resolution of the
Common Council.



   (H)   Credit card use agreement. The credit card use agreement on
file in the city Clerk-Treasurer's office, which must be executed by an
employee before an account credit card may be issued to such employee and
before such employee is authorized to charge permitted expenses against the
city's line of credit, is attached to Ord. 2018-8 as Exhibit "A." The city
Clerk-Treasurer shall have the right to amend or modify such agreement from
time to time as may be necessary or appropriate, subject to approval of the
Common Council of the city by resolution. In the event such agreement is
amended or modified, each employee who has been issued an account credit card
shall be obligated to sign the amended or modified agreement in order to
continue to have the right to use the account credit card issued to him or
her.



(Prior Code, § 34.50)  (Ord. 2004-18, passed 11-16-2004; Ord. passed
2-7-2010; Ord. 2018-8, passed 4-17-2018)



§ 33.004  PAYMENT OF CLAIMS IN ADVANCE OF ALLOWANCE.



   (A)   The City Clerk-Treasurer may make claim payments in advance of
Common Council allowance for the following kinds of expenses:



      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United
States government, its agencies or its political subdivisions;



      (2)   License or permit fees;



      (3)   Insurance premiums;



      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;



      (5)   General grant programs where advance funding is not
prohibited and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the
amount advanced;



      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;



      (7)   Maintenance of service agreements;



      (8)   Leases or rental agreements;



      (9)   Bond or coupon payments;



      (10)   Payroll;



      (11)   State or federal taxes;



      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency
circumstances; and



      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance.



   (B)   Each payment of expenses under this section must be supported
by a fully itemized invoice or bill and certification by the City
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   The Common Council shall review and allow the claim at its
next regular or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the
expense.



(Ord. 2013-5, passed 7-1-2013)



§ 33.005  VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   This section is to clarify and establish an uniform video
franchise fee to be paid by all current and future holders of video franchise
certificates issued by the Indiana Utilities Regulatory Commission which
authorize providing video services within the city.



   (B)   A 3% video franchise fee shall be paid, in the manner and as
determined pursuant to I.C. 8-1-34, to the city by a holder of a franchise
certificate issued by the Indiana Utilities Regulatory Commission which
authorizes the holder to provide video services to customers within the city
limits.



   (C)   Nothing shall be construed to relieve holders of franchise
certificates issued by the Indiana Utilities Regulatory Commission from
paying a 3% franchise fee to the city for quarterly periods such holders
provided video services within the city prior to the effective date of this
section, as such holders were obligated to pay a 3% fee prior to this section
by virtue of the sole franchise agreement existing on July 1, 2006.



(Ord. 2014-3, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 33.006  BOND AMOUNTS FOR CERTAIN OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the
amount of a surety bond to be posted for the City Clerk-Treasurer, for each
Deputy Clerk-Treasurer, for the Utilities Director, for each Utilities Clerk,
for each Redevelopment Commission member, and for the Police Pension and Fire
Pension secretaries. This section is further adopted for the purpose of
authorizing the use of a blanket surety bond to bond all other officers,
employees and contractors of the city, whose official duties require that
they be bonded by law, and to establish a bond amount to be posted by such
individuals.



   (B)   Separate bonds and bond amounts.



      (1)   Each position identified in this section shall post an
individual surety bond in the amount set forth herein:



         (a)   Clerk-Treasurer: $300,000.



         (b)   Deputy Clerk- Treasurer: $30,000.



         (c)   Utilities Director: $30,000.



         (d)   Utilities Clerk: $30,000.



         (e)   Redevelopment Commission member: $15,000.



         (f)   Police Pension secretary: $10,000.



         (g)   Fire Pension secretary: $10,000.



      (2)   Surety bonds required for such positions shall be
secured annually for a one year term, commencing January 1 of each year. Such
bonds shall be endorsed to include faithful performance of duties.



   (C)   Authorized use of blanket surety bond. The remaining officers,
employees and contractors of the city required to be bonded by law, shall be
bonded by the use of a blanket surety bond which is endorsed to include
faithful performance of duties and includes aggregate coverage sufficient to
provide coverage amounts for all such officers, employees, commission members
and contractors who are required to file a bond pursuant to I.C. 5-4-1, which
blanket surety bond is hereby authorized and approved. Such bond shall be
secured annually for a one year term, commencing January 1 of each year.



   (D)   Aggregate amount of blanket surety bond. The aggregate amount
of the blanket surety bond authorized in division (C) per person is $5,000.



   (E)   Terms of surety bonds and filing requirements. The surety
bonds and blanket surety bonds required under divisions (B) and (C) above
shall contain such terms and conditions as may be required under I.C.
5-4-1-5.1 and I.C. 5-4-1-18, Such surety bonds and blanket surety bond shall
be filed with the Adams County Recorder and the Indiana State Board of
Accounts as required by law.



(Ord. 2015-17, passed 12-1-2015)




PURCHASING POLICIES




§ 33.015  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to exercise authority conferred upon
the city pursuant to I.C. 5-22.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)



§ 33.016  PURCHASING AGENCIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-22-2-25, the City Board of Public Works and
Safety and the City Parks Board are hereby established as the purchasing
agencies for the city.



   (B)   The City Parks Board is hereby established to serve as the
purchasing agency for the Parks Department.



   (C)   The City Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby
established to serve as the purchasing agency for all other city departments.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008; Ord. 2013-14, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 33.017  PURCHASING AGENTS.



   Pursuant to I.C. 5-22-2-26, city department heads are hereby
established as purchasing agents for the city.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)



§ 33.018  POLICY.



   Pursuant to this subchapter, it is the policy of the city to simplify
and expedite the purchase of supplies and services, while at the same time
promoting overall economy and encouraging competition in satisfying the needs
of the city.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)



§ 33.019  RULES FOR PURCHASES UNDER $150,000.



   For purchases under $150,000, a purchasing agent is hereby authorized
to purchase supplies, as defined in I.C. 5-22-2-38, or to purchase services,
as defined in I.C. 5-22-2-30 in accordance with the purchasing requirements
identified in Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified herein;
provided, however, when there exists, under emergency conditions, a threat to
public health, welfare or safety, and appropriated funds exist, a purchasing
agent may purchase reasonably necessary supplies or services pursuant to I.C.
5-22-10-4(a), notwithstanding the purchasing requirements set forth in
Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance codified herein.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008; Ord. 2008-9, passed 11-3-2008)



§ 33.020  RULES FOR PURCHASES OF $150,000 OR MORE.



   If the purchase of supplies or services, as defined above, is expected
by the purchasing agent to be $150,000 or more, and appropriated funds exist
for such purchase, the purchasing agent shall purchase such supplies or
services pursuant to competitive bidding following the procedure set forth in
I.C. 5-22-7, unless the purchasing agency authorizes an online auction
pursuant to I.C. 5-22-7.5 and I.C. 4-13-17-4; unless the purchasing agency
authorizes seeking requests for proposals pursuant to I.C. 5-22-9; or unless
emergency conditions exist, in which case the purchasing agent is authorized
to make a special purchase pursuant to I.C. 5-22-10, if such purchase is
reasonably necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)



§ 33.021  STATUTORY REFERENCE.



   Reference hereinabove to the “Indiana Code” shall be understood to
mean the statutory language currently in effect as well as any amendments or
recodifications thereto as hereinafter enacted into law.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)



§ 33.022  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be effective immediately upon its passage,
approval by the Mayor and publication as may be required by law.



(Ord. 2008-5, passed 7-15-2008)




FIRE VEHICLE NON-REVERTING FUND




§ 33.035  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A fund is hereby established as the “Fire Vehicle Non-Reverting
Fund”.



(Ord. 2013-3, passed 6-4-2013)



§ 33.036  SOURCE OF MONEYS.



   The source of moneys for this Fund shall be collections from township
fire contracts.



(Ord. 2013-3, passed 6-4-2013)



§ 33.037  EXPENDITURES.



   Expenditures from this Fund shall be for fire vehicles only for the
City Fire Department and shall be dispersed only on approved claims.



(Ord. 2013-3, passed 6-4-2013)




PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND




§ 33.050  CITY’S ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE.



   The city hereby elects to become a participant in the Public
Employees’ Retirement Fund, as established by I.C. 5-10.3-1-1 et seq.



(Prior Code, § 34.01)



§ 33.051  CITY’S CONTRIBUTION.



   The city agrees to make the required contributions under the Public
Employees’ Retirement Fund Act, commonly designated as “The Indiana
Public Employee Social Security Integration and Supplemental Retirement
Benefits Act”.



(Prior Code, § 34.02)



§ 33.052  EMPLOYEES COVERED.



   The following are declared to be covered by the Fund: all full time
employees of the civil city, including elected officials, but excepting
officers and members of the Police and Fire Departments who are covered by
either the Police Pension Fund or the Firemen’s Pension Fund.



(Prior Code, § 34.03)



§ 33.053  POSITIONS NOT COVERED.



   It is hereby declared that none of the classifications or positions
specified in § 33.052 of this chapter are compensated on a fee basis, are of
an emergency nature or are in a part-time category.



(Prior Code, § 34.04)



§ 33.054  BEGINNING DATE FOR PARTICIPATION.



   The active participating membership of the city shall begin on 1-1-1971.



(Prior Code, § 34.05)



§ 33.055  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from date of
passage, approval by the Mayor and approval by the Board of Trustees of the
Public Employees’ Retirement Fund of the state.



   (B)   Active participation membership shall begin on the date set
forth in § 33.054 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 34.06)




CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND




§ 33.070  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby re-established a City Cumulative Capital Development
Fund.



(Prior Code, § 34.10)  (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. 1985-3, passed
5-21-1985; Ord. 2004-8, passed 7-20-2004; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-7-17) 
(Amended 2-17-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Cumulative Capital Development Funds, see I.C. 6-7-1-31.1



§ 33.071  AD VALOREM PROPERTY TAX LEVY.



   (A)   An ad valorem property tax levy shall be imposed and the
revenues from the levy shall be retained in the City Cumulative Capital
Development Fund.



   (B)   The maximum rate of levy under division (A) above shall not
exceed $0.0500 per $100 assessed valuation for 2018 and thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 33.11)  (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. 1985-3, passed
5-21-1985; Ord. 2004-8, passed 7-20-2004; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-7-17) 
(Amended 2-17-2010)



§ 33.072  USE OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund shall be used for all purposes authorized and described in I.C. 36-8-14,
36-9-16-2, 36-9-16-3, 36-9-16.5, 36-9-17, 36-9-26, 36-10-3-21 and 36-10-4-36.



   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, funds accumulated in the
Cumulative Capital Development Fund may be spent for purposes other than the
purposes stated in division (A) above if the purpose is to protect the public
health, welfare or safety in an emergency situation which demands immediate
action. Money may be spent under the authority of this section only after the
Mayor of the city issues a declaration that the public health, welfare or
safety is in immediate danger that requires the expenditure of money in said
Fund.



(Prior Code, § 34.12)  (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. 1985-3, passed
5-21-1985; Ord. 2004-8, passed 7-20-2004; Am. Ord. 2017-5, passed 6-7-2017)



§ 33.073  EFFECT OF FUND.



   This Fund takes effect upon approval of the Department of Local
Government Finance.



(Prior Code, § 34.13)  (Ord. 1984-9, passed 8-21-1984; Ord. 1985-3, passed
5-21-1985; Ord. 2004-8, passed 7-20-2004; Ord. 2017-05, passed 6-7-17)



POLICE EQUIPMENT AND
TRAINING FUND



§ 33.085  FEE RECEIVED FOR VEHICLE INSPECTION; RECEIPT ISSUED.



   (A)   A fee is established in the amount of $5 per vehicle for the
inspection by law enforcement officers of the Police Department for the
inspection of certificates of title for motor vehicles and the certification
of the correct VIN number, as required by law.



   (B)   The officer shall issue a receipt for each fee collected to
the person or firm paying the fee imposed.



(Prior Code, § 34.30)  (Ord. 1988-13, passed 6-7-1988)



§ 33.086  FEE REMITTED TO CLERK- TREASURER.



   (A)   Each fee collected shall be promptly remitted to the
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an official receipt for
remittance specifying on such receipt the number of general receipts and the
amount for each.



(Prior Code, § 34.31)  (Ord. 1988-13, passed 6-7-1988)



§ 33.087  FUND ESTABLISHED.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall receipt the fees to a fund, which shall be
deposited in a special fund established and known as the “Local Law
Enforcement Continuing Education Fund”.



(Prior Code, § 34.32)  (Ord. 1988-13, passed 6-7-1988)



§ 33.088  USE OF FUNDS; CHIEF OF POLICE AND COUNCIL TO APPROVE
DISBURSEMENTS.



   (A)   The Common Council must appropriate the money collected from
the inspection fees only for law enforcement purposes.



   (B)   All disbursements from the funds shall be on the
recommendation of the Chief of Police with the approval of the Common Council.



(Prior Code, § 34.33)  (Ord. 1988-13, passed 6-7-1988)



LOCAL OPTION INCOME TAX PUBLIC SAFETY FUND



§ 33.100  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Local Option Income Tax (LOIT) Public Safety Fund for the
City of Decatur is hereby established into which all funds received by the
City of Decatur as a result of the Adams County Indiana, Local Option Income
Tax (LOIT) for public safety shall be transferred.



   (B)   The LOIT Public Safety Fund is subject to the same
appropriation process as all other funds receiving tax money. Prior to making
an appropriation from the LOIT Public Safety Fund, the Common Council shall
make a finding that the proposed use of the LOIT Public Safety Fund is
consistent with the intent of the Fund for the purpose of public safety as
defined in I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-25, as amended.



   (C)   In any fiscal year, the city may transfer in accord with any
statutory requirements for the LOIT Fund.



(Ord. 2015-10, passed 8-4-2015)



GENERAL FUND



§ 33.110  USES OF THE GENERAL FUND TO PROMOTE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND
TOURISM.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the use
of the city’s General Fund to promote economic development and tourism
within the city, pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3 and I.C. 36-7-2-7.



   (B)   Authorization. The Common Council hereby authorizes the
budgeting and appropriation of funds from the General Fund to pay the expense
of or to reimburse city officials for expenses incurred in promoting the best
interests of the city.



   (C)   Expenses. Expenses incurred in promoting the best interests of
the city may include, but are not necessarily limited to, rental of meeting
places, meals, decorations, memorabilia, awards, expenses incurred in
promoting industrial, commercial and residential development, expenses
incurred in developing relations with other units of government, expenses
related to community promotion, community events and festivals, expenses
related to the recognition of individuals or organizations for their
community service, and any other expenses of a civic or governmental nature
deemed by the Mayor or Common Council to be in the best interests of the city.



   (D)   Budgeting of funds. From year to year, Common Council may
budget and appropriate city general funds to pay expenses set forth above
incurred in the promotion of economic development and tourism within the
city. Such budget and appropriation shall be identified in the city’s
annual budget and shall be included in either the Mayor’s budget or Common
Council’s budget, or in both.



   (E)   Approval of use of budgeted funds. The Mayor may recommend
payment of expenses incurred or to be incurred in the promotion of economic
development and tourism within the city from funds budgeted and appropriated,
whether within the Mayor’s budget or Common Council’s budget, subject to
Common Council approval of submitted claims for payment or reimbursement.



(Ord. 2015-14, passed 10-20-2015)



LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND



§ 33.120  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a LOIT
Special Distribution Fund for the city and is to allocate the one-time 2016
LOIT Special Distribution between said fund and the City's Rainy Day Fund.



   (B)   Establishment of fund. The Decatur LOIT Special Distribution
Fund, fund 257, is hereby created and established to receipt and account for
that portion of the 2016 LOIT Special Distribution which is restricted for
infrastucture use.



   (C)   Allocation of distribution. Upon receipt of the LOIT Special
Distribution from the Adams County Auditor, the City Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby directed to deposit 75% of said distribution into fund 257, the City's
LOIT Special Distribution Fund, to be used for infrastructure and is further
hereby directed to deposit the remaining 25% of said distribution into the
City's Rainy Day Fund to be used as appropriated by the Common Council.



(Ord. 2016-4, passed 5-17-2016)



FIRE DEPARTMENT
NON-REVERTING OPERATING FUND



§ 33.130  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a
second non-reverting operating fund for the Decatur Fire Department to be
used for the purposes hereinafter established.



   (B)   Fund. There is hereby established a Decatur Fire Department
Non-Reverting Smoke Detector Fund for collecting donations and expenditures
for smoke detectors.



   (C)   Donations. Donations for smoke detectors shall be deposited
into the Non-Reverting Operating Fund.



   (D)   Use of funds. Expenditures can be made from this fund by the
city, without appropriation, for the purchases of smoke detectors. The monies
of this fund shall be dispersed only upon claims approved by the Common
Council of the City of Decatur.



(Ord. 2016-13, passed 9-20-2016)



TRAIN DEPOT AND ANCILLARY RAILROAD STRUCTURES
NON-REVERTING OPERATING FUND



§ 33.140  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a
non-reverting operating fund for the Decatur Train Depot and Ancillary
Railroad Structures to be used for the purposes hereinafter established.



   (B)   Fund. There is hereby established a Decatur Train Depot
Non-Reverting Operating Fund for construction, maintenance, repairs and
improvements to the Decatur Train Depot and Ancillary Railroad Structures.



   (C)   Rental fees. Rental fees established by the Decatur Common
Council for use of its Train Depot or any Ancillary Railroad Structures, and
donations towards said improvements, upon collection, shall be deposited into
the Train Depot Non-Reverting Operating Fund established herein.



   (D)   Use of funds. Expenditures can be made from this fund by the
Common Council of the City of Decatur, without appropriation, for
construction, maintenance, repairs and improvements to the Decatur Train
Depot and Ancillary Railroad Structures. The monies of this fund shall be
dispersed only upon claims approved by the Decatur Common Council.



(Ord. 2016-17, passed 11-1-2016)



CHAPTER 34:  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS



Section



   34.001   Purpose



   34.002   Findings



   34.003   Mission



   34.004   Objectives



   34.005   Standards



   34.006   Principles



   34.007   Internal control system



   34.008   Safeguard of assets



   34.009   Materiality threshold



   34.010   Internal Control Committee



   34.011   Parties subject to compliance



   34.012   Training



   34.013   Designation of those to be trained



   34.014   Duties of Internal Control Committee



   34.015   Cooperation required



   34.016   Effect of non-compliance by employee



   34.017   Effect of non-compliance by official



§ 34.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish internal control standards
and procedures for the city, for the purpose of requiring appropriate
training of personnel regarding such standards and procedure, for the purpose
of adopting a policy regarding such standards and procedures; and for the
purpose of establishing a materiality threshold.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.002  FINDINGS.



   The above recitations are adopted as findings of the Common Council.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.003  MISSION.



   The city further finds that its mission as related to an internal
control system is as follows:



   (A)   Provision of a democratic governmental structure at the
grassroots level;



   (B)   Provision of services as determined through the political
process including but not limited to police and fire protection, access to
city utilities (water, stormwater, sanitary sewer), sanitation services,
parks and park programs, and pursuit of economic development;



   (C)   Promotion of government efficiency, accountability,
reliability and transparency; and



   (D)   Promotion of safeguards to reduce the risk of loss due to
fraud, waste, abuse, mismanagement or errors.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.004  OBJECTIVES.



   The city finds that its interrelated and often overlapping objectives
as related to internal control systems are as follows:



   (A)   Operations objectives which involve the ways governmental
services are performed and the performance of those providing governmental
services including by way of example budgeting, purchasing, permitting, cash
management and planning among others.



   (B)   Reporting objectives which involve the filing of financial and
non-financial information to those inside the government and those outside of
the government including by way of example filing the annual report, audit
and examination cooperation, filing uniform conflict of interest forms and
the other filings with any governmental agency or official or information
required to be kept such as an OSHA log and responding to a public records
request among others.



   (C)   Compliance objectives involve the adherence to law and
regulations including by way of example following guidance documents such as
the State Board of Accounts' manuals, bulletins, directives and the
Department of Local Government Finance's forms and directions and including
other outside of government trainings and documents such as IACT among others.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.005  STANDARDS.



   The city adopts and directs the minimum level of control standards and
internal control procedures for an internal control system that includes the
following five standards to promote government accountability and
transparency as described in the Uniform Internal Control Standards for
Indiana Political Subdivisions guidance document from the State Board of
Accounts dated September 2015 and as thereafter modified:



   (A)   Control environment;



   (B)   Risk assessment;



   (C)   Control activities;



   (D)   Information and communication; and



   (E)   Monitoring.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.006  PRINCIPLES.



   The city adopts and directs the following principles in explanation of
the pertinent standards above be followed at all levels of the city
government:



   (A)   Control environment.



      (1)   The Internal Control Committee, hereinafter named, City
Department Heads and the Common Council, as the fiscal body of the city,
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "Management") demonstrate a
commitment to integrity and ethical values.



      (2)   The Internal Control Committee oversees the city's
internal control system, while the Clerk Treasurer, as the chief fiscal
officer of the city, shall implement and manage the internal control policies
and procedures.



      (3)   Management establishes an organizational structure,
assigns responsibility and delegates authority to achieve the city's
objectives.



      (4)   Management demonstrates a commitment to attract, develop
and retain competent individuals.



      (5)   Management evaluates performance and holds individuals
accountable for their internal control responsibilities.



   (B)   Risk assessment.



      (1)   Management defines objectives clearly to enable the
identification of risks and defines risk tolerances.



      (2)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to risk
related to achieving the defined objectives.



      (3)   Management considers the potential for fraud when
identifying, analyzing and responding to risks.



      (4)   Management identifies, analyzes and responds to
significant changes that could impact the internal control system.



   (C)   Control activities.



      (1)   Management designs control activities to achieve
objectives and respond to risks.



      (2)   Management designs the city's information system and
related control activities to achieve objectives and respond to risks.



      (3)   Management implements control activities through
policies.



   (D)   Information and Communication.



      (1)   Management uses quality information to achieve the
city's objectives.



      (2)   Management internally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the city's objectives.



      (3)   Management externally communicates the necessary quality
information to achieve the city's objectives.



   (E)   Monitoring.



      (1)   Management establishes and operates monitoring
activities to monitor the internal control system and evaluate the results.



      (2)   Management remediates identified internal control
deficiencies on a timely basis.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.007  INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM.



   The city adopts the internal control standards above so as to establish
an effective internal control system for the city through its design,
implementation and operation.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.008  SAFEGUARD OF ASSETS.



   The city directs that the above standards be used to design, implement,
operate and modify current operations, reporting and compliance objectives
that will safeguard the assets of the city, promote reliability,
accountability and transparency of financial and non-financial information
and to assure compliance with laws and regulations for each office,
department and personnel (as defined below) for an effective and reasonable
internal control system of the city.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.009  MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.



   The city hereby establishes and adopts a materiality threshold of $500
for purposes of the internal control procedures adopted and approved herein.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.010  INTERNAL CONTROL COMMITTEE.



   The city authorizes the Internal Control Committee of the city,
consisting of the Mayor, Clerk Treasurer and a representative of the City
Common Council, together with City Department Heads, to review the current
internal control system of the city and recommend to the City Common Council
for adoption a policy for the future internal control system to be effective
after June 30, 2016, and perform an annual review, or more if determined
necessary for compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.011  PARTIES SUBJECT TO COMPLIANCE.



   The personnel, whether an official or employee, of the city whose
official duties include receiving, processing, depositing, disbursing, or
otherwise having access to funds that belong to the federal government, state
government, a political subdivision, or another governmental entity shall
comply with these minimum internal control standards and procedures and any
other policy regarding standards and procedures determined necessary by the
city now and as modified in the future.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.012  TRAINING.



   The personnel of the city whose official duties include receiving,
processing, depositing, disbursing, or otherwise having access to funds that
belong to the federal government, state government, a political subdivision,
or another governmental entity shall be trained at least once during a
calendar year and annually thereafter, unless on leave status, on the minimum
internal control standards and procedures determined necessary by the city
and shall cooperate with the city fiscal officer or designee so that the
fiscal officer can timely certify to the State Board of Accounts that the
training was received annually by the personnel as provided by law.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.013  DESIGNATION OF THOSE TO BE TRAINED.



   The city authorizes the Internal Control Committee of the city to
determine the position and person who are the personnel referred to in §§
34.009 and 34.010 above and notify such personnel.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.014 DUTIES OF INTERNAL CONTROL COMMITTEE.



   The Internal Control Committee shall perform all the internal controls
system activities/duties, including the development of an internal control
systems policy.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.015  COOPERATION REQUIRED.



   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the city are
hereby directed to abide by and to cooperate fully in the implementation of
the internal control system of the city.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.016  EFFECT OF NON-COMPLIANCE BY EMPLOYEE.



   An employee who fails to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the Internal Control System
commits a violation of and may result in the discipline, including
termination, of the employee.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



§ 34.017  EFFECT OF NON-COMPLIANCE BY AN OFFICIAL.



   An elected or appointed official of the city who fails to abide by or
cooperate with the implementation and the mandated certifications of the
Internal Control System may be subject to any action allowed by law.



(Ord. 2016-05, passed 6-7-2016)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WORKS FACILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS



      51.   SANITATION SERVICE AND REGULATIONS



      52.   STORM WATER REGULATIONS



      53.   WATER



      54.   SEWERS



      55.   KOOS DITCH TRUNK SANITARY SEWER



CHAPTER 50:  CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WORKS FACILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   General




Policy




   50.15   Streets, curbs and alleys



   50.16   Walks



   50.17   Street lights



   50.18   Storm sewers



   50.19   Sanitary sewers



   50.20   Water lines




Procedure for Requesting the Construction of Public Improvements




   50.35   Petition to Board of Works



   50.36   Review by Board of Works



   50.37   Vote by property owners



Procedure for Billing for City Services



   50.40   Billing



   50.41   Notice and remedy in event of non- payment




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  GENERAL.



   (A)   It is the basic position of the city that public works
facilities and improvements, hereinafter defined as streets, curbs, alleys,
walks, street lights, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water lines, shall be
constructed for the convenience of the properties that said public works
facilities serve. Furthermore, that the cost of constructing said public
works facilities shall be the primary responsibility of those properties
receiving the benefit from such facilities and such facilities shall be
constructed according to city specifications. It is not the policy of the
city to provide these public works facilities for any property or at any
location at no cost to the properties receiving the benefit from said
facilities.



(Prior Code, § 49.01)



   (B)   A developer or owner shall be responsible for obtaining all
required permits and approvals related to the design and construction of
public works facilities and improvements. No such facilities or improvements
shall be deemed transferred to the city until such time as the facilities and
improvements have been constructed, dedicated to the city and accepted by the
city. In addition, no such facilities and improvements may be constructed
within the city’s rights-of-way or easements without the prior written
approval of the city.



(Amended 11-25-2008)




POLICY




§ 50.15  STREETS, CURBS AND ALLEYS.



   Each property owner and/or property developer receiving the service and
use of streets, curbs and alleys shall pay on a pro rata share cost basis for
the initial improvement or construction of these public works facilities.
Once constructed and accepted by the city, the city shall be responsible for
routine and periodic maintenance. The city will use, wherever possible, motor
vehicle highway, local roads and streets or other funds or taxes for the
maintenance and, when appropriate, reconstruction of improved streets, curbs
and alleyways.



(Prior Code, § 49.20)



§ 50.16  WALKS.



   (A)   The cost and installation of sidewalks shall be the
responsibility of the underlying property owner. Furthermore, all property
owners are responsible for maintenance of the walks.



   (B)   Developers of all sites, including developers of new
subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and apartments, are responsible for the
cost and installation of sidewalks.



(Prior Code, § 49.21)  (Amended 11-25-2008)



§ 50.17  STREET LIGHTS.



   (A)   The city may provide street lighting as funds permit in a
standard street lighting form. These shall be single alley or street lights
installed on the city’s standard poles with overhead wiring. If any
property owner or owners should desire to have ornamental lighting in lieu of
the standard lighting, they shall then be required to pay the increased cost.



   (B)   Developers of all sites, including developers of new
subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and apartments, are responsible for the
cost and installment of street lighting.



(Prior Code, § 49.22)  (Amended 11-25-2008)



§ 50.18  STORM SEWERS.



   (A)   Storm sewers shall be designed and constructed to serve the
watershed area. The cost of storm sewers shall be prorated over the
benefitted property owners in a manner consistent with the Barrett Law or
other assessment procedures provided by state statute to the city. The city
will seek federal and state funding where possible to assist in these costs.



   (B)   Developers of all sites, including developers of new
subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and apartments, are responsible for the
cost and installation of storm sewers.



(Prior Code, § 49.23)  (Amended 11-25-2008)



§ 50.19  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   Sanitary sewers will be available to be extended for the
benefit to serve additional properties. The cost shall be prorated to the
property owners in a manner consistent with the Barrett Law or other
assessment procedures provided by state statute to the city. The city will
also seek federal and state funding where possible to assist in these costs.



   (B)   Developers of all sites, including developers of new
subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and apartments, are responsible for the
cost and installation of sanitary sewers.



(Prior Code, § 49.24)  (Amended 11-25-2008)



§ 50.20  WATER LINES.



   (A)   Water lines will be available to be extended for all benefit
to serve additional properties. The cost shall be prorated to the property
owners in a manner consistent with the Barrett Law or other assessment
procedures provided by state statute to the city. The city will also seek
federal and state funding where possible to assist in these costs.



   (B)   Developers of all sites, including developers of new
subdivisions, multi-family dwellings and apartments, are responsible for the
cost and installation of water lines, fire hydrants and water taps, as
approved by the Plan Commission and/or Board of Works.



(Prior Code, § 49.25)  (Amended 9-16-2008; Amended 11-25-2008)




PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING THE CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS




§ 50.35  PETITION TO BOARD OF WORKS.



   Whenever a property owner or owners should desire the construction of
public improvements, they shall first petition the Board of Works. This
petition shall clearly state the type of public improvements desired, their
location and shall be signed by the property owners making such a request.



(Prior Code, § 49.30)



§ 50.36  REVIEW BY BOARD OF WORKS.



   Upon receiving the petition, the City Engineer, appropriate department
heads and/or the Board of Works will review existing facilities in the area,
and prepare a preliminary cost estimate for the public facilities requested,
and make a determination of available funds to assist in the cost sharing of
these public improvements. Upon completion of this determination, the Board
of Works shall then inform the petitioner(s) and other affected property
owners, who will be expected to cost share in the project of the proposed
project, of its findings including estimated cost.



(Prior Code, § 49.31)  (Amended 9-16-2008; Amended 11-25-2008)



§ 50.37  VOTE BY PROPERTY OWNERS.



   The property owners affected will then have the right to vote on
whether or not they wish to proceed with the project. If 61% or more of the
affected property owners wish to proceed, then the Board of Works will then
follow the applicable state statutes for construction of public improvements
and complete the project accordingly.



(Prior Code, § 49.32)  (Ord. 1989-21, passed 11-7-1989)



§ 50.40  BILLING.



   The city shall invoice on a monthly basis for sanitation services, fire
protection services, storm water utility services, water utility services and
sewage utility services in amounts set forth in Chapters 51 through 54 of
this code. Services provided to each lot, parcel of real estate, or building
which benefits from such services shall be billed on a combined statement,
hereinafter referred to as the utility bill, which statement shall contain a
breakdown of charges for each service and which statement shall contain a
payment due date. The utility bill shall be invoiced to the owner at the
billing address shown on the Adams County, Indiana property tax card, unless
a different billing address is on file with the city. The owner of the lot,
parcel of real estate, or building which benefits from utility or other
included city services identified on the utility bill shall be liable to the
city for such invoiced services, regardless of whether the property is
occupied by the owner. The city, at the city's discretion, may allow such
services to be billed to an occupant at the owner's and occupant's request,
which requests shall be made on forms approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety and which forms shall be available through the city. Provided,
however, in such case, the owner and occupant of a property shall remain
jointly and severally liable to the city for any unpaid utility bills billed
to an occupant, notwithstanding any lease or contract terms to the contrary.
In the event payment of an invoice is not received in full before
discontinuance or disconnection of a city service to a property, or in the
event a request is made to transfer services to a successor owner, services
shall not be restored to said property or transferred until such time as
payment of all outstanding invoiced amounts, including reconnect fees, if
any, have been paid in full. Liability shall follow the property, shall
remain the liability of the current owner and shall become the joint and
several liability of any successor owner if unpaid utility bills are not paid
by the prior owner at the time record ownership is transferred to a successor
owner. In addition, the city reserves the right to refuse to provide city
services to a lot, parcel of real estate or building owned, in part or
outright, or occupied by a person or legal entity which owes the city for
city services provided to such person or legal entity at a different lot,
parcel of real estate or building until such time as all outstanding amounts
due to the city for such services are paid in full.



(Ord. 2018-15, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 50.41  NOTICE AND REMEDY IN EVENT OF NON-PAYMENT.



   In the event utility and other included city services provided to a
lot, parcel of real estate, or building, as shown on the utility bill, remain
unpaid for more than 30 days from the original due date, a shut off notice of
service and discontinuance of services shall be posted at the lot, parcel of
real estate, or building. Failure on the part of the owner or occupant to pay
in full unpaid utility bills, including late fees, within ten days of the
date of such notice shall result in the shut off of water service and
discontinuance of other services to said lot, parcel of real estate, or
building, regardless of occupancy. Such services shall not be restored to
such lot, parcel of real estate, or building until such time as all
outstanding amounts invoiced for services to such lot, parcel of real estate,
or building, including reconnect fees, have been paid in full. The remedy for
non-payment of a utility bill as set forth herein shall be in addition to any
other remedy set forth in Chapters 51 through 54 of this code.



(Ord. 2018-15, passed 8-7-2018)



CHAPTER 51:  SANITATION SERVICE AND REGULATIONS



Section



   51.01   Intent and purpose



   51.02   Sanitation Department created



   51.03   Sanitation Superintendent duties



   51.04   Definitions



   51.05   Collection schedule



   51.06   Required receptacles



   51.07   Collection procedure and requirements



   51.08   Regulation of open burning



   51.09   Accumulation of garbage, rubbish and household rubbish
prohibited



   51.10   Unauthorized disposition of garbage, rubbish, yard waste and
household rubbish prohibited



   51.11   Preparation for collection



   51.12   Failure to properly prepare for collection



   51.13   Collection day falling on holiday



   51.14   Collection fee



   51.15   Curbside recycling containers



   51.16   Liability for charges



 



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-references:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 92



§ 51.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish a sanitation
department which will provide for the collection of garbage, rubbish, yard
waste and household rubbish in order to promote the health and welfare of the
residents of the city and to continue a program of modernization and
beautification.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.02  SANITATION DEPARTMENT CREATED.



   A Sanitation Department is established which shall be composed of a
Superintendent and other personnel as the Board of Public Works shall deem
necessary in order to carry out the functions of the Department. The
Sanitation Superintendent shall serve as the department head, shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the Mayor’s discretion.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.03  SANITATION SUPERINTENDENT DUTIES.



   The Sanitation Superintendent shall perform the functions necessary to
implement this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APARTMENT. A portion of a building used as a single-family residence.



   APARTMENT BUILDING. A building containing two or more separate
apartments used as separate single-family residences.



   APARTMENT COMPLEX. A cluster of two or more apartment buildings.



   GARBAGE. All refuse accumulation of animal, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable matter that results from preparation, use or cooking.



   HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH.



      (1)   Furniture, springs and mattresses, furnace pipe, stoves,
hot water heaters, television sets, trunks, incinerator refuse and cold ashes
of all kinds if placed in a receptacle as specified herein, wood not over 48
inches in length, toys, leather, rubber, cardboard, household appliances and
fixtures, including refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners, if such
appliances are refrigerant free and properly tagged. It shall not include
broken concrete and other refuse from repairs, alterations and construction
of buildings and sidewalks, tree limbs and tree trunks, debris from
commercial or industrial establishments, and material which cannot be easily
handled by two persons or weighs over 50 pounds.



      (2)   Household appliances weighing over 50 pounds shall be
considered as HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH, unless they cannot be easily handled by two
persons.



   INCINERATOR. A device constructed of steel or like material for the
purpose of burning combustible matter and having a permanently attached
screen or other filter device covering the exhaust outlet. The screen or
filter device shall be sufficiently fine in porosity to prevent the escape of
ignited particles.



   SANITATION SERVICES. Collection and disposal or recycling of garbage,
rubbish, household rubbish and yard waste.



   RUBBISH. All rags, broken glass, crockery, bottles, tin cans, paper and
similar household refuse which is placed in required receptacles. It does not
include dead animals, animal or human feces, and liquid matter whether
containerized or not.



   YARD WASTE. Vegetative mater including grass, garden plants, leaves,
hedge cuttings, shrubbery, brush, limbs and branches resulting from
landscaping maintenance.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.05  COLLECTION SCHEDULE.



   Collection shall be made in accordance with a daily schedule determined
and promulgated by the Board of Public Works.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.06  REQUIRED RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   All garbage, yard waste and rubbish shall be placed in
receptacles of galvanized metal, plastic or other like material with two
handles or a bail and close-fitting covers. They shall be water-tight, have a
capacity of not less than five gallons, nor more than 30 gallons, and shall
not exceed more than 50 pounds in weight, and shall be kept in a sanitary
condition. Plastic bags of not less than two mil in strength may be used. The
city shall not be responsible for damage to receptacles.



   (B)   The number of receptacles weekly pick up is limited to a
maximum of four bags and two containers or six bags total.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.07  COLLECTION PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS.



   Collections of garbage, rubbish, yard waste and household rubbish shall
be made by the Sanitation Department, as follows.



   (A)   Business, commercial and industrial. Except as otherwise
provided in division (B) below, there shall be no collection of any garbage,
rubbish, yard waste, household rubbish or any other waste or residue of any
kind, character or description from any business, commercial or industrial
establishment.



   (B)   Residential.



      (1)   Garbage, rubbish, yard waste and household rubbish shall
be collected from city residences and may be collected from non-city
residences located on city sanitation routes or from apartment complexes or
apartment buildings located within the city having five or less separate
apartments. There shall be no collection of garbage, rubbish, yard waste or
household rubbish from non-city residences not located on city sanitation
routes or from apartment complexes and apartment buildings having more than
five separate apartments.



      (2)   The Sanitation Department shall collect garbage and
rubbish from each residence or apartment on a weekly schedule. Yard waste
shall be collected seasonally on a weekly basis, weather permitting. All
garbage and rubbish shall be placed in receptacles described in this chapter
and shall be placed on the street curb within five feet of the street curb.
No garbage, yard waste or rubbish shall be placed on any public sidewalk. On
corner lots, garbage yard waste and rubbish is to be placed within five feet
of the curb closest to the street to be traveled by collection trucks. All
receptacles shall be placed for collection no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the
day preceding the collection day and shall be removed from public view within
24 hours.



      (3)   The Sanitation Department shall collect household
rubbish from residences and apartments on the regular collection day of the
first week of April and September each year. Such service shall be commonly
known as large trash pickup. Household rubbish shall be placed within five
feet of the curb of adequate streets no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the collection day. Any materials which are placed for collection
and are not acceptable to the city as household rubbish shall be removed by
the owner from public view within 24 hours of the collection day.



   (C)   Mobile home court. The Sanitation Department shall collect
garbage, rubbish, yard waste and household rubbish from mobile home
residences located within a mobile home court located within the city on a
weekly or seasonal schedule, similar to residential service provided in
division (B) above, under the following circumstances.



      (1)   The mobile home court owner shall provide adequate
streets, approved by the Board of Public Works, for ingress and egress to all
mobile homes requiring service. The streets shall accommodate the Sanitation
Department trucks and allow for pickup at the curb.



      (2)   (a)   The mobile home court owner shall submit
written authorization to the Superintendent of the Sanitation Department to
enter the premises. The mobile home court owner shall agree to indemnify the
city from any resulting damage; except that, caused by the negligence of city
employees.



         (b)   The mobile home court owner shall agree to be
billed for such service and shall be responsible to the city to timely pay
the monthly rate invoiced.



      (3)   Garbage and rubbish shall be placed in receptacles
described in this chapter and shall be placed within five feet of the curb of
adequate streets no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the
collection day and shall be removed from public view within 24 hours.



      (4)   Household rubbish shall be collected on the regular
collection day of the first week of April and September of each year. Such
service shall be commonly known as large trash pickup. Household rubbish
shall be placed within five feet of the curb of adequate streets no earlier
than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day. Any materials which
are placed for collection and are not acceptable to the city as household
rubbish shall be removed by the owner from public view within 24 hours of the
collection day.



      (5)   The monthly rate levied and assessed to a mobile home
court owner shall be based upon the actual number of mobile home residences
located within the mobile home court, whether occupied or not. Each May and
November, the monthly rate levied and assessed to User Code SA6 in § 51.14
of this chapter for the next six months shall be adjusted by the city by
multiplying the number of mobile homes inventoried by the city by $12 per
mobile home.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.08  REGULATION OF OPEN BURNING.



   (A) Unless otherwise permitted in division (C) below, open burning of
combustible materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, household
refuse, flammable liquids, petroleum products, rubber products, recyclables,
construction and/or demolition materials, yardwaste and/or leaves, is
prohibited within the municipal limits of the city.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, OPEN BURNING shall mean the
combustion of any matter in the open, in a burn container or in an open pit
or dump where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air
without passing through a stack or chimney, or combustion occurs in a device
other than a state approved incinerator.



   (C)   The following open burning is permissible within the city
limits, subject to the restrictions set forth in division (D) below:



      (1)   Controlled burns conducted by the City Fire Department;



      (2)   Bonfires approved by the City Board of Public Works and
Safety;



      (3)   Recreational campfires in open in ground pits or
decorative metal containers designed for campfires; and



      (4)   Charcoal or gas burning grills designed for cooking.



   (D)   Open burning, as permitted in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3)
above, is subject to the following restrictions.



      (1)   Only natural wood products shall be burned.



      (2)   Fire shall be attended at all times until all materials
are completely extinguished.



      (3)   If a fire creates a nuisance or air pollution problem
(excessive smoke or offensive odors) affecting the peace and quiet enjoyment
of surrounding properties, or if a fire creates a fire hazard to surrounding
properties due to blowing embers, and fire and/or law enforcement authorities
receive at least two complaints from different surrounding property owners
about the fire, the fire shall be investigated by fire and/or law enforcement
authorities. If it is determined by the responding fire or law enforcement
authorities that the fire is creating a health or safety risk, the fire shall
be extinguished at the direction of the responding fire or law enforcement
authorities.



      (4)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, air stagnation or
dangerously dry conditions.



      (5)   Any person who conducts open burning assumes all risk of
personal injury or property damage arising from or related to such open
burning, and shall be liable for expenses related to fire and emergency
personnel responding to an emergency arising from or related to such open
burning.



      (6)   Burning may not occur on an owner’s property any
closer than ten feet from an adjoining owner’ property line.



      (7)   No burning is permitted at the location of apartment
complexes or mobile home parks due to density of residences and/or reduced
lot sizes.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009; Ord. 2013-12, passed 11-19-2013)



§ 51.09  ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH PROHIBITED.



   The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises located within the city
shall remove from the premises all garbage, rubbish and household rubbish and
keep the premises free and clear from any accumulation of garbage, rubbish
and household rubbish at all times.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.10  UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSITION OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH, YARD WASTE AND
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to throw, place or scatter any
garbage, rubbish, yard waste or household rubbish over any premises, park,
street or alley, either public or private, or to permit any garbage, rubbish,
yard waste or household rubbish to be deposited on premises owned, occupied
or controlled by that person, whether or not the person intends to later
remove, cover or otherwise dispose of it, except as provided herein.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any city resident to allow any person who
resides outside the city limits to place that person’s garbage, rubbish,
yard waste or household rubbish on the city resident’s premises for pick up
by the City Sanitation Department.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.11  PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION.



   (A)   Garbage. All liquids shall be drained from garbage and all
garbage shall be securely wrapped before being placed in receptacles for
collection.



   (B)   Rubbish.



      (1)   All liquids shall be drained from rubbish before being
placed in receptacles for collection.



      (2)   (a)   All cans and bottles which have contained food
shall be thoroughly rinsed and drained before being placed in receptacles for
collection.



         (b)   All broken glass shall be securely wrapped.



      (3)   All rubbish of any kind, character and description shall
be placed in a receptacle of a type specified before being placed for
collection.



   (C)   Household rubbish.



      (1)   All household rubbish shall be in clean and sanitary
condition before being placed for collection.



      (2)   All incinerator refuse and cold ashes of all kinds and
descriptions shall be placed in a container of the type specified.



   (D)   Yard waste.



      (1)   Grass cuttings and garden plants shall be placed in a
receptacle of a type specified before being placed for collection.



      (2)   Hedge cuttings, shrubbery trimmings and similar material
shall be cut to a length permitting it to be placed in the receptacles for
collection.



      (3)   Tree branches, limbs, brush and shrubs need not be
placed in receptacles; provided, they may be easily handled by one person.



      (4)   Leaves shall not be placed in receptacles. Leaves shall
be placed on the street within five feet of the curb or the edge of the
pavement.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.12  FAILURE TO PROPERLY PREPARE FOR COLLECTION.



   The Sanitation Department shall not be responsible for collection of
any garbage, rubbish or household rubbish which has not been properly placed
for collection.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.13  COLLECTION DAY FALLING ON HOLIDAY.



   In the event a collection day falls on January 1 (New Year’s Day),
May 30 (Memorial Day), July 4 (Independence Day), the first Monday in
September (Labor Day), the fourth Thursday of November (Thanksgiving Day) and
December 25 (Christmas Day), collections which would have been made on those
days shall be made on the next regular day of business following the holiday.
In the event any collection day falls on any other declared holiday,
collections which would have been made on the holiday shall be made on the
next regular day of business following the holiday.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.14  COLLECTION FEE.



   (A)   Commencing 11-1-2009, the city shall classify residences and
commercial customers by the following user codes and shall charge a monthly
rate to such users for sanitation services provided by the city as follows:



 

User Code
 

Monthly Rate





SA1 Residential and churches
 

$12



SA2 Residential outside city
 

$18



SA3 Apartment buildings and complexes
 

$12



SA4 Daycare services
 

$20



SA5 Schools and the County Jail
 

$135 (does not included Bellmont High or Middle Schools)



SA6 Mobile home court
 

$876



SA7 Bi-county services
 

$20




   Trailers at $12/trailer (adjusted semi-annually)





 



   (B)   The monthly rate charged to residences and commercial
customers shall be invoiced monthly and included on the customer’s water
and sewage billing statement. If a customer does not receive a water and
sewage bill, a separate invoice shall be sent.



   (C)   (1)   The monthly rates levied pursuant to division (A)
above and assessed to city residences in User Code SA1 and to the mobile home
court in User Code SA6 are mandatory, regardless of the extent a customer
makes use of sanitation services offered by the city.



      (2)   All other commercial customers identified in division
(A) above shall have the option to pay the city the monthly rate levied and
assessed in order to take advantage of the sanitation services made available
by the city, or such commercial customers may elect to contract with a
private contractor for sanitation services in lieu thereof.



   (D)   Charges for sanitation services levied pursuant to division
(A) above shall be due and payable on or before the due dates shown on the
bills. Any invoice not paid by the due date (approximately 15 days after the
bill is rendered) shall be considered delinquent and a delinquent charge of
10% of the amount due shall be added to the amount due. Delinquent charges
together with costs and other expenses of collection may be collected by any
lawful remedy, including where applicable, the placing of and foreclosure of
liens on real estate as provide by law.



   (E)   The city reserves the right to hereafter modify sanitation
services offered by the city; hereby reserves the right to expand or
eliminate customers covered under user codes set forth in division (A) above;
and hereby reserves the right to amend the monthly rate levied and assessed
for sanitation services provided. No such modification or amendment shall
occur unless by ordinance duly adopted by Common Council and published as
required by law.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009)



§ 51.15  CURBSIDE RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize the sale
of curbside recycling totes to the general public, is to establish a maximum
fee charged per tote, is to establish the manner in which totes shall be
sold, and is to establish the fund in which sale proceeds shall be deposited.



   (B)   Authorization to sell. The Sanitation Department is authorized
to sell curbside recycling totes and is hereby directed to maintain
appropriate records regarding such sales in such manner as required by the
Indiana State Board of Accounts.



   (C)   Maximum price. The price per tote charged by the city shall
not exceed $16.00 plus Indiana sales tax. Once a final price has been
established, such price shall be published on the city's web site and shall
be conspicuously posted at the location where totes are sold. Payment by cash
or check shall be required at the time of purchase. Residents shall be
responsible for picking up each tote purchased. Purchases shall be limited to
three totes per household. Totes shall be available for purchase and pickup
at the Sanitation Department office located at 809 W. Elm St., Decatur,
Indiana during normal business hours. Totes shall be offered for sale to
residents on a first come, first serve basis.



   (D)   Depository of sale proceeds. All proceeds from the sale of
curbside recycling Totes shall be delivered to the City Clerk Treasurer who
shall deposit such proceeds, into the City's General Fund. Sales tax
collected by the City shall be deposited into a designated account and paid
by the Clerk Treasurer to the Indiana Department of Revenue (IDOR) in a
manner and at such times as required by IDOR.



(Ord. 2016-11, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 51.16  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The procedures, rates and charges for the use of and the service
rendered by the city's Sanitation Department established in Chapter 51, and
liability therefore, shall be the responsibility of the owner of each and
every lot, parcel of real estate, or building, regardless of occupancy. If
the city permits utility bills to be invoiced to an occupant, liability for
payment shall be the joint and several liability of the occupant and owner.
In addition, it shall be the owner's responsibility to verify payments are
timely made by an occupant. Failure on the part of the owner to pay or cause
payment for such services and other city services included on the utility
bill referenced in § 50.40 shall result in the exercise of remedies against
the owner set forth in this chapter as well as that set forth in §§ 50.40
and 50.41.



(Ord. 2018-15, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Any persons violating any provisions of this chapter,
except §§ 51.07, 51.08, 51.09 and 51.10 of this chapter, shall be served by
the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction or abatement.



      (2)   The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease the violation or violations.



   (B)   Any person who continues a violation beyond the time limit
given to correct or abate a violation as provided for in division (A) above
shall be cited for such violation and upon being found guilty of such
violation shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $100, for each
violation. Each day in which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.



   (C)   No notice as provided in division (A) above shall be served on
any person in violation of §§ 51.08, 51.09 or 51.10 of this chapter. Any
person who shall violate § 51.08 shall be subject to a $50 fine per
occurrence. Any person who shall violate §§ 51.09 or 51.10 of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $300, per
occurrence. Each day in which any violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-6-2009; Ord. 2013-12, passed 11-19-2013)



CHAPTER 52:  STORM WATER REGULATIONS



Section




Department of Storm Water Management; Fees and Billing




   52.001   Intent



   52.002   Legislative findings and policy



   52.003   Creation of storm water utility



   52.004   Definitions



   52.005   Funding of Department of Storm Water Management



   52.006   Storm Water Fund



   52.007   Operating budget



   52.008   Storm water user’s fees established



   52.009   Equivalent residential unit (ERU)



   52.010   Property classification for storm water user’s fee



   52.011   Base rate



   52.012   Adjustments to storm water user’s fees



   52.013   Liability for charges



   52.014   Billing procedures and penalties for late payment



   52.015   Appeals of fees




Storm Water User Fee




   52.030   Intent; definitions



   52.031   Fee established



   52.032   Storm water user fee collection



   52.033   User fee determination



   52.034   ERU established



   52.035   ERU rate established




Illicit Discharge and Connection




   52.050   Purpose/intent



   52.051   Definitions



   52.052   Applicability



   52.053   Responsibility for administration



   52.054   Severability



   52.055   Ultimate responsibility



   52.056   Discharge prohibitions



   52.057   Suspension of MS4 access



   52.058   Industrial or construction activity discharge



   52.059   Monitoring of discharges



   52.060   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   52.061   Watercourse protection



   52.062   Notification of spills



   52.063   Enforcement



   52.064   Appeal of notice of violation



   52.065   Enforcement measures after appeal



   52.066   Cost of abatement of the violation




Calculations, Design Standards and Specifications




   52.070   Generally




Construction Site and Post-Construction Control




   52.080   Purpose/intent



   52.081   Definitions



   52.082   Applicability



   52.083   Responsibility for administration



   52.084   Severability



   52.085   Ultimate responsibility



   52.086   Responsibility of construction site owner



   52.087   General requirements for storm water quality control



   52.088   General requirements for individual building lots within a
permitted project



   52.089   Monitoring of discharges



   52.090   Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   52.091   Post-construction controls for new development or
redevelopment



   52.092   Enforcement



 



   52.999   Penalty




DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT; FEES AND BILLING




§ 52.001  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to establish a storm water utility to
be responsible for the operation, construction and maintenance of storm water
facilities; for storm water system planning and for review of storm water
development plans for compliance with storm water management codes.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.002  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND POLICY.



   (A)   The Common Council of the city finds, determines and declares
that the storm water system which provides for the collection, treatment,
storage and disposal of storm water provides benefits and services to all
property within the incorporated city limits.



   (B)   Such benefits include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   The provision of adequate systems of collection,
conveyance, detention, treatment and release of storm water;



      (2)   The reduction of hazards to property and life resulting
from storm water runoff;



      (3)   Improvements in general health and welfare through
reduction of undesirable storm water conditions; and



      (4)   Improvements to the water quality in the storm water and
surface water system and its receiving waters.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.003  CREATION OF STORM WATER UTILITY.



   (A)   (1)   For those purposes of the Federal Clean Water Act and
of I.C. 8-1.5, there is hereby created a Department of Storm Water Management
which shall be governed by the City Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant
to I.C. 8-1.5-3-3.



      (2)   The Department of Storm Water Management shall consist
of a Manager, appointed by the Mayor as the Storm Water Management department
head, and such staff as deemed necessary by the City Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (B)   The Department of Storm Water Management,  under the
legislative policy, supervision and control of the Common Council of the
city, shall:



      (1)   Administer the acquisition, design, construction,
maintenance and operation of the Department of Storm Water Management system,
including capital improvements designated in the capital improvement program;



      (2)   Administer and enforce this chapter and all regulations
and procedures adopted relating to the design, construction, maintenance,
operation and alteration of the utility storm water system, including, but
not limited to, the quantity, quality and/or velocity of the storm water
conveyed thereby;



      (3)   Advise the municipality’s Common Council and other
city departments on matters relating to the utility;



      (4)   Prepare and revise a comprehensive drainage plan for
adoption by the municipality’s Common Council;



      (5)   Review plans and approve or deny, inspect and accept
extensions and connections to the system;



      (6)   Enforce regulations to protect and maintain water
quality and quantity within the system in compliance with water quality
standards established by state, regional and/or federal agencies as now
adopted or hereafter amended; and



      (7)   Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits
provided, and the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and
other revenues of the utility.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)  (Ord. 2012-1, passed 1-17-2012)



§ 52.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the
meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster’s Dictionary.



   BASE RATE. The storm water user’s fee for a detached single-family
residential property in the city.



   CONSTRUCTION. The erection, building, acquisition, alteration,
reconstruction, improvement or extension of storm water facilities;
preliminary planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of
storm water facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and
economic investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working
drawings, specifications, procedures and other action necessary in the
construction of storm water facilities; and the inspection and supervision of
the construction of storm water facilities.



   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has been altered from its
natural state by the creation or addition of impervious areas, by the
addition of any buildings, structures, pavement or other improvements.



   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. The average square footage of a
detached single- family residential property determined pursuant to this
chapter.



   EXEMPT PROPERTY. All properties of the federal, state, county and city
governments, and any of their divisions or subdivisions, and property that
does not discharge storm water runoff into the storm water or flood control
facilities of the municipality.



   FEE or STORM WATER USER’S FEE. The charge established under this
chapter and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property
to fund the costs of storm water management and of operating, maintaining and
improving the storm water system in the municipality. The STORM WATER
USER’S FEE is in addition to any other fee that the municipality has the
right to charge under any other rule or regulation of the municipality.



   FISCAL YEAR. July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar
year, both inclusive.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface which is compacted or covered with
material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not
limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios,
driveways, parking lots and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted or
any other surface which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA. The number of square feet of horizontal
surface covered by buildings, and other impervious surfaces. All building
measurements shall be made between exterior faces of walls, foundations,
columns or other means of support or enclosure.



   OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Developed property other than single-family
residential property. Such property shall include, but not be limited to,
commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals,
schools, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices and churches.



   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.



   PROPERTY OWNER. The property owner of record as listed in the
county’s assessment roll. A PROPERTY OWNER includes any individual,
corporation, firm, partnership or group of individuals acting as a unit, and
any trustee, receiver or personal representative.



   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A developed property which serves
the primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit to a single
family. A single-family detached dwelling or a townhouse containing an
accessory apartment or second dwelling unit is included in this definition.



   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff,
street wash waters related to street cleaning or maintenance, infiltration
and drainage.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FUND or FUND. The fund created by this chapter
to operate, maintain and improve the city’s storm water system.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The planning, design, construction, regulation,
improvement, repair, maintenance and operation of facilities and programs
relating to water, floodplains, flood control, grading, erosion, tree
conservation and sediment control.



   SURFACE WATER. Includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds
created naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams,
other watercourses, lakes and reservoirs.



   USER. The owner of record of property subject to the storm water
user’s fee imposed by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.005  FUNDING OF DEPARTMENT OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Funding for the Department of Storm Water Management’s
activities may include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Storm water user’s fees;



      (2)   Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or
arising from the violation of the city’s storm water management ordinance;



      (3)   Storm water permit and inspection fees; and



      (4)   Other funds or income obtained from federal, state,
local and private grants, or revolving funds.



   (B)   To the extent that the storm water drainage fees collected are
insufficient to construct needed storm water drainage facilities, the cost of
the same may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the
municipality’s Common Council.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.006  STORM WATER FUND.



   All revenues generated by or on behalf of the Department of Storm Water
Management shall be deposited in a Department of Storm Water Management Fund
and used exclusively for the Department of Storm Water Management.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.007  OPERATING BUDGET.



   The municipality’s Common Council shall adopt an operating budget for
the Department of Storm Water Management each fiscal year. The operating
budget shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the
estimated costs for operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and
debt service.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.008  STORM WATER USER’S FEES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There shall be imposed on each and every developed property in
the city, except exempt property, a storm water user’s fee, which shall be
set from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and in the manner and
amount prescribed by this chapter.



   (B)   Prior to establishing or amending user’s fees, the
municipality shall advertise its intent to do so by publishing notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 30 days in advance of
the meeting of the municipality’s Common Council which shall consider the
adoption of the fee or its amendment.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.009  EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU).



   (A)   Establishment. There is established for purposes of
calculating the storm water user’s fee the equivalent residential unit
(ERU).



   (B)   Definition. The ERU is the average square footage of a
detached single-family residential property.



   (C)   Setting the ERU. The ERU shall be set by the municipality’s
Common Council from time to time by ordinance or resolution.



   (D)   Source of ERU. The municipality’s Common Council shall have
the discretion to determine the source of the data from which the ERU is
established, taking into consideration the general acceptance and use of such
source on the part of other storm water systems, and the reliability and
general accuracy of the source. The municipality’s Common Council shall
have the discretion to determine the impervious surface area of other
developed property through property tax assessor’s rolls or site
examination, mapping information, aerial photographs and other reliable
information.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.010  PROPERTY CLASSIFICATION FOR STORM WATER USER’S FEE.



   (A)   Property classifications. For purposes of determining the
storm water user’s fee, all properties in the city are classified into one
of the following classes:



      (1)   Single-family residential property;



      (2)   Other developed property; or



      (3)   Exempt property.



   (B)   Single-family residential fee. The municipality’s Common
Council finds that the intensity of development of most parcels of real
property in the municipality classified as single-family residential is
similar and that it would be excessively and unnecessarily expensive to
determine precisely the square footage of the improvements (such as
buildings, structures and other impervious areas) on each such parcel.
Therefore, all single-family residential properties in the city shall be
charged a flat storm water management fee, equal the base rate, regardless of
the size of the parcel or the improvements.



   (C)   Other developed property fee.



      (1)   The fee for other developed property (i.e.,
non-single-family residential property) in the municipality shall be the base
rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total
impervious area (square feet) of the property by one ERU. The impervious
surface area for other developed property is the square footage for the
buildings and other improvements on the property.



      (2)   The minimum storm water management fee for other
developed property shall equal the base rate for single-family residential
property.



   (D)   Exempt property. There shall be no storm water user’s fee
for exempt property.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.011  BASE RATE.



   The municipality’s Common Council shall, by ordinance or resolution,
establish the base rate for the storm water user’s fee. The base rate shall
be calculated to ensure adequate revenues to fund the costs of storm water
management and to provide for the operation, maintenance and capital
improvements of the storm water system in the city.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.012  ADJUSTMENTS TO STORM WATER USER’S FEES.



   The Department of Storm Water Management shall have the right on its
own initiative to adjust upward or downward the storm water user’s fees
with respect to any property, based on the approximate percentage on any
significant variation in the volume or rate of storm water, or any
significant variation in the quality of storm water, emanating from the
property, compared to other similar properties. In making determinations of
the similarity of property, the Department of Storm Water Management shall
take into consideration the location, geography, size, use, impervious area,
storm water facilities on the property and any other factors that have a
bearing on the variation.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.013  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The procedures, rates and charges for the use of and the service
rendered by the city's Storm Water Management Department established in
Chapter 52, and liability therefore, shall be the responsibility of the owner
of each and every non-exempt lot, parcel of real estate, or building,
regardless of occupancy. If the city permits utility bills to be invoiced to
an occupant, liability for payment shall be the joint and several liability
of the occupant and owner. In addition, it shall be the owner's
responsibility to verify payments are timely made by an occupant. Failure on
the part of the owner to pay or cause payment for such services and other
city services included on the utility bill referenced in § 50.40 shall
result in the exercise of remedies against the owner set forth in this
chapter as well as that set forth in §§ 50.40 and 50.41.



(Prior Code, § 53.10) (Ord. 2018-15, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 52.014  BILLING PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   Rate and collection schedule. The storm water user’s fee
must be set at a rate, and collected on a schedule, established by ordinance
or resolution.



   (B)   Delinquent bills. The storm water user’s fee shall be paid
in person or by mail at Decatur city hall, 172 N. 2nd Street, Decatur, IN
46733 and shall become delinquent as of 17 days following the billing date.
Any unpaid storm water user’s fee shall bear interest at the legal rate if
it remains unpaid after the due date.



   (C)   Penalties for late payment. Storm water user’s fees shall be
subject to a late fee established by ordinance or resolution. The
municipality shall be entitled to recover attorney’s fees incurred in
collecting delinquent drainage fees. Any charge due under this chapter which
shall not be paid may be recovered at law by the municipality.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)



§ 52.015  APPEALS OF FEES.



   (A)   Generally. Any person who disagrees with the calculation of
the storm water user’s fee, as provided in this chapter, or who seeks a
storm water user’s fee adjustment based upon storm water management
practices, may appeal such fee determination to the Department of Storm Water
Management within 30 days from the date of the last bill containing storm
water user’s fees charges. Any appeal shall be filed in writing and shall
state the grounds for the appeal. The Department of Storm Water Management
Director may request additional information from the appealing party.



   (B)   Adjustments. Storm water user’s fee adjustments for storm
water management practices may be considered for: reductions in runoff volume
including discharge to a non-city drainage system; and properly designed
constructed and maintained existing retention facilities (i.e., evaporation
and recharge). Based upon the information provided by the utility and the
appealing party, the Department of Storm Water Management shall make a final
calculation of the storm water drainage fee. The Department of Storm Water
Management shall notify the parties, in writing, of its decision.



(Prior Code, § 53.10)




STORM WATER USER FEE




§ 52.030  INTENT; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to establish a fair,
equitable and dependable source of funds to manage the storm water program in
the city consistent with federal and state law and local ordinance.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word
“may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have
the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition
of Webster’s Dictionary.



      BOARD. The Decatur Board of Public Works and Safety which
controls the Department of Storm Water Management.



      BONDS. Revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations
issued or incurred to finance the costs of construction.



      CALENDAR YEAR. A 12-month period commencing on January 1 of any
year.



      COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION. Costs reasonable incurred in connection
with providing capital improvements to the system or any portion thereof,
including, but not limited to, the costs of:



         (a)   Acquisition of all property, real or personal, and
all interests in connection therewith including all rights-of-way and
easements therefore;



         (b)   Physical construction, installation and testing,
including the costs of labor, services, materials, supplies and construction
services used in connection therewith;



         (c)   Architectural, engineering, legal and other
professional services;



         (d)   Insurance premiums taken out and maintained during
construction, to the extent not paid for by a contractor for construction;



         (e)   Any taxes or other charges which become due during
construction;



         (f)   Expenses incurred by the city or on its behalf
with its approval in seeking to enforce any remedy against any contractor or
bus-contractor in respect of any default under a contract relating to
construction;



         (g)   Principal of and interest of any bonds; and



         (h)   Miscellaneous expenses incidental thereto.



      DEBT SERVICE. With any particular series of bonds, an amount
equal to the sum of:



         (a)   All interest payable on such bonds during such
calendar year; plus



         (b)   Any principal installments of such bonds during
such calendar year.



      DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property other than undisturbed property
and vacant improved property.



      DIRECTOR. A member of the City Board of Public Works and Safety.



      DWELLING UNIT. A singular unit or apartment providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



      EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. The average impervious area
of residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the city
and as established by the Board.



      ERU RATE. A utility fee charged on each ERU as established by the
Common Council of the City of Decatur.



      EXEMPT PROPERTY. Public rights-of- way, public streets, public
alleys and public sidewalks.



      EXTENSION AND REPLACEMENT. Costs of extensions, additions and
capital improvements to, or the renewal and replacement of capital assets of,
or purchasing and installing new equipment for, the system, or land
acquisitions for the system and any related costs thereto, or paying
extraordinary maintenance and repair, including the costs of construction, or
any other expenses which are not costs of operation and maintenance or debt
service.



      IMPERVIOUS AREA. The number of square feet of hard surfaced areas
which either prevent or retard the entry of water into soil mantle, as it
entered under natural conditions as undisturbed property, and/or causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow
from that present under natural conditions as undisturbed property,
including, but not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, patios, porches,
driveway, sidewalks, pavement, stone and gravel.



      MANAGER. The department head for the Department of Storm Water
Management.



      NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Developed property that is
not utilized for dwelling units within the city.



      OPERATING BUDGET. The annual operating budget adopted by the city
for the succeeding fiscal year.



      OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE. The current expenses, paid or
accrued, of operation, maintenance and current repair of the system, as
calculated in accordance with sound accounting  practice, and includes,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums,
administrative expenses, labor, executive compensation and cost of materials
and supplies used for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of
appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but which
are such as may reasonably be expected to be incurred in accordance with
sound accounting practice.



      REVENUES. All rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges
or other income received by the Storm Water User Fee Fund, in connection with
the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from
the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts
contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound
accounting practice.



      STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM. The existing storm water
management of the city and all improvements thereto which by this chapter are
constituted as the property and responsibility of the city, to be operated as
an enterprise fund to, among other things, conserve water, control discharges
necessitated by rainfall events, incorporate methods to collect, convey,
store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse water to prevent or reduce
flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation and water pollution or
otherwise affect the quality and quantity of discharge from such system.



      STORM WATER USER FEE. A fee authorized by ordinance(s)
established to pay operations and maintenance, extension and replace- ment
and debt service.



      STORM WATER USER FEE FUND. The special revenue fund created by
this chapter to operate, maintain and improve the system and for such other
purposes as stated in this chapter.



      UNDISTURBED PROPERTY. Real property, which has not been altered
from its natural state by dredging, filling, removal of trees and vegetation
or other activities, which have disturbed or altered the topography or soils
on the property.



      USER FEE DISTRICT. The area or property within the corporate
limits of the city.



      VACANT IMPROVED PROPERTY. Vacant property, which is or could
reasonably be, served by any subdivision improvements that allow egress.



(Prior Code, § 53.20)  (Ord. 2012-1, passed 1-17-2012)



§ 52.031  FEE ESTABLISHED.



   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, each and every
residential developed property, non- residential developed property and
vacant improved property, other than exempt property, within the corporate
limits of the city, and the owners and non-owner users thereof, have imposed
upon them a storm water user fee. In the event the owner and non-owner users
of a particular property are not the same, the liability for each the owner
and non-owner for the user fee attributable to that property shall be joint
and several. The storm water user fee shall be a monthly or a regular
interval service charge and shall be determined by the provisions of this
chapter and the ERU and ERU rate which shall be established and changed from
time to time by the Common Council of the city.



(Prior Code, § 53.20)



§ 52.032  STORM WATER USER FEE COLLECTION.



   (A)   The storm water user fee for residential and non-residential
property shall be billed and collected monthly with the monthly utility
services bill for those properties within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   The storm water user fee for those properties utilizing city
utilities is part of a consolidated statement for utility customers, which is
generally paid by a single payment to the Utility Department.



   (C)   In the event that a partial payment is received, the payment
shall be applied pro rata to each account billed on the consolidated
statement in the proportion that an individual account bears to the total
consolidated statement of all current charges for all accounts.



   (D)   All bills for storm water user fees shall become due and
payable in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Utilities
Department pertaining to the collection of the storm water user fees.



(Prior Code, § 53.20)



§ 52.033  USER FEE DETERMINATION.



   There is hereby established the following uniform schedule of rates for
the services and use of facilities of the storm water management system by
the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises using the services and
facilities of said system.



   (A)   The Common Council of the city upon recommendation of the
Board of Directors for the Department of Storm Water Management shall
establish reasonable rates for storm water management systems for each
single-family residence; each single- family residence shall be billed at a
flat fee established by the Common Council for an equivalent residential unit
(ERU).



   (B)   (1)   For all non-residential properties, that is
enterprise, business establishment, building or other occupancy not covered
by this section, the rate shall be computed based on the total impervious
area of the property divided by the average impervious area of an equivalent
residential unit times the rate established for an equivalent residential
unit.



      (2)   The billing amount shall be updated by the Manager based
on any additions to the impervious areas as approved through the building
permit process.



(Prior Code, § 53.20)



§ 52.034  ERU ESTABLISHED.



   The equivalent residential unit is hereby established to be 2,840
square feet of impervious area.



(Prior Code, § 53.20)



§ 52.035  ERU RATE ESTABLISHED.



   The ERU rate to be charged for storm water management  utility fees
for each ERU is hereby established to be $3.50 per month. This will increase
to $4.50 on January 1, 2017.



(Prior Code, § 53.20) (Ord. 2015-7, passed 5-5-2015)




ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION




§ 52.050  PURPOSE/INTENT.



   (A)   It is the intent of this subchapter to prohibit the connection
of non-storm water discharges to the storm water system.



   (B)   (1)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the
regulation of non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system to the
maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.



      (2)   This subchapter establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.



      (3)   The objectives of this subchapter are:



         (a)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by storm water discharges by any
user;



         (b)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to
the municipal separate storm sewer system; and



         (c)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.051  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. City Department of Storm Water
Management.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS).



      (1)   Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water,
receiving waters or storm water conveyance systems.



      (2)   BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more, as defined in 327 I.A.C. 15-5. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.



   DEPARTMENT. The City Department of Storm Water Management.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 52.056 of this chapter.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits, as
defined in 327 I.A.C. 15-6.



   MANAGER. The department head for the Department of Storm Water
Management.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner’s agent.



   POLLUTANT.



      (1)   Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.



      (2)   POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or
other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that
same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides
and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human- made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the
best management practices (BMPs) and activities to be implemented by a person
or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and
the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.052  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain
system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.053  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.054  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be
severable.



   (B)   If any provision, clause, sentence or division of this chapter
or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.055  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore, this subchapter does not intend, nor imply,
that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.056  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including,
but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause
or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other
than storm water.



      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited, except as described as
follows.



         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream
flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not
including active ground water dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air
conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles,
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated
- typically less than one part per million chlorine), firefighting
activities, irrigation water, street wash water and any other water source
not containing pollutants.



         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the Department
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the Department prior to the time of the
test.



         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm
water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge
order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency; provided that, the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
subchapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.057  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
The Department  may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when  such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or
waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency
may take such steps as deemed  necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.



      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
subchapter may have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency
will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration
and hearing.



      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant  to this section, without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.058  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Department prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.059  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that
have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The Department shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the Department ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The Department shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility’s storm water discharge.



      (4)   The Department has the right to require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Department and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Department access to
a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of
this subchapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES
permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits
an offense if the person denies the Department reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this subchapter.



      (7)   If the Department has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this subchapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Department may
seek a court order to access the premises.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.060  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The Department will establish requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain
system or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial
or industrial establishment shall provide, at his, her or their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an
illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense,
additional structural and non- structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this
section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.061  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of
water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.062  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system
or water of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately
notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the Department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than
the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed
by written notice addressed and mailed to the Department within three
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three years.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.063  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever the Department finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this subchapter, the
Department may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Emergency notifications may be made by the Manager.



   (B)   Such notice may require without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   Violating discharges, practices or operations shall
cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (C)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.064  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the Department.



   (B)   The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the
date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the City Board
of Works shall take place within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal.



   (C)   The decision of the City Board of Works shall be final.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



§ 52.065  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected within ten days of the notice
of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision
of the City Board of Works upholding the decision of the Department, then
representatives of the Department may enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the
purposes set forth above.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.066  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the Department or the City Board of Works as the case may be
or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges
shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a
lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



CALCULATIONS, DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS



§ 52.070  GENERALLY.



   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, placement of storm
sewers, inlets, manholes and all stormwater pollution prevention measures for
construction sites shall meet the design criteria included in the Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual adopted and approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety, latest revision.




CONSTRUCTION SITE AND POST- CONSTRUCTION CONTROL




§ 52.080  PURPOSE/INTENT.



   (A)   General. It is the intent of this subchapter to require storm
water pollution prevention plans which includes erosion and sediment control
measures and materials handling procedures to be submitted as part of the
construction plans and specifications in order to be issued a land
disturbance permit for construction sites disturbing one acre or more of
land. This subchapter also requires the development of  post-construction
storm water control measures for new development and redevelopment to be
submitted and approved as part of the construction plans and specifications.



   (B)   Site construction control. The purpose of this subchapter is
to establish requirements for storm water discharges from construction
activities of one acre or more so that the public health, existing water uses
and aquatic biota are protected. This subchapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To regulate construction activities disturbing more than
one acre of land as governed by 327 I.A.C. 15-5; and



      (2)   To require construction site operators to develop and
implement a construction plan including a storm water pollution prevention
plan in order to receive a land disturbance permit from the city.



   (C)   Post-construction control. The purpose of this chapter is to
implement planning procedures that promote and improve water quality. The
planning procedures will include, at a minimum, the post-construction
requirements of 327 I.A.C. 5-5-6.5(a)(8). The city may require the use of any
storage, infiltration, filtering and/or vegetative practices to reduce the
impact of pollutants on storm water runoff. Where appropriate, and to the
extent of the MS4 operator’s authority, the planning procedures may also
include the following:



      (1)   Buffer strip and riparian zone preservation;



      (2)   Filter strip creation;



      (3)   Minimization of land disturbance and surface
imperviousness;



      (4)   Minimization of directly connected impervious areas;



      (5)   Maximization of open space; and



      (6)   Directing the community’s growth away from sensitive
areas and towards areas that can support growth without compromising water
quality.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.081  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City Department of Storm Water
Management.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more, as defined in 327 I.A.C. 15-5. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, land disturbance, excavating and
demolition.



   DEPARTMENT. The City Department of Storm Water Management.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in City Ord. 2006-3, Illicit
Discharge and Connection Storm Water Ordinance.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. Either of the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any non-storm
water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter
the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   INDIANA STORM WATER QUALITY MANUAL. A reference manual developed by the
state that provides guidance on planning principals, as well as criteria for
specific structural and non-structural storm water management practices.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 327 I.A.C. 15-6.



   MANAGER. The department head for City Department of Storm Water
Management.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of storm water.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner’s agent.



   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human- made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures.



   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or
business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the
actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm
water conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.082  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This subchapter covers any new development or re-development
construction site resulting in the disturbance of one acre or more of total
land area. Persons must meet the general permit rule applicability
requirements under 327 I.A.C. 15-2-6. This subchapter also applies to
disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a larger common
plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb
one or more acres of land within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   All terms, conditions, definitions and other measures defined
in 327 I.A.C. 15-5 shall apply, except for state permitting process
references and submittal deadlines of construction plans.



   (C)   This subchapter does not apply to persons who obtain an
individual NPDES permit under 327 I.A.C. 15-2-6.



   (D)   This subchapter does not apply to the Indiana Department of
Transportation when it conducts its business within the city corporate limit
under its NPDES permit under 327 I.A.C. 15.



   (E)   This subchapter does not apply to the following types of
activities:



      (1)   Agricultural land disturbance activities; and/or



      (2)   Forest harvesting activities.



   (F)   This subchapter does not apply to the following activities;
provided, other applicable permits contain provisions requiring immediate
implementation of soil erosion control measures:



      (1)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of
closure under 329 I.A.C. 10;



      (2)   Coal mining activities permitted under I.C. 14-34; and



      (3)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste
pursuant to a permit issued by the State Department of Environmental
Management under 329 I.A.C. 10 that contains equivalent storm water
requirements, including the expansion of landfill boundaries and construction
of new cells either within or outside the original solid waste permit
boundary.



   (G)   (1)   The following fees will be charged for the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan reviews that disturb one acre or more of
land, as outlined in this section. The applicant will submit cash, check or
money order made payable to Decatur Storm Water Department. The fee shall
accompany the development plan submittal and may be paid to the Decatur
Utilities Department located on the 1st floor of City Hall or mailed to the
City of Decatur, Utilities Storm Water Department, 172 North 2nd Street,
Decatur, IN 46733.



      (2)   Fees for applications are to as follows:



 


Acres (Overall Site Area)

 

Fee



1 - 4.99
 
$250


5 and over
 
$250 + $15/additional acre


Acreage will be calculated to the nearest whole acre, no fractional total
will be used



 



      (3)   If the applicant fails to directly address and attempts
to resolve concerns expressed by the Department, and such actions require
more than two plan reviews, a $150 fee will be imposed for each submission
thereafter.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.083  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.084  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be
severable.



   (B)   If any provision, clause, sentence or division of this chapter
or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.085  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
subchapter are minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend,
nor imply, that compliance by any person will ensure that there will not be
violations of NPDES permits.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.086  RESPONSIBILITY OF CONSTRUCTION SITE OWNER.



   (A)   The project site owner has the following responsibilities:



      (1)   Ensure that a sufficient construction plan is completed
and submitted in accordance with procedures established by the Department;



      (2)   Complete a sufficient notice of intent letter submitted
to the Department with a copy sent to the State Department of Environmental
Management;



      (3)   Make application for a land disturbance permit in
accordance with procedures established by the Department;



      (4)   Ensure compliance with this chapter during:



         (a)   The construction activity; and



         (b)   Implementation of the construction plan.



      (5)   Ensure that all persons engaging in construction
activities on a permitted project site comply with the applicable
requirements of this rule and the approved construction plan; and



      (6)   Notify the Department with a sufficient notice of
termination letter with a copy sent to the State Department of Environmental
Management.



   (B)   For off-site construction activities that provide services
(for example, road extensions, sewer, water and other utilities) to a
permitted project site, these off-site activity areas must be considered a
part of the permitted project site when the activity is under the control of
the project site owner.



   (C)   For an individual lot where land disturbance is expected to be
one acre or more and the lot lies within a project site permitted under this
rule, the individual lot owner shall:



      (1)   Ensure that a sufficient construction plan is completed
and submitted in accordance with procedures established by the Department;



      (2)   Complete his or her own notice of intent letter and
submit it to the Department; and



      (3)   Apply for a building permit in accordance with the
procedures established by the Department.



   (D)   For an individual lot where the land disturbance is less than
one acre and the lot lies within a project site permitted under this rule,
the individual lot operator shall:



      (1)   Comply with the provisions and requirements of the plan
developed by the project site owner in accordance with the procedures
established by the Department;



      (2)   Comply with the provisions set forth in § 52.090 of
this chapter;



      (3)   Not need to submit a notice of intent letter; and



      (4)   Apply for a building permit in accordance with the
procedures established by the Department.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.087  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STORM WATER QUALITY CONTROL.



   (A)   All storm water quality measures and erosion and sediment
controls necessary to comply with this chapter must be implemented in
accordance with the construction plan and sufficient to satisfy the following
conditions.



   (B)   A project site owner shall, at least, meet the following
requirements.



      (1)   Sediment-laden water which otherwise would flow from the
project site shall be treated by erosion and sediment control measures
appropriate to minimize sedimentation.



      (2)   Appropriate measures shall be implemented to minimize or
eliminate wastes or unused building materials, including garbage, debris,
cleaning wastes, wastewater, concrete truck washout and other substances from
being carried from a project site by run-off or wind. Identification of areas
where concrete truck washout is permissible must be clearly posted at
appropriate areas of the site. Wastes and unused building materials shall be
managed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable statutes and
regulations.



      (3)   A stable construction site access shall be provided at
all points of construction traffic ingress and egress to the project site.



      (4)   Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of
accumulated sediment that is a result of run-off or tracking. Bulk clearing
of sediment shall not include flushing the area with water. Cleared sediment
shall be redistributed or disposed of in a manner that is in accordance with
all applicable statutes and regulations.



      (5)   Storm water run-off leaving a project site must be
discharged in a manner that is consistent with applicable state or federal
law.



      (6)   The project site owner shall post a notice near the main
entrance of the project site. For linear project sites, such as a pipeline or
highway, the notice must be placed in a publicly accessible location near the
project field office. The notice must be maintained in a legible condition
and contain the following information:



         (a)   Copy of the completed NOI letter and the NPDES
permit number, where applicable;



         (b)   Name, company name, telephone number, e-mail
address (if available), and address of the project site owner or a local
contact person; and



         (c)   Location of the construction plan if the project
site does not have an on-site location to store the plan.



      (7)   This permit and posting of the notice under division
(B)(6) above does not provide the public with any right to trespass on a
project site for any reason, nor does it require that the project site owner
allow members of the public access to the project site.



      (8)   The storm water pollution prevention plan shall serve as
a guideline for storm water quality, but should not be interpreted to be the
only basis for implementation of storm water quality measures for a project
site. The project site owner is responsible for implementing, in accordance
with this rule, all measures necessary to adequately prevent polluted storm
water run-off.



      (9)   The project site owner shall inform all general
contractors, construction management firms, land disturbance or excavating
contractors, utility contractors, and the contractors that have primary
oversight on individual building lots of the terms and conditions of this
rule and the conditions and standards of the storm water pollution prevention
plan and the schedule for proposed implementation.



      (10)   Phasing of construction activities shall be used, where
possible, to minimize disturbance of large areas.



      (11)   Appropriate measures shall be planned and installed as
part of an erosion and sediment control system.



      (12)   All storm water quality measures must be designed and
installed under the guidance of a trained individual.



      (13)   Collected run-off leaving a project site must be either
discharged directly into a well-defined, stable receiving channel or diffused
and released to adjacent property without causing an erosion or pollutant
problem to the adjacent property owner.



      (14)   Drainage channels and swales must be designed and
adequately protected so that their final gradients and resultant velocities
will not cause erosion in the receiving channel or at the outlet.



      (15)   Natural features, including wetlands and sinkholes,
shall be protected from pollutants associated with storm water run-off.



      (16)   Unvegetated areas that are scheduled or likely to be
left inactive for 15 days or more must be temporarily or permanently
stabilized with measures appropriate for the season to minimize erosion
potential. Alternative measures to site stabilization are acceptable if the
project site owner or their representative can demonstrate they have
implemented erosion and sediment control measures adequate to prevent
sediment discharge. Vegetated areas with a density of less than 70% shall be
restabilized using appropriate methods to minimize the erosion potential.



      (17)   During the period of construction activities, all storm
water quality measures necessary to meet the requirements of this rule shall
be maintained in working order.



      (18)   A self-monitoring program that includes the following
must be implemented:



         (a)   A trained individual shall perform a written
evaluation of the project site:



            1.   By the end of the next business day following
each one-half inch of rain; and



            2.   At a minimum of one time per week.



         (b)   The evaluation must:



            1.   Address the maintenance of existing storm
water quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly; and



            2.   Identify additional measures necessary to
remain in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances.



         (c)   Written evaluation reports must include:



            1.   The name of the individual performing the
evaluation;



            2.   The date of the evaluation;



            3.   Problems identified at the project site; and



            4.   Details of corrective actions recommended and
completed.



         (d)   All evaluation reports for the project site must
be made available to the inspecting authority within 48 hours of a request.



      (19)   Proper storage and handling of materials, such as fuels
or hazardous wastes, and spill prevention and clean-up measures shall be
implemented to minimize the potential for pollutants to contaminate surface
or ground water or degrade soil quality.



      (20)   Final stabilization of a project site is achieved when:



         (a)   All land disturbance activities have been
completed and a uniform (for example, evenly distributed, without large bare
areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% has been established
on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or
equivalent permanent stabilization measures have been employed; and



         (b)   Construction projects on land used for
agricultural purposes are returned to its pre-construction agricultural use
or disturbed areas, not previously used for agricultural production, such as
filter strips and areas that are not being returned to their preconstruction
agricultural use, meet the final stabilization requirements in division
(B)(20)(a) above.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.088  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOTS WITHIN A
PERMITTED PROJECT.



   (A)   All storm water quality measures, including erosion and
sediment control, necessary to comply with this subchapter must be
implemented in accordance with the plan and sufficient to satisfy the
following conditions.



   (B)   Provisions for erosion and sediment control on individual
building lots regulated under the original permit of a project site owner
must include the following requirements:



      (1)   The individual lot operator, whether owning the property
or acting as the agent of the property owner, shall be responsible for
erosion and sediment control requirements associated with activities on
individual lots;



      (2)   Installation and maintenance of a stable construction
site access;



      (3)   Installation and maintenance of appropriate perimeter
erosion and sediment control measures prior to land disturbance;



      (4)   Sediment discharge and tracking from each lot must be
minimized throughout the land disturbance activities on the lot until
permanent stabilization has been achieved;



      (5)   Clean-up of sediment that is either tracked or washed
onto roads. Bulk clearing of sediment shall not include flushing the area
with water. Cleared sediment must be redistributed or disposed of in a manner
that is in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances;



      (6)   Adjacent lots disturbed by an individual lot operator
must be repaired and stabilized with temporary or permanent surface
stabilization;



      (7)   For individual residential lots, final stabilization
meeting the criteria in § 52.087(B)(20) of this chapter will be achieved
when the individual lot operator:



         (a)   Completes final stabilization; or



         (b)   Has installed appropriate erosion and sediment
control measures for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by the
homeowner and has informed the homeowner of the requirement for, and benefits
of, final stabilization.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.089  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   The Department shall have the authority to monitor discharges from
construction sites covered under this subchapter as described in City Ord.
2006-3, Illicit Discharge and Connection Storm Water Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.090  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The Department will establish requirements identifying best management
practices for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or
contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain
system or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
construction site shall provide, at his, her or their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of
these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for
a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge, may be required to implement, at said person’s expense,
additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the
extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this
section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.091  POST-CONSTRUCTION CONTROLS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   On areas that undergo new development or redevelopment, site
construction resulting in disturbance of one acre or more total land area,
post- construction control measures in the form of structural and/or
non-structural best management practices are required. Specifically,
post-construction storm water pollutant loading should not exceed
pre-construction pollutant loading. Pre-construction refers to the site
immediately before the planned land disturbance and development activities
occur. Pre-construction is not intended to be interpreted as that period
before any human-induced land disturbance activity has occurred.
Post-construction pollutant loadings will be controlled through the six
minimum control measures under the city’s storm water NPDES permit.
Post-construction storm water best management practices (BMPs) shall follow
Indiana’s Storm Water Quality Manual as a guidance document. The city shall
have full technical and administrative approval authority on the application
and design of all post-construction  BMPs, conditions, definitions and
submittal requirements of construction plans and specifications and other
related documents. The minimum measures are implemented to meet the terms
defined in 327 I.A.C. 15-5-6.5(a)(8) which are enumerated below.



   (B)   The Post-Construction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWP3) must include the following information:



      (1)   A description of potential pollutant sources from the
proposed land use that may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount
of pollutants to storm water discharges;



      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all post- construction storm water quality measures;



      (3)   A description of measures that will be installed to
control pollutants in storm water discharges that will occur after
construction activities have been completed. Such practices include
infiltration of run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter
strip creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness,
maximization of open space and storm water retention and detention ponds;



      (4)   A sequence describing when each post- construction storm
water quality measure will be installed;



      (5)   Storm water quality measures that will remove or
minimize pollutants from storm water run- off;



      (6)   Storm water quality measures that will be implemented to
prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian habitat;



      (7)   Storm water quality measures that will be implemented to
prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream or riparian habitat; and



      (8)   A narrative description of the maintenance guidelines
for all post-construction storm water quality measures to facilitate their
proper long term function. This narrative BMP description shall be made
available to future parties who will assume responsibility for the operation
and maintenance of the post-construction storm water quality measures.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.092  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be subject to the
severity of the infraction and the construction site operator’s efforts to
comply. The Department shall reserve the right to interpret enforcement on a
case by case basis. Tiered enforcement will be practiced at the Manager’s
discretion. The tiered enforcement may include:



      (1)   Verbal warning to the construction site operator to make
corrections;



      (2)   Written warning to the construction site operator to
make corrections within a specified period of time. The period of time shall
take into account issues such as the severity of the problem, pending
weather, seasonal conditions and the level of effort necessary to correct the
problem;



      (3)   Written warning of non-compliance with directions to the
construction site operator that site conditions require immediate action; and



      (4)   Stop work order.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice of violation  shall set forth a deadline
within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice
shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated
governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged
to the violator.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Injunctive relief and civil penalty.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of §§ 52.050
through 52.066 of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of §§ 52.050 through 52.066 of this chapter, the
authorized department may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



         (b)   Additionally, any person that has violated or
continues to violate §§ 52.050 through 52.066 of this chapter shall be
liable for civil penalties to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a fine of up to $100 per violation per day.



         (c)   The Department may recover all attorney’s fees
court costs, consultant costs and other expenses associated with enforcement
of §§ 52.050 through 52.066 of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.



      (2)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by §§ 52.050 through 52.066 of this
chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance
at compliance workshops, creek cleanup and the like.



      (3)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 52.050
through 52.066 of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated
or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



      (4)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in §§
52.050 through 52.066 of this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the Department to seek cumulative remedies.



(Prior Code, § 53.30)



   (B)   (1)   Injunctive relief and civil penalty.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of §§ 52.080
through 52.092 of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of §§ 52.080 through 52.092 of this chapter, the
Department may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



         (b)   Additionally, any person that has violated or
continues to violate §§ 52.080 through 52.092 of this chapter shall be
liable for civil penalties to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be
subject to a fine of up to $100 per violation per day.



         (c)   The Department may recover all attorney’s fees
court costs, consultant costs and other expenses associated with enforcement
of §§ 52.080 through 52.092 of this chapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.



      (2)   Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties and remedies authorized by §§ 52.080 through 52.092 of this
chapter, the Department may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
action, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup and the like.



      (3)   Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 52.080
through 52.092 of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety and
welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated
or restored at the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



      (4)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in §§
52.080 through 52.092 of this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.



(Prior Code, § 53.40)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   53.001   Removal from jurisdiction of Indiana Utility Regulatory
Commission



   53.002   Water rates



   53.003   Rules and regulations on file



   53.004   Written application of contract required



   53.005   Modification of contract



   53.006   Assignment of contract



   53.007   Turning on water service



   53.008   Description of service to be furnished



   53.009   Waste of water



   53.010   Interruption of service and the like



   53.011   Use of fire hydrant



   53.012   Hydrant connection charge



   53.013   Water main extensions




Services; Taps




   53.025   Location of service connection



   53.026   Cost of service connection



   53.027   Service line



   53.028   Service pipe and fix time requirements



   53.029   Service to more than one building



   53.030   Installation of service pipe



   53.031   Permits and fees



   53.032   Prerequisites for installation of taps



   53.033   Tap installation



   53.034   Installation and marking service line



   53.035   Liability for repairs



   53.036   Scheduling of taps



   53.037   Temporary metering



   53.038   Repair of service pipes




Service Piping and Fittings




   53.050   Shutoff valves



   53.051   Maintenance by utility



   53.052   Maintenance by property owner



   53.053   Cross-connections; state regulations



   53.054   Cross-connections; physical connections prohibited



   53.055   Cross-connections; inspections



   53.056   Use of booster pump




Meter Readings and Billings




   53.070   Monthly readings and billings



   53.071   Minimum charge



   53.072   Liability for charges



   53.073   Fire protection billing



   53.074   Place of payment



   53.075   Calculation of charges



   53.076   Reading of meters



   53.077   Billing multiple meters



   53.078   Billing for all metered water



   53.079   Resale of water



   53.080   Access to premises



   53.081   Maintenance of meter area



   53.082   Inspection of meter and plumbing



   53.083   Leakage



   53.084   Meter tests



   53.085   Erroneous bills



   53.086   Meter seals




Meters




   53.100   General meter information



   53.101   Size of meter



   53.102   Bypass of meter required



   53.103   Ownership of meters and appliances



   53.104   Meter repair



   53.105   Meter inspection and tests



   53.106   Testing criteria



   53.107   New service water meters



   53.108   Replacement of meter



   53.109   Removal of meter




Fire Protection




   53.120   General rules and specifications



   53.121   Inspection access, underwriter approval



   53.122   Alarm and check valve




Discontinuance of Service




   53.135   Notice



   53.136   Absence of customer



   53.137   Temporary discontinuance



   53.138   Contract



   53.139   Reasons for discontinuance



   53.140   Written notice of discontinuance



   53.141   Remedies



 



   53.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.001  REMOVAL FROM JURISDICTION OF INDIANA UTILITY REGULATORY
COMMISSION.



   The city’s municipally owned water utility is hereby removed from the
jurisdiction of the Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission for the approval of
rates and charges and of the issuance of stocks, bonds, notes or other
evidence of indebtedness.



(Prior Code, § 51.00)  (Ord. 1990-3, passed 6-5-1990)



§ 53.002  WATER RATES.



   Commencing with the first billing cycle following passage of this
section, there are established for the use of and the service rendered by the
waterworks system of the city the following rates and charges, based on the
use of water supplied by the waterworks system:



   (A)   Rates per 100 cubic feet.



      (1)   Metered rates per month.



 



 

Phase I



2018

 

Phase II



2020





 
 

Inside

 

Outside*

 

Inside

 

Outside*



First 360 cubic feet
 

$5.42

 

$7.04

 

$6.88

 

$8.94



Next 900 cubic feet
 

$5.22

 

$6.78

 

$6.63

 

$8.61



Next 1,000 cubic feet
 

$5.03

 

$6.52

 

$6.39

 

$8.28



Next 2,000 cubic feet
 

$4.68

 

$6.08

 

$5.94

 

$7.72



Next 16,000 cubic feet
 

$4.09

 

$5.31

 

$5.19

 

$6.74



Next 20,000 cubic feet
 

$2.25

 

$2.92

 

$2.86

 

$3.71



Next 40,260 cubic feet
 

$2.04

 

$2.65

 

$2.59

 

$3.36



NOTES TO TABLE:

*Outside: where hydrants are available









      (2)   Minimum charge.



         (a)   Each user shall pay a minimum charge in accordance
with the following applicable size of meter installed, for which the user
will be entitled to the quantity of water set out in the above schedule of
rates:



 



 

Phase I



2018

 

Phase II



2020






Size of Meter per Month

 

Inside

 

Outside*

 

Inside

 

Outside *




5/8-inch

 

$19.51

 

$25.34

 

$24.77

 

$32.18




3/4-inch

 

$19.51

 

$25.34

 

$24.77

 

$32.18




1-inch

 

$22.04

 

$28.64

 

$27.99

 

$36.37




1-1/4 inch

 

$33.71

 

$43.82

 

$42.81

 

$55.65




1-1/2 inch

 

$51.28

 

$66.65

 

$65.13

 

$84.65




2-inch

 

$64.89

 

$84.35

 

$82.41

 

$107.12




3-inch

 

$88.28

 

$114.76

 

$112.12

 

$145.75




4-inch

 

$109.06

 

$141.77

 

$138.51

 

$180.05




6-inch

 

$170.42

 

$221.54

 

$216.43

 

$281.35



NOTES TO TABLE:

*Outside: Where hydrants are available




 



         (b)   The rates and charges for users of water outside
the corporate limits of the city shall be 130% of the monthly rates and
charges for all other users; provided, however, that, such additional charge
shall apply only if fire hydrants are maintained in the general area for
furnishing fire protection to the property so served and that the city is not
otherwise compensated for fire hydrant service.



   (B)   Fire hydrants:



      (1)   Municipal: $0; and



      (2)   Non-municipal (per annum):



         (a)   Phase I; 2018: $586.25.



         (b)   Phase II; 2020: $744.54.



   (C)   Monthly fire protection (per equivalent user). Each user shall
pay a minimum charge in accordance with the following applicable size of
meter installed, for which the user will be entitled to fire protection.



 



 

Phase I



2018

 

Phase II



2020





Size of meter
 

Per month

 

Per month




5/8-inch

 

$3.22

 

$4.09




3/4-inch

 

$3.22

 

$4.09




1-inch

 

$6.44

 

$8.18




1-1/4 inch

 

$9.66

 

$12.27




1-1/2 inch

 

$12.88

 

$16.36




2-inch

 

$20.93

 

$26.58




3-inch

 

$38.64

 

$49.07




4-inch

 

$64.40

 

$81.79




6-inch

 

$125.58

 

$159.49





 



   (D)   Municipal drinking fountains per annum:



      (1)   Phase I; 2018: $526.05.



      (2)   Phase II; 2020: $668.08.



   (E)   Private fire protection:



 



 

Phase I



2018

 

Phase II



2020



 
 

Per annum



6-inch connection
 

$885.50

 

$1,124.59



8-inch connection
 

$1,618.05

 

$2,054.92



10-inch and over connection
 

$2,447.20

 

$3,107.94




 



   (F)   Temporary users. Water furnished to temporary users, such as
contractors, circuses and the like shall be charged on the basis of the
metered rates hereinabove set forth as estimated and established by the
Superintendent.



   (G)   Tap charge.



      (1)   A tap charge shall be collected from each customer,
prior to connection to the water system, in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the city for the labor and material necessary for tapping the main and
installation of service from the main to the curb stop and the cost of
furnishing and installing a suitable water meter.



      (2)   The charge for a five-eighths inch to a three-fourths
inch installation shall be in the amount of $750. The charge for a one inch
installation shall be in the amount of $1,000. The charge for a larger than
one inch installation shall be the labor and material costs incurred in
connection with such installation.



   (H)   Minimum charges for miscellaneous billing.



 


Hydrant connection charge

 

$70



Insufficient fund/personal check
 

$20



Meter test:


   Minimum for all meter sizes
 

$20



Service call charge
 

$15



Turn on connection charge
 

$20




 



   (I)   Monthly rates for resale of raw water.



 

 
Phase I

2018
 
Phase II

2020




Gallons
 
Rate per 1,000 gallons


First 750,000
 
$0.84
 
$1.07


Next 1,250,000
 
$0.77
 
$0.98


Next 2,000,000
 
$0.66
 
$0.84


Next 6,000,000
 
$0.60
 
$0.76


Next 10,000,000
 
$0.50
 
$0.64


Minimum monthly charge
 
$632.24
 
$802.94




 



(Prior Code, § 51.01)  (Ord. 1994-11, passed 10-18-1994; Ord. 2009-5,
passed 9-1-2009; Ord. 2009-13, passed 12-15-2009; Ord. 2016-9, passed
8-16-2016; Ord. 2017-10, passed 10-3-2017; Ord. 2018-2, passed 2-6-2018)



§ 53.003  RULES AND REGULATIONS ON FILE.



   A copy of all rates, rules and regulations, and material specifications
under which water service will be rendered is filed for the convenience of
the public in the general office of the utility and shall be complied with
when water service is to be provided.



(Prior Code, § 51.02)



§ 53.004  WRITTEN APPLICATION OF CONTRACT REQUIRED.



   A written application for the service or a contract properly executed
will be required from a prospective customer (including contractors and
builders) before the utility will supply service; however, the utility shall
have the right to reject an application for any valid reason. Where unusual
construction or equipment expenses will be involved in furnishing the
service, the utility may require the contract to be for an appropriate period
of time specified by the utility when the contract is executed.



(Prior Code, § 51.03)



§ 53.005  MODIFICATION OF CONTRACT.



   No promise, agreement or representation by any agent of the utility
shall be binding upon the utility unless it has been incorporated in a
written contract signed and approved by an agent of the utility authorized to
sign such contract on behalf of the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.04)



§ 53.006  ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACT.



   The benefits and obligations under any contract for the supply of water
by the utility shall begin when the utility commences to supply water service
thereunder and shall so inure and be binding upon the successors, assigns,
survivors, executors or administrators, that no assignment thereof shall be
made by the customer or by any successor, assign, survivor, executor or
administrator, unless the utility’s written consent to any such assignment
is first obtained.



(Prior Code, § 51.05)



§ 53.007  TURNING ON WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   (1)   Until a request for water service has been executed
and a meter has been installed, water shall not be turned on at any premises
by anyone but a water utility representative.



      (2)   No person, except an authorized employee of the water
utility, Fire and Street Departments or any other authorized person, shall
open, operate or remove the nozzle cap from any fire hydrant to which water
is supplied by utility.



      (3)   When water is required to test plumbing before a water
contract has been executed and a meter installed, a water utility employee
shall be called to make the turn-on and turn-off. It is a violation of this
chapter for anyone, except a water utility employee to make such turn-on.



   (B)   A violation of this rule will subject the offender to the
penalty provided in § 53.999 of this chapter and to payment for the
estimated quantity of water consumed during the period the water was turned
on without authority from the water utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.06)  (Amended 9-16-2008)



§ 53.008  DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE TO BE FURNISHED.



   Upon request, the customer shall present to the utility a written list
of the devices which are to be attached to the utility’s lines, giving the
location of the building, and the utility then will advise the form and the
character of the supply available.



(Prior Code, § 51.07)



§ 53.009  WASTE OF WATER.



   There shall be no waste of water.



(Prior Code, § 51.08)  (Amended 9-16-2008)



§ 53.010  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE AND THE LIKE.



   The utility shall not be responsible in damages for any failure to
supply water service or for interruption of the supply of water, for
defective piping on the customer’s premises or for damages resulting to a
customer or to third persons from the use of water or the presence of the
utility’s devices on the customer’s premises, unless due to fault,
neglect or culpability on the part of the utility. Neither party shall be
liable to the other for any failure or delay in case such failure or delays
caused by strikes, the acts of nature, unavoidable accidents or contingencies
beyond its control and is not due to fault, neglect or culpability on its
part.



(Prior Code, § 51.150)



§ 53.011  USE OF FIRE HYDRANT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, excepting members of
the Fire, Street and Water Departments of the city, to open and cause water
to be removed from a fire hydrant without the consent of the Water
Superintendent. It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief and the Street
Commissioner to immediately report the use of all fire hydrants from November
1 to April 1, and the same will be inspected by the Water Department.



(Prior Code, § 51.151)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.012  HYDRANT CONNECTION CHARGE.



   Swimming pools shall be filled with customer’s regular service. No
pools shall be filled through the direct use of a fire hydrant. Use of a fire
hydrant for purposes other than fire suppression shall be prohibited unless
permitted by the utility and unless the customer pays the permit fee and
meter service at the schedule rates.



(Prior Code, § 51.152)



§ 53.013  WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   the City Water Department shall determine the type of material
to be used in the construction of all water main extension. Water mains will
be of ductile iron or P.V.C. water pipe. P.V.C. must be U.L. approved for
both potable water and fire protection. It shall be class D.R. 18 with cast
iron O.D. or equal.



   (B)   All fire hydrants shall be the same make and shall meet the
same specifications as those installed by the City Water Department.



   (C)   No water main extensions shall have any dead end, unless
written approval therefor shall have been obtained from the City Water
Department.



(Prior Code, § 51.153)  (Amended 10-7-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.999




SERVICES; TAPS




§ 53.025  LOCATION OF SERVICE CONNECTION.



   The utility reserves the right to locate the point at which the service
connection will be made, and to furnish and run service pipe from the main to
the curb line, inside line of sidewalk or customer’s property line,
whichever, in the judgment of the utility, will provide the safest, most
convenient and most satisfactory location for the curb stop and service box.



(Prior Code, § 51.20)



§ 53.026  COST OF SERVICE CONNECTION.



   The customer shall pay the utility for the cost of such service
connection and water meter based upon the rates and charges set forth in §
53.002 of this chapter, however, where the distance from the water main to
the customer’s curb box exceeds 50 feet, the customer shall pay the actual
cost for the connection in excess of 50 feet.



(Prior Code, § 51.21)  (Amended 9-23-2008)



§ 53.027  SERVICE LINE.



   (A)   The customer, at his or her own expense, shall install, or
cause to be installed, the service line from the curb stop into his or her
own premises.



   (B)   The utility and/or the City Building Inspector reserves the
right to inspect, before the service trench is backfilled, each service run
made by a plumber, a contractor or an individual customer.



(Prior Code, § 51.22)  (Amended 9-23-2008)



§ 53.028  SERVICE PIPE AND FIX TIME REQUIREMENTS.



   Service pipe to the meter shall be type “K” copper and so stamped
or labeled and/or poly pipe 200 psi CTS with #12 solid copper trace wire. All
underground connections shall be type “K” copper and so stamped or
labeled or connections shall be compression with inserts for poly pipe. All
underground connections shall be compression connections. Service pipe must
be at least three and one-half feet below the surface and shall be so
protected as to prevent injury occasioned by freezing.



(Prior Code, § 51.23)  (Ord. 2011-7, passed 9-20-2011)



§ 53.029  SERVICE TO MORE THAN ONE BUILDING.



   Water service will not be furnished through a single-service pipe to
more than one residence or building, unless approved by the utility after
determining an appropriate rate of billing, service and shut off capabilities.



(Prior Code, § 51.24)



§ 53.030  INSTALLATION OF SERVICE PIPE.



   (A)   A new service pipe between the distribution main and a
building shall be run in a straight line, whenever it is practicable and
possible, without bends and at a depth of not less than four feet.



   (B)   No pipe having joints shall be driven.



(Prior Code, § 51.25)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.031  PERMITS AND FEES.



   Developers, contractors and individuals requesting taps shall obtain
from the Utility Department or the Building Department the necessary permits
for each lot or separate premises to be served. Applications for taps shall
be accompanied by the necessary prevailing fees.



(Prior Code, § 51.26)  (Amended 9-23-2008)



§ 53.032  PREREQUISITES FOR INSTALLATION OF TAPS.



   (A)   Taps will not be installed until platting has been approved,
rough grading has been completed, and sidewalks and curbs have been located.



   (B)   If pavement is to be placed where a main or taps are to be
installed, then the developer shall be responsible for such installation at
the developer’s cost.



(Prior Code, § 51.27)  (Amended 9-23-2008)



§ 53.033  TAP INSTALLATION.



   Unless otherwise the responsibility of a developer to install water
taps as part of a subdivision development, all other water taps should be
installed by the water utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.28)  (Amended 9-23-2008)



§ 53.034  INSTALLATION AND MARKING SERVICE LINE.



   Water service lines and sewer lines are not to be installed in the same
trenches unless they are laid four feet apart and bedded on firm soil. All
sewer and water lines shall be installed in accordance with state regulations
and local ordinances. If the service line from the house to the curb shutoff
valve site is installed prior to the utility installing the service tap, the
end of the line shall be marked as above, or the service pipe shall project
above the surface to show its location. In general, taps shall be installed
at the front center line of the lot, and the plumber’s portion of the
service line between the curb shutoff and the property line shall extend
perpendicularly to the main completely to the property line of the lot
served, before any change in direction is made. The curb box will be
installed at a location established by the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.29)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.035  LIABILITY FOR REPAIRS.



   Any developer, general contractor or person responsible for disturbing
or damaging water service or valve boxes, once the services have been
properly installed, shall be liable for the cost of repairs.



(Prior Code, § 51.30)



§ 53.036  SCHEDULING OF TAPS.



   The utility will make every reasonable effort to assist the customer or
developer in scheduling the tapping for orderly installation to avoid
needless conflict or delay, weather permitting. A week’s notice of the need
for a tap shall be given by owner or builder.



(Prior Code, § 51.31)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.037  TEMPORARY METERING.



   The supply of water for any construction, including commercial and
industrial, will necessitate the installing of a meter in temporary housing
giving sufficient protection to prevent freezing or vandalism and will result
in a minimum fee of $25 per month charged by the utility for such service.



(Prior Code, § 51.32)



§ 53.038  REPAIR OF SERVICE PIPES.



   All service pipes from the curb box to the basement or meter which have
heretofore been installed with galvanized iron pipe and which have become
leaky shall not be repaired with galvanized iron pipe, but the same shall be
replaced with copper or 200 psi C.T. Poly as hereinbefore specified for new
services.



(Prior Code, § 51.33)  (Amended 9-30-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.999




SERVICE PIPING AND FITTINGS




§ 53.050  SHUTOFF VALVES.



   Each applicant for service shall, at his or her own expense, equip his
or her service line with a suitable shutoff valve or valves just inside the
foundation wall and shall provide all piping and attachments, all of which
shall be assembled, installed and maintained by him or her, subject to the
approval of any authorized inspectors and in accordance with the utility’s
general rules and regulations in force at that time. Each new or repaired
water service line of two inches in diameter or less shall have a ball-type
valve on the inlet side of the meter to service line in excess of two inches
in diameter shall have a shut off valve of a type approved by the inspector.



(Prior Code, § 51.40)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.051  MAINTENANCE BY UTILITY.



   All service pipes from the water main to and including the curb stop
shall be maintained in good repair at the expense of the utility, including
the replacement thereof if necessitated because of damage, corrosion,
tuberculation or other deterioration.



(Prior Code, § 51.41)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.052  MAINTENANCE BY PROPERTY OWNER.



   All service pipes and fixtures from the curb stop to the meter shall be
installed and maintained at the expense of the property owner and any leaks
or other defects in these shall be properly repaired by him or her. Service
extended to property not adjacent to a water main, whether through public or
private property, shall be considered a service pipe, the maintenance of
which will be the customer’s responsibility, unless the line or main has
been accepted in writing for maintenance by the utility prior to its
installation. If needed repairs are not made to service lines within seven
days of written notification by the utility, service to the property shall be
discontinued until the repairs are made.



(Prior Code, § 51.42)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.053  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; STATE REGULATIONS.



   Any cross-connections with other sources of water supply shall be made
in conformity with the rules and regulatory of the State Board of Health
and/or such requirements as other regulatory bodies may from time to time
require and/or the rules and regulations of the utility in force at that
time. Copies of the State Board of Health regulations and requirements are on
file in the office of the utility for the benefit and inspection of parties
concerned.



(Prior Code, § 51.43)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.054  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; PHYSICAL CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   All plumbing shall conform to the City Plumbing Code which does not
permit physical connections between the public water supply and waste lines,
process solution lines tanks and the like, unless properly protected by
approved safety devices.



(Prior Code, § 51.44)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.055  CROSS-CONNECTIONS; INSPECTIONS.



   A utility representative will make periodic inspections of customer’s
piping and will report any violations, as set out in §§ 53.053 and 53.054
of this chapter, to both the customer and to the respective regulatory
authority. The utility will not assume responsibility for damage, sickness or
death arising from the existence of an improper cross-connection or the use
or failure of a cross-connection. The discovery of a non-complying
installation may lead to a disconnection of service.



(Prior Code, § 51.45)



§ 53.056  USE OF BOOSTER PUMP.



   No booster pump shall be installed without the written approval of the
utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.46)  (Amended 9-30-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.999




METER READINGS AND BILLINGS




§ 53.070  MONTHLY READINGS AND BILLINGS.



   Meters will be read monthly and bills will be rendered monthly,
according to the schedule of rates filed. If a bill is not paid on or before
the due date (approximately 22 days after the current meter reading date or
ten days after the anticipated mailing date, whichever is later) indicated on
the bill, the customer will be considered delinquent and, at any time
thereafter prior to the payment thereof, the utility may, ten days after
written notice has been given to such delinquent customer, discontinue
service.



(Prior Code, § 51.50)



§ 53.071  MINIMUM CHARGE.



   A minimum charge of $20 shall be made for either a turn-off or turn-on.



(Prior Code, § 51.51)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.072  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The procedures, rates and charges for the use of and the service
rendered by the city's water utility for water usage and fire protection
established in Chapter 53, and liability therefore, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of each and every lot, parcel of real estate, or
building that is connected to the water utility system, regardless of
occupancy. If the city permits utility bills to be invoiced to an occupant,
liability for payment shall be the joint and several liability of the
occupant and owner. In addition, it shall be the owner's responsibility to
verify payments are timely made by an occupant. Failure on the part of the
owner or occupant to pay or cause payment for such services and such other
services included on the utility bill referenced in § 50.40 shall result in
the exercise of remedies against the owner, set forth in this chapter as well
as that set forth in §§ 50.40 and 50.41.



(Prior Code, § 51.52)  (Amended 9-30-2008; Ord. 2018-15, passed 8-7-2018)



§ 53.073  FIRE PROTECTION BILLING.



   Bills for public fire protection shall be rendered monthly. Bills for
private fire protection and municipal drinking fountains shall be rendered 
annually in  advance.



(Prior Code, § 51.53)



§ 53.074  PLACE OF PAYMENT.



   Each bill shall be due upon receipt and payable at the water utility
office or at such other places as may be designated by the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.54)



§ 53.075  CALCULATIONS OF CHARGES.



   All charges for water service, other than the service charge, if any,
shall be calculated upon the registration of the meter or meters installed.



(Prior Code, § 51.55)



§ 53.076  READING OF METERS.



   (A)   The utility will make an effort to read meters monthly and
such reading shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of water used. If
the utility is unable to gain access to a customer’s property, the customer
shall be billed an estimated charge based on the average of previous meter
readings. The first billing made after the meter is read shall be adjusted
according to the meter reading.



   (B)   No more than three consecutive estimated billings will be
allowed; after that, the customer may be required to have a radio meter
installed.



(Prior Code, § 51.56)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.077  BILLING MULTIPLE METERS.



   Where water is taken through more than one meter, each meter shall be
read and billed separately.



(Prior Code, § 51.57)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.078  BILLING FOR ALL METERED WATER.



   All water passing through meters shall be charged for, whether used,
wasted or lost through leakage.



(Prior Code, § 51.58)



§ 53.079  RESALE OF WATER.



   The water furnished under these rules is for the use of the customer on
his or her premises; the customer shall not resell any of it without the
written consent of the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.59)  (Amended 9-30-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.080  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   The properly authorized representatives of the utility shall have the
right to enter upon the premises of the customer at all reasonable times for
the purpose of inspecting cross-connections, protective devices, atmospheric
tank installations, booster pump vacuum breaker valves and general plumbing,
as well as for the purpose of reading, inspecting, repairing or replacing the
meter or meters used in connection with the service and removing such meter
or meters at the termination of the agreement or the discontinuance of the
service.



(Prior Code, § 51.60)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.081  MAINTENANCE OF METER AREA.



   (A)   Wherever a meter is set, the consumer shall be required to
keep the surroundings of the meter clean, dry and of easy access, and protect
the same from freezing.



   (B)   In case of a violation of this provision and failure on the
part of the owner or occupant of the premises to remove such obstruction upon
notice from the Water Department, the water shall be shut off immediately
from the premises.



(Prior Code, § 51.61)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.082  INSPECTION OF METER AND PLUMBING.



   The Water Department reserves the right to examine the meter and
plumbing connected with the water works system at any and all reasonable
times.



(Prior Code, § 51.62)



§ 53.083  LEAKAGE.



   No credit will be allowed for leakage after the same has passed through
the meter unless so ordered by the Board of Works.



(Prior Code, § 51.63)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.084  METER TESTS.



   All meters shall be tested by the Water Department whenever deemed
necessary by the Superintendent and shall be tested once a year free of
charge whenever requested by the consumer. Otherwise, the charge of testing
shall be paid by consumer.



(Prior Code, § 51.64)



§ 53.085  ERRONEOUS BILLS.



   All bills erroneously charged shall be corrected for the current month
only if the results of the test which, in the judgment of the Water
Department, warrant correction.



(Prior Code, § 51.65)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.086  METER SEALS.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to break or remove a seal placed upon
any meter or stop by the Water Department.



(Prior Code, § 51.66)  Penalty, see § 53.999




METERS




§ 53.100  GENERAL METER INFORMATION.



   Unless otherwise specified in the agreement between the utility and the
customer or by the rate on file, the water supplied will be measured by a
meter or meters of standard manufacture, furnished and installed by the
utility according to its requirements in force and effect as amended from
time to time. The customer shall provide for this purpose, free of expense to
the utility, a suitable place near the service entrance, either in the
basement or in a location which is approved by the utility before
installation and which is readily accessible to the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.70)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.101  SIZE OF METER.



   (A)   The utility will designate the size of the meter to be used
for serving any customer.



   (B)   Each building to be served must be supplied by at least a
three-fourths inch service.



   (C)   When the service is larger than this, the utility reserves the
right to designate the number of meters that can be supplied by such service.



(Prior Code, § 51.71)



§ 53.102  BYPASS OF METER REQUIRED.



   (A)   Bypass around any new or existing meter installation will be
required under any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The service line on the outlet side of the meter is one
and one-half inches or larger;



      (2)   The service line, regardless of size, serves
refrigeration equipment; and



      (3)   The water service must not, for any reason, be
interrupted while the meter is being repaired or replaced.



   (B)   The bypass shall be furnished and installed by the customer
according to the utility’s specifications. Where existing piping not
containing a bypass is altered to meet any of the above conditions, the
alteration shall also include the installation of a bypass.



(Prior Code, § 51.72)  (Amended 9-30-2008)



§ 53.103  OWNERSHIP OF METERS AND APPLIANCES.



   All meters or other appliances and equipment which are furnished by and
at the expense of the utility and which may at the time be on the
customer’s premises shall, unless otherwise provided herein, be and remain
the property of the utility; the customer shall protect such property from
freezing and from loss or damage and no one who is not a representative of
the utility shall be permitted to remove such property or tamper therewith.



(Prior Code, § 51.73)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.104  METER REPAIR.



   Ordinary repairs to meters will be made by the utility without expense
to the customer. Repairs of damage caused by carelessness or neglect on the
part of the customer will also be made by the utility, but the cost of such
repairs shall be charged to the customer.



(Prior Code, § 51.74)



§ 53.105  METER INSPECTION AND TESTS.



   (A)   (1)   A meter may be inspected and tested by the utility at
any reasonable time. A meter will be tested by the utility upon request of
the customer, but not more frequently than once in 12 months.



      (2)   A report of the results of such a test will be made to
the customer and a complete record of the test will be kept on file in the
office of the utility.



      (3)   The customer may be present or have a representative
present when the meter is tested.



      (4)   If a test requested by the customer establishes that the
meter is over registering more than 3%, no charge will be made for the test;
otherwise, the utility shall charge the customer for making the test at the
then established rate.



   (B)   For each water meter:



 


5/8-inch

 

$4




3/4-inch

 

$4




1-inch

 

$5




1-1/2 inches

 

$10




2 inches and over

 

Actual cost




 



(Prior Code, § 51.75)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.106  TESTING CRITERIA.



   For the determination of meter accuracy, the utility shall use the
appropriate test flows specified by the American Water Works Association for
the various type of meters. These test flows for displacement type cold water
meters are on file in the office of the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.76)



§ 53.107  NEW SERVICE WATER METERS.



   All new buildings shall be equipped with a water meter device approved
by the utility.



(Prior Code, § 51.77)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.108  REPLACEMENT OF METER.



   Replacement of stopped, leaking and/or defective meters will be made
with a meter approved by the utility at the utility’s expense.



(Prior Code, § 51.78)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.109  REMOVAL OF METER.



   The Water Department shall have the right to take out and remove any
water meter for the purpose of inspecting, repairing or testing the same;
and, in such cases, suitable provisions shall be made by the Water Department
for the necessary supply during the removal of the meter.



(Prior Code, § 51.79)




FIRE PROTECTION




§ 53.120  GENERAL RULES AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Before any modifications are made to any private fire
protection system, or before service is furnished to any new fire protection
system connected to or proposed to be connected to and supplied with water
from the utility’s distribution mains, final plans shall be filed with the
Building Department which shall submit such plans for approval to the City
Plan Commission in the case of new construction or to the City Board of
Zoning Appeals in case of a change of use which requires the Board of Zoning
Appeals approval.



   (B)   The following shall be shown on the plans:



      (1)   The number of sprinkler heads to be served;



      (2)   The sizes and locations of the system’s piping;



      (3)   The sizes and locations of all connections to the
utility’s distribution mains;



      (4)   The sizes, locations and types of all valves;



      (5)   The sizes and locations of all hose connections, reels
or cabinets;



      (6)   The sizes and locations of storage tanks connected to
the system; and



      (7)   The outlet sizes and locations of all fire hydrants.



(Prior Code, § 51.80)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.121  INSPECTION ACCESS, UNDERWRITER APPROVAL.



   All fire protection lines within buildings shall be installed in such
manner that all pipes will be easily accessible for inspection at any time.
Underground pipes outside of buildings must be placed and maintained at a
minimum depth of four and one-half feet. No connections with a fire
protection system will be permitted to supply water service for commercial or
industrial use, unless the connection has been approved by the customer’s
fire underwriter and unless the commercial or industrial use is metered.



(Prior Code, § 51.81)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.122  ALARM AND CHECK VALVE.



   A private fire protection system without a tank shall be  equipped
with an alarm valve and a check valve. A system with a tank shall have one
alarm valve and two check valves.



(Prior Code, § 51.82)  Penalty, see § 53.999




DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE




§ 53.135  NOTICE.



   Whenever a customer desires to have service discontinued, he or she
shall give sufficient advance notice to enable the utility to obtain the
final meter reading.



(Prior Code, § 51.100)



§ 53.136  ABSENCE OF CUSTOMER.



   There will be no adjustment of charges, in whole or in part, by reason
of the extended absence of the customer or for any other cause unless the
utility has been notified to turn off the water.



(Prior Code, § 51.101)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.137  TEMPORARY DISCONTINUANCE.



   When water service is temporarily discontinued at the request of a
customer, a minimum charge to cover the expense of turning the water off and
on may be made at the time the water is turned on.



(Prior Code, § 51.102)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.138  CONTRACT.



   Discontinuance of service shall not apply to any case where a customer
has entered into a contract with the utility to take service from the utility
for a definite period of time specified or provided for in such contract.



(Prior Code, § 51.103)



§ 53.139  REASONS FOR DISCONTINUANCE.



   The utility may discontinue the service of any customer for any of the
following reasons:



   (A)   For repairs;



   (B)   For want of supply;



   (C)   For any use of water unauthorized by the utility;



   (D)   For unapproved cross-connections of a customer’s water pipes
to any other source of water supply or for permitting any condition to exist
about the premises that causes or might cause pollution of the public water
supply;



   (E)   Upon order by any authority having jurisdiction of such
matters;



   (F)   For any leak in the service pipe or appurtenances between the
property line and the meter or in any private fire protection system or other
unmetered facilities;



   (G)   For any tampering or knowingly permitting any tampering with
any service pipe, service stop, meter or meter seal;



   (H)   For vacancy of premises;



   (I)   For failure to pay, in accordance with these rules, any water
bills or other charges in connection with water utility service installation
or facilities;



   (J)   For failure to provide free and non- hazardous access to the
premises and meter so that representatives of the utility may take meter
readings, make all necessary inspections, and maintain, replace or remove the
meter;



   (K)   For failure to maintain approved meter settings, including
pits and vaults;



   (L)   For installing a new service pipe and appurtenances or
altering or removing existing service pipe and appurtenances, including the
meter, without approval from the utility; and



   (M)   For violation of any of the utility rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 51.104)  (Amended 10-7-2008)



§ 53.140  WRITTEN NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE.



   In each case, except those arising under § 53.139(A), (B), (C), (D) or
(G), the utility shall give written notice of at least three days, either
mailed to such customer at his or her address as shown upon the utility’s
records, or personally delivered to him, her or a person on the premises,
advising the customer of the reason for the proposed discontinuance of
service and stating that service will be discontinued if the reason continues
uncorrected. In cases provided for in § 53.139(A), (B), (C), (D) or (G), the
utility may discontinue service without notice.



(Prior Code, § 51.105)



§ 53.141  REMEDIES.



   The remedies provided to the utility in these rules and regulations
shall not be exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies which
the utility has at law or in equity.



(Prior Code, § 51.106)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum of $1 to $500 for each
offense.



(Prior Code, § 51.999)  (Amended 9-16-2008; Amended 10-7-2008)



CHAPTER 54:  SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   54.001   Purpose and policy



   54.002   Administration generally



   54.003   Definitions



   54.004   Bylaws and regulations of Board of Public Works and Safety



   54.005   Damaging sewer works property



   54.006   Privies, septic tanks and cesspools



   54.007   When connection to sewerage system is required



   54.008   Construction of building sewers



   54.009   Permission to connect required



   54.010   Prohibition of discharge to natural outlets



   54.011   Private wells



   54.012   Limitations on point of discharge



   54.013   Confidential information



   54.014   Pretreatment charges and fees



   54.015   Lift stations



   54.016   Low pressure sewer systems




Regulation of Direct and Indirect Discharges




   54.030   Prohibited discharge standards



   54.031   Abnormal waste surcharge



   54.032   National categorical pretreatment standards



   54.033   Local limits



   54.034   Board’s right of revision



   54.035   Dilution




Pretreatment of Wastewater




   54.050   Pretreatment facilities



   54.051   Additional pretreatment measures



   54.052   Accidental discharge/slug control plans




Wastewater Discharge Permit Application




   54.065   Wastewater analysis



   54.066   Wastewater discharge permit requirement



   54.067   Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections



   54.068   Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections



   54.069   Wastewater discharge permit application contents



   54.070   Application signatories and certification



   54.071   Wastewater discharge permit decisions




Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process




   54.085   Wastewater discharge permit duration



   54.086   Wastewater discharge permit contents



   54.087   Wastewater discharge permit appeals



   54.088   Wastewater discharge permit modification



   54.089   Wastewater discharge permit transfer



   54.090   Wastewater discharge permit revocation



   54.091   Wastewater discharge permit reissuance



   54.092   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions




Reporting Requirements




   54.105   Baseline monitoring reports



   54.106   Compliance schedule progress reports



   54.107   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   54.108   Periodic compliance reports



   54.109   Reports of changed conditions



   54.110   Reports of potential problems



   54.111   Reports from unpermitted users



   54.112   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   54.113   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   54.114   Analytical requirements



   54.115   Sample collection



   54.116   Timing



   54.117   Record keeping




Compliance Monitoring




   54.130   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   54.131   Search warrants




Administrative Enforcement Remedies




   54.145   Notification of violation



   54.146   Agreed orders



   54.147   Show cause hearing



   54.148   Compliance orders



   54.149   Cease and desist orders



   54.150   Administrative fines



   54.151   Emergency suspensions



   54.152   Termination of discharge




Sewer Rates




   54.165   Definitions



   54.166   Persons subject to fees and sewer charges



   54.167   Effective date; extension to additional property



   54.168   Rate basis; meter reading schedule



   54.169   Water obtained from sources other than city waterworks



   54.170   One or more lots or dwelling units served by a single meter



   54.171   Portion of water not entering sewage system



   54.172   Swimming pool charge



   54.173   Sprinkling rates



   54.174   Billing procedure



   54.175   Liability for charges



   54.176   Liability of city for charges



   54.177   Sewage charges



   54.178   Delinquent accounts



   54.179   Biennial review



   54.180   Approval of Environmental Protection Agency



 



   54.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 54.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R.
part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;



      (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;



      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and



      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.



   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned
treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits; provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities;
establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.



(Prior Code, § 50.01(1.1))



§ 54.002  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to other city personnel.



(Prior Code, § 50.01(1.2))



§ 54.003  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
chapter, shall have the designated meanings.



      BOD5. Biochemical oxygen demand - five day.



      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



      COD5. Chemical oxygen demand - five day.



      EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency - Washington D.C.



      EPA REG. V - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region V -
Chicago, Illinois.



      FOG. Fats, oil and grease.



      gpd. Gallons per day.



      I.C. Indiana Code.



      IDEM. Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.



      NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



      O&G. Oil and grease.



      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.



      RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



      SIC. Standard industrial classification.



      TSS. Total suspended solids.



      U.S.C. United States Code.



(Prior Code, § 50.01(1.3))



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Regional Administration of U.S. EPA
Region V.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
Board.



      AVERAGE MONTHLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION. The highest allowable
average of daily discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of
all daily discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.



      AVERAGE WEEKLY DISCHARGE LIMITATION. The highest allowable
average of daily discharges over a calendar week, calculated as the sum of
all daily discharges, measured during a calendar week divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that week.



      BENEFICIAL USERS. These include, but are not limited to,
domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial use, power generation,
recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and
enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and
other uses, both tangible or intangible, as specified by state or federal law.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5. The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).



      BOARD. The City Board of Public Works and Safety or any other
duly authorized officials acting on its behalf.



      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls, for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or other property. When separated by a party wall, without opening
through such wall, each portion of such a BUILDING shall be considered a
separate building.



      BUILDING DRAIN. The lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil pipes, waste pipes and
other drainage pipes inside a building and conveys it to a point outside of
the building.



      BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY. A building drain which conveys sanitary
or industrial sewage only.



      BUILDING DRAIN, STORM. A building drain which conveys storm water
or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater.



      BUILDING (OR HOUSE) LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the
building drain to the sewerage system or other place of disposal.



      BUILDING SEWER, STORM. A building sewer which conveys storm water
or other clear water drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.



      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply
to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch.
N, parts 405 through 471.



      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.



      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. (of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes). A measure of the oxygen equivalent of
that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to
oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



      CITY. The City of Decatur, under the jurisdiction of the City
Board of Public Works and Safety.



      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which carries storm, surface or ground
water runoff in addition to sewage.



      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.



         (a)   Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH
and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants if the treatment
works was designed to treat these pollutants, and in fact does remove these
pollutants to a substantial degree. The term “substantial degree” is not
subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in the
order of 80% or greater. Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30%
are not considered substantial.



         (b)   Examples of the additional pollutants which may be
COMPATIBLE include the following (except as prohibited where these materials
would interfere with the operation of the treatment works):



            1.   Chemical oxygen demand;



            2.   Total organic carbon;



            3.   Phosphorous and phosphorous compounds;



            4.   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds; and



            5.   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable
origin.



      COMPOSITE SAMPLING. Method of sampling which weights sample
volume with discharge flow rate.



      CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTER- ISTICS. The chemical, physical,
bacteriological and radiological properties, including volume, flow rate and
such other properties which serve to define, classify or measure the
contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY. Board of Public Works and Safety, the City of
Decatur, Indiana.



      COUNCIL. The Common Council of the City of Decatur, Indiana.



      DAILY DISCHARGE. Discharge of the pollutant measured during a
calendar day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar
for purposes of sampling.



      DEPARTMENT. The city wastewater treatment plant, including the
sewer collection system.



      DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Wastewater from typical residential users and
having pollutant characteristics of not greater than 230 mg/l BOD and 250
mg/l suspended solids.



      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right of the specific use of land
owned by others.



      EFFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be
present, flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Region V Water Management
Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency.



      EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the
Act.



      FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the
intestinal tract of humans and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is
an indicator of pollution.



      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state, such that
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility.



      GARBAGE. Any solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or
dispensing of food or from the handling, storage or sale of produce.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.



      GREASE AND OIL.



         (a)   A group of substances including hydrocarbons,
fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils or any other material that is extracted
by a solvent from an acidified sample and that is not volatilized during the
laboratory test procedures.



         (b)   GREASES AND OILS are defined by the method of
their determination in accordance with Standard Methods.



      GREASE AND OIL OF ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE ORIGIN. Substances of
biodegradable nature such as are discharged by meatpacking, vegetable oil and
fat industries, food processors, canneries and restaurants.



      GREASE AND OIL OF MINERAL ORIGIN. Substances that are less
readily biodegradable than grease and oil of animal or vegetable origin; and
are derived from a petroleum source. These substances include machinery
lubricating oils, gasoline station wastes, petroleum refinery wastes and
storage depot wastes.



      GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE. Garbage that is shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the
conditions normally prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being
greater than one-half inch in dimension.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, such as
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum pump trucks and the
like.



      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a
compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids, and
further defined in 40 C.F.R. part 403.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Act.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTE PERMIT. A permit to deposit or discharge
industrial waste into any sanitary sewer as issued by the POTW.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or
form of energy discharged, or permitted to flow or escape from an industrial,
manufacturing, commercial or business process or from the development,
recovery or processing of any natural resource carried on by a person and
shall further mean any waste from an industrial user.



      INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.



      INFLOW. The water discharged into a sewer system, including
service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders,
cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cistern overflows, cooling
water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers,
cross- connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm
waters, surface run-off, street waste waters or drainage. INFLOW does not
include, and is distinguished from infiltration.



      INFLUENT. The water, together with any wastes that may be
present, flowing into a drain, sewer, receptacle or outlet.



      INSPECTOR. A person authorized by the city.



      INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOW- ABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



      INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of the
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.



      LATERAL SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the
sewerage system or other place of disposal.



      MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS. Highest allowable daily
discharge.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and
dialysis wastes.



      mg. Milligrams.



      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
the EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347)
which applies to a specific category (SIC No.) of industrial users and
specifies quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be discharged.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307 (b) of the
Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5 and includes specific prohibitions or limits as
developed by a POTW, either as a requirement of an approved POTW pretreatment
program or an NPDES permit.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section;
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of division (a)2. or (a)3. above, but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined
hereunder, has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program;



               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation
of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site prep- aration work
including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage such as discharged by residential
users with a BOD5 concentration not in excess of 230 mg/l and a suspended
solids concentration not in excess of 250 mg/l.



      NPDES PERMIT. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit setting forth conditions for the discharge of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to the navigable waters of the United States
pursuant to § 402 of Pub. Law No. 95-217.



      NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to health or offensive to
the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit (IN0039314), including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state and local governmental entities.



      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.



      POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD5, COD5, toxicity or odor).



      POLLUTION. An alteration of the quality of the waters of the
state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects these waters for
beneficial uses or facilities which serve the beneficial uses. The human-made
or human-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and
radiological integrity of water.



      PREMISES. A parcel of real estate including any single
improvement thereon which is determined by the city to be a single user for
purposes of receiving, using and payment for service. Any additional
improvement on the same parcel of real estate which is determined by the city
to be a user shall be separately connected to the sewerage for the purpose of
receiving, using and payment for service.



      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.



      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 54.030 of this chapter.



      PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Procedures executed in a
prudent, cost-effective and workmanlike manner which achieve the highest or
required effluent quality of industrial discharge attainable in conformance
with the best available technology and practices.   



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.



         (a)   A “treatment works,” as defined by § 212 of
the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city.



         (b)   This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.



      RECEIVING SEWER SYSTEM. The city’s municipal sewer system.



      RECEIVING STREAM. The watercourse, stream or body of water
receiving the waters finally discharged form the wastewater treatment plant.



      SANITARY SEWAGE. The waste from water closets, urinals,
lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, basement drains, household laundries,
garage floor drains, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips,
drinking fountains, stable floor drains and all other water-carried waste,
except industrial wastes.



      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.



      SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations and the like).



      SEWAGE WORKS. Sewers, wastewater treatment plant, sewerage system
and any associated structures or equipment. Also known as POTW.



      SEWER. A pipe or conduit laid for carrying wastewater or other
liquids.



      SEWER, COMBINED. A sewer in which all owners of abutting property
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority, including the
following elements.



      SEWER, PUBLIC. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect waste
waters from individual point source discharges.



         (a)   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is
to collect waste waters from individual point source discharges.



         (b)   FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried
under pressure.



         (c)   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose
is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.



      PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewerage
system at which wastewater is pumped to higher level.



      SEWER, SANITARY. A sewer which carries wastewater and to which
storm, surface and ground waters and unpolluted industrial wastewater are not
intentionally admitted.



      SEWER, STORM. A sewer which carries storm, surface and ground
water drainage but excludes wastewater.



      SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of publicly owned sewers and
appurtenances used for collecting, transporting and pumping wastewater to the
wastewater treatment plant.



      SHREDDED GARBAGE. See GROUND (SHREDDED) GARBAGE.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment
standards; or



         (b)   A user that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling
and boiler blowdown wastewater);



            2.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes
up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



            3.   Is designated as such by the Board on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



         (c)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Board may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER.



      SLUDGE. Any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant or air pollution control facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects as defined in standards issued under §§
401 and 405 of the Federal Act and in the applicable requirements under §§
3001, 3004 and 4004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, Pub. Law No. 94-580.



      SLUG LOAD or SLUG. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
54.030 of this chapter.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFI- CATION (SIC) CODE. A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



      STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation.



      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



      SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the City Board of Public
Works and Safety who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by
this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.



      SUPERVISOR, SEWER MAINTENANCE. Administrative head of sewer
maintenance.



      SURCHARGE. A charge for services in addition to the basic service
charge.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquid, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



      TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will
cause adverse effects such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological
manifestations, as defined in standards issued pursuant to the Clean Water
Act, Pub. Law No. 94-217.



      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Those substances referred to in § 307(a) of the
Act as well as any other known potential substances capable of producing
toxic effects.



      TOXICANT. A substance that is known or suspected carcinogens,
mutagens or teratogens and substances present in industrial discharges with
known toxic effects on human and aquatic life which is among the list of
elements and compounds known as priority pollutants developed under the Clean
Water Act.



      TSS. Total suspended solids.



      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which a discharger
unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of non-compliance with the
standards set forth in this chapter due to factors beyond the reasonable
control of the discharger, and excluding non-compliance to the extent caused
by operational error, improperly designed pretreatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation thereof.



      USER. A person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge
of wastewater into the sewerage system.



      USER or INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   A source of indirect discharge; and



      (2)   The “non-industrial class” shall include all users
whose wastes are segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences where regular domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary
conveniences are those wastes generated by normal domestic activity.



      VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids
transformed to gases or vapors when heated at 550°C for 15 to 20 minutes.



      WASTE. Includes sanitary sewage and any and all other waste
substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human or
animal origin, or from any producing, processing, manufacturing or industrial
operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers
of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of disposal.



      WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



      WATERS OF THE STATE. Any water, surface or underground, within
the boundaries of the state, except confined waters in sewers, tanks and the
like.



      WWTP. Wastewater Treatment Plant (after WPCF).



(Prior Code, § 50.01(1.4))  (Ord. 1998-3, passed 3-3-1998)



§ 54.004  BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   The Board of Public works and Safety may adopt and enforce such
reasonable regulations not in conflict herewith as it may be deemed necessary
for the safe, economical and efficient management of the city’s sewerage
system and wastewater treatment plant and for the construction and use of
building (or house) lateral sewers and connections to the sewerage system,
which regulations may include limitations of or prohibition of, introduction
of or infiltration by storm water, surface water and ground water into the
sewerage system.



(Prior Code, § 50.02)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.005  DAMAGING SEWER WORKS PROPERTY.



   A person shall not maliciously, willfully or recklessly break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the city sewerage system.



(Prior Code, § 50.03)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.006  PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND CESSPOOLS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by the Board of Public Works and
Safety, the city, or the state or any of its agencies, a person shall not
construct or maintain a privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



   (B)   Except that, existing septic tank system and fields may be
repaired and maintained in accord with applicable laws and ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 50.04)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.007  WHEN CONNECTION TO SEWERAGE SYSTEM IS REQUIRED.



   Any person owning or occupying a house or other building for
residential, commercial, institutional, governmental or industrial use,
located on any property situated within the city and abutting on any street,
alley or easement in which there is now located or may in the future be
located a public sewer or combined sewer of the city, is required, at his or
her expense, to install suitable wastewater facilities therein, and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so; provided that, the public sewer is
within 150 feet of the property line. Said persons shall not discharge sewage
elsewhere than into the sewage system. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require the connection of any such structure to a sewer if
wastewater is not generated in such structure.



(Prior Code, § 50.05)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.008  CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDING SEWERS.



   (A)   General. The size, shape, alignment, materials or construction
of a building (or house) lateral sewer and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench
shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes and
other applicable rules and regulations of the city.



   (B)   Determining major contributors. Each commercial and industrial
user shall supply the city with information about expected wastewater
constituents and characteristics to be used in determining whether or not the
user will be a major contributor.



   (C)   Separate sewer requirements. A separate and independent
building (or house) lateral sewer shall be provided for every building (or
house); except where one building (or house) stands at the rear of another or
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building (or house) through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway. In such cases, the building (or house) lateral sewer from the front
building (or house) may be extended to the rear building (or house) and the
whole considered as one building (or house) lateral sewer. Nothing in this
division (C) shall be construed to apply to lateral sewer connections between
different facilities of an industrial user located on contiguous properties.



   (D)   Use of old building (or house) lateral sewer for a new
building (or house). Old building (or house) lateral sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings (or houses) only when they are determined, upon
examination and test by the inspector, to meet all requirements of this
subchapter.



   (E)   Connection of downspouts, drains and the like. No person shall
hereafter connect or reconnect roof downspouts, footing drains, areaway
drains, driveways, parking lots or other sources of surface, runoff or ground
water, to a building (or house) lateral sewer or building (or house) drain
which is in turn connected directly or indirectly to the sewerage system.



   (F)   Inspection; supervision of connection. The applicant for the
building (or house) lateral sewer permit shall notify the Board or its
designated representative when a building (or house) lateral sewer is ready
for inspection and connection to the sewerage system. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the inspector or his or her representative
using materials and techniques conforming to the requirements of the Board.
The applicant shall give notice before the burial or covering of the lateral
sewer and shall not cover or bury the sewer until the inspection is completed
and the connection approved.



(Prior Code, § 50.06)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.009  PERMISSION TO CONNECT REQUIRED.



   A person shall not directly or indirectly make any connections with or
openings into the sewerage system for the purpose of serving any areas
outside the corporate boundaries of the city without first securing a
specific resolution of the Board of Public Works and Safety describing the
real estate and property to be served and authorizing such connections.



(Prior Code, § 50.07)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.010  PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.08)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.011  PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   Registration of wells. Every owner or occupant of real estate
within the corporate limits of the city, or real estate from which there is a
lateral sewer or other means or path of direct or indirect flow into the
sewerage system, shall, on a form provided by the Board of Public Works and
Safety, report the existence of any well to the Superintendent of the Sewer
Department. The information furnished on such form by the owner or occupant
shall include, among other items, the name of the owner and occupant of such
real estate, the location of said real estate of such well, the size of the
well pipe, the size (voltage, amperage and horsepower where ascertainable) of
the well pump motor, and the purpose for which the well water is used by the
owner, occupant or others.



   (B)   Metering of well water. The Board shall determine by any
reasonable means, including, but not limited to, the use of water meters and
timing devices, the flow of such well in order to determine the amount of
sewage entering the sewage system. The owner or occupant of such real estate
shall pay for such metering device and backflow device, which shall be of a
type approved by the Board, and which shall remain the property of the owner
but shall be under the exclusive control of the Board and shall not under any
circumstances be tampered with by the owner, occupant or any other person. In
the case of wells for household use only the Board may, in lieu of metering
or timing the use of the well, provide for use of reasonable estimates
regarding water volume.



   (C)   Inspection of wells. The Board may direct the Superintendent,
inspector or any other employee to enter upon private property for the
purpose of inspecting to determine the existence of private wells, to oversee
or to direct the installation of metering or timing devices, and to read such
meters and devices.



   (D)   Well digging. A person shall not hereafter dig or drive a well
within the city limits without first making application therefor to the
Superintendent, which application shall be on a form approved by the Board
and shall show all pertinent data regarding size and flow. The application
shall be signed by both the installer of the well (the contractor or other
person doing the work) and the owner of his or her agent (other than the
installer). The failure to file such an application shall be a violation of
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.09)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  (Amended
9-16-2008)  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.012  LIMITATIONS ON POINT OF DISCHARGE.



   No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or
other opening in the sewerage system other than through the approved building
(or house) lateral sewer, except in accordance with the terms of this
subchapter or by express permission of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 50.10)  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)  Penalty, see §
54.999



§ 54.013  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs, and from the Wastewater Superintendent’s inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without
restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data”, as defined by 40 C.F.R. §
2.302, will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(8))  (Ord. 1983-1, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.014  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The Board may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program which may include:



   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including
the cost of processing such applications;



   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



   (D)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (E)   Other fees as the Board may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the city.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(11.1))  (Ord. 1998-3, passed 3-3-1998)



§ 54.015  LIFT STATIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements must be met prior to the city
assuming control and maintenance of a sanitary sewer lift station.



      (1)   The owner of the lift station shall pay for the expense
of hook-up of the telemetry lines into the control board located at the waste
water treatment plant.



      (2)   The owner shall install Flyte pumps (no grinder pumps)
or pumps with compatible connections to Flyte pump rails and hookups.



      (3)   Hour meters are to be installed on each pump.



      (4)   All pumps must be three phase pumps with three phase
line. No converters to three-phase will be accepted.



      (5)   The rails for each pump are to be installed and are to
be made of stainless steel.



      (6)   Each lift station shall have an aluminum entrance door.



      (7)   Steps are to be installed into the wet well of the lift
station.



      (8)   Three-way disconnect with portable generator hook-up is
to be installed.



   (B)   Whenever a development plan is submitted for a subdivision or
any other development requiring a hook-up to the city’s sanitary sewer
lines and the development plan includes installation of a lift station rather
than a gravity sanitary sewer, then the individual or entity submitting the
development plan shall submit cost estimates for each, gravity sanitary sewer
and sanitary sewer with lift station, to the appropriate body, City Planning
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, with the development plan.



(Prior Code, § 50.25)  (Ord. 1998-3, passed 3-3-1998)



§ 54.016  LOW PRESSURE SEWER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   LOW PRESSURE SEWER SYSTEM. An alternative to a
conventional gravity collector sewer system that relies on individual grinder
pumps to deliver wastewater from buildings to a system of pressurized small
diameter pipes that serve an area of the municipality. The system is
typically used where gravity sewers are not cost effective and/or not
feasible due to topography, excessive rock or other reason.



      (2)   GRINDER PUMP. Any electric motor-driven, submersible,
centrifugal pump capable of macerating all material found in normal domestic
sanitary sewage, including reasonable amounts of objects such as plastics,
sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to a fine slurry
and pumping this material through a small diameter discharge. Grinder pumps
can be used as one component of an area-wide low pressure sewer system or to
deliver wastewater from a single building to a gravity sewer system. In
either case, the property owner's system will include the low pressure
lateral from the pump to the city's limit of responsibility for the publicly
owned sewer system.



   (B)   General. Low-pressure systems will only be considered in areas
where conventional sanitary sewer facility construction is not feasible.



   (C)   Approval.



      (1)   Approval of low-pressure sewer systems will be evaluated
on a case-by-case basis and will only be allowed with prior written approval
from the Board of Public Works and Safety. At the discretion of the Board, a
lift station may be required in lieu of a low pressure system.



      (2)   Property owner shall provide a record drawing showing
the location of the building being served by the grinder pump, the grinder
pump, electrical connection, lateral from building to grinder pump, lateral
from grinder pump to common force main, shutoff valve, property line and
driveway. The record drawing shall include a minimum of two dimensions to
each the grinder pump and shutoff valve. Dimensions may be measured from
building comers, property lines, electrical connection, or driveways. Example
record drawings are available from the city.



      (3)   After installation of the grinder pump, the Wastewater
Department will perform an inspection and complete a Sanitary Sewer Grinder
Pump Inspection Report.



   (D)   Responsibility.



      (1)   The city will only be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the common force main in city property, right of way, or
easement and the portion of the lateral from the common force main to, and
including, the shutoff valve.



      (2)   The property owner shall be responsible for all piping,
pumping equipment, and appurtenances between the building and the shutoff
valve.



      (3)   The property owner shall maintain electrical service to
the grinder pump system at all times.



      (4)   Any property owner with a grinder pump shall grant the
city an easement for installation of the common force main if needed.



   (E)   Connections to grinder pump units.



      (1)   No more than one building will be permitted to connect
to a grinder pump unit.



      (2)   Common grinder pumps for one building with multiple
residential units are also prohibited.



      (3)   The intent is to have individual residential units be
served by individual grinder pump units.



      (4)   Industrial facilities will be handled on a case-by-case
basis.



      (5)   Flows to the grinder pump unit shall be wastewater
sources only. Clear water discharges including, but not limited to,
downspouts, sump pumps, perimeter drains and footing drains shall not flow to
the sanitary sewer.



   (F)   Grinder pump equipment.



      (1)   Grinder pump pumping capacity shall be no greater than
15 gallons per minute (gpm).



      (2)   Grinder pump equipment shall be purchased by the
property owner. Grinder pump equipment package may be purchased from the city
for a discounted rate.



      (3)   All grinder pump equipment shall include a minimum two
year warranty from the pump manufacturer. The warranty period shall start on
the date of pump startup.



   (G)   Grinder pump installation.



      (1)   The grinder pump shall be installed so that the top of
the grinder pump basin is above the 100-year flood elevation at the property.



      (2)   Locator wire shall be installed on the lateral from the
grinder pump to the common force main.



      (3)   Grinder pumps shall be installed in accordance with
detail drawings provided by the city.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 9-6-2016)




REGULATION OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT DISCHARGES




§ 54.030  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. Total
suspended solids level in excess of 300 mg/l daily average may be subject to
a surcharge per § 54.031 of this chapter;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW. BOD levels in excess of 300 mg/l daily
average may be subject to a surcharge per § 54.031 of this chapter;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through;



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW sewers including in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test; and/or



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.



   (C)   Processing, storage. Pollutants, substances or wastewater
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner
that they could be discharged to the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.1))  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.031  ABNORMAL WASTE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   In the event the control authority excludes a customer from
the requirements of § 54.030 of this chapter and the customer discharges
abnormal industrial wastes to the public sanitary sewerage system having an
average total suspended solids (TSS) content in excess of 300 mg/l and/or an
average of five-day BOD in excess of 300 mg/l, the customer shall pay a
surcharge based upon the excess strength of his or her wastes.



   (B)   The costs of treatment for each pound of BOD, suspended solids
or grease removed by each treatment works shall be reviewed by the city at
the end of each fiscal year. If a discrepancy exists between the actual costs
as found by the city and the estimated costs, the control authority shall
increase or decrease the surcharge rates sufficiently to cover only the
projected actual costs for the ensuing year.



   (C)   No reduction in sewerage service charges, fees or taxes will
be permitted because of the fact that certain industrial wastes discharged to
the public sanitary sewerage system contain less than 300 mg/l of suspended
solids or 300 mg/l BOD.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.2))



§ 54.032  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch.
N, parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.3))



§ 54.033  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The following pollutant limitations are established to protect
against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following daily maximum concentrations based upon
a 24-hour composite sample. Additionally, no person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum concentrations times
a multiplier of 1.5 based upon a grab sample. The 1.5 grab sample multiplier
does not apply to Hex Chromium, Cyanide and Phenols in that analytical
procedures do not allow for composite techniques to be applied to these
parameters. For Hex Chromium, Cyanide and Phenols, three grab sample results
shall be analyzed with results not to exceed the following noted limitations.



 

Daily Maximum Limitations




Arsenic (total)
 
0.10 mg/l


BOD5
 
500 mg/l


Cadmium (total)
 
0.3 mg/l


COD5
 
1,000 mg/l


Copper2
 
0.23 mg/l


Cyanide (total)1
 
0.19 mg/l


Hex. Chromium1
 
0.28 mg/l


Lead (total)1
 
0.32 mg/l


Mercury (total)1
 
0.007 mg/l


Molybdenum2
 
0.01 mg/l


Nickel1
 
5.0 mg/l


Oil and grease
 
100 mg/l


Phenols
 
1.0 mg/l


Selenium2
 
0.013 mg/l


Silver1
 
0.30 mg/l


Total Chromium1
 
5.0 mg/l


Total suspended solids
 
500 mg/l


Zinc (total)1
 
1.9 mg/l




 



   (B)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent may impose
mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based
limitations above.



   (C)   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard (NCPS) for a particular user, the said standard, if more stringent
than the limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that category,
shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions
imposed under this chapter. The Wastewater Superintendent shall notify all
known affected users of the applicable permitting and reporting requirements
under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.4))  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.034  BOARD’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The Board reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.5))



§ 54.035  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(2.6))  Penalty, see § 54.999




PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER




§ 54.050  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in § 54.030 of this
chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state or the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable
to the Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(3.1))



§ 54.051  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization
of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.



   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



   (D)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
waste, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, these interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for inspection,
and kept clean at all times. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed
of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight, and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place, shall be
gas-tight and water-tight, and capable of the maximum flow rate of the pipe
installed therein.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(3.2))  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.052  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   At least once every two years, the Superintendent shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. The Superintendent may require any user to
develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 54.110 of this
chapter; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(3.3))




WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION




§ 54.065  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   When requested by the Superintendent, a user must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request. The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require users to update this information.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.1))



§ 54.066  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the
Superintendent; except that, a significant industrial user that has filed a
timely application pursuant to § 54.067 of this chapter may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in §§ 54.014 and
54.999 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state and local law.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.2))  Penalty, see § 54.999



§ 54.067  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this
chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall,
within 30 days after said date, apply to the Superintendent for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with § 54.069 of this chapter, and shall not
cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter, except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.3))



§ 54.068  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING; NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes
to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit
prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for
this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with § 54.069 of this
chapter, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any
discharge will begin or recommence.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.4))



§ 54.069  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require all users to submit as part of
an application the following information:



      (1)   All information required by § 54.105(B) of this chapter;



      (2)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or
intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



      (3)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation and
proposed or actual hours of operation;



      (4)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes, and rate of production;



      (5)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation, and all points of discharge;



      (7)   Time and duration of discharges; and



      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.



   (C)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.5))



§ 54.070  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.



   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.6))



§ 54.071  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.



   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 15 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the Superintendent will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Superintendent may
deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(4.7))




WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS




§ 54.085  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.



   (A)   A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit.
A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five
years, at the discretion of the Superintendent.



   (B)   Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date
upon which it will expire.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.1))



§ 54.086  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.



   (A)   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to prevent pass through
or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the
treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate
sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:



      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit
duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
non-transferable without prior notification to the Board in accordance with
§ 54.089 of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



      (3)   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (4)   Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and



      (5)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-
routine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



      (7)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards,
including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and



      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.2))



§ 54.087  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance
of a wastewater discharge permit.



   (B)   Any person, including the user, may petition the
Superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit
within 15 days of notice of its issuance.



      (1)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be
deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



      (2)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit
shall not be stayed pending the appeal.



      (4)   If the Wastewater Superintendent fails to act within 30
days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions
not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be
considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.



      (5)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the County Circuit Court within 30 days.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.3))



§ 54.088  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   The Superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



   (A)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;



   (B)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user’s operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;



   (C)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



   (D)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters;



   (E)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;



   (F)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;



   (G)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13;



   (H)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or



   (I)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation
to a new owner or operator.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.4))



§ 54.089  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.



   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days’ advance notice to
the Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the wastewater discharge
permit transfer.



   (B)   The notice to the Superintendent must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.



   (C)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.5))



§ 54.090  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to § 54.109 of this chapter;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the Superintendent or his or her agent
timely access to the facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges and/or surcharges pursuant
to § 54.031 of this chapter;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.



   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation
of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.6))



§ 54.091  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REISSUANCE.



   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with § 54.069 of this chapter, a minimum of 180
days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge
permit.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.7))



§ 54.092  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   (A)   If another municipality or sewer district contributes
wastewater to the POTW, the Superintendent shall enter into an intermunicipal
or interdistrict agreement with the contributing entity.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A)
above, the Superintendent shall request the following information from the
contributing entity:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing entity;



      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing entity that are discharging to the POTW; and



      (3)   Such other information as the Superintendent may deem
necessary.



   (C)   An agreement, as required by division (A) above, shall contain
the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing entity to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 54.033 of this
chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or
local limits;



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing entity to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by
the contributing municipality and the Superintendent;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing entity to provide the
Superintendent with access to all information that the contributing entity
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the
contributing entity’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing entity’s
discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing entity’s jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties
deemed necessary by the Superintendent; and



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of
the terms of the intermunicipal or interdistrict agreement.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(5.8))




REPORTING REQUIREMENTS




§ 54.105  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below:



      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner;



      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility;



      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes;



      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 54.114 of this chapter.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 54.115 of this chapter.



      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements;



      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 54.106 of this chapter; and



      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 54.070 of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.1))



§ 54.106  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 54.105(B)(7) of this chapter.



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, project status reports, beginning operation and attain
compliance).



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.2))



§ 54.107  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in §
54.105(B)(4) through (B)(6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 54.070 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.3))



§ 54.108  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in
June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 54.070 of this chapter.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Superintendent,
using the procedures prescribed in § 54.115 of this chapter, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.4))



§ 54.109  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Each user must notify the Superintendent of any planned
significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter
the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the
change.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 54.069 of this chapter.



   (C)   The Superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 54.071 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge
permit under § 54.088 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.



   (D)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge
of any previously unreported pollutants.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.5))



§ 54.110  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the
Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event
of a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.6))



§ 54.111  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Superintendent as the Superintendent may
require.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.7))



§ 54.112  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after becoming
aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
Superintendent monitors at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if
the Superintendent samples between the user’s initial sampling and when the
user receives the results of this sampling.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.8))



§ 54.113  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Region V Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities (IDEM Office of Solid and Hazardous Waste),
in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. part 261. Such
notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40
C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms
of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and
readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that
calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this division (A) need be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under § 54.109 of this chapter. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the
self-monitoring requirements of §§ 54.105, 54.107 and 54.108 of this
chapter.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of
any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Region V Waste Management Waste Division Director and
the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) of the discharge of
such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.9))



§ 54.114  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.10))



§ 54.115  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will
provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
discharge limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease (O&G), temperature, pH, cyanide,
phenols, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.11))



§ 54.116  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.12))



§ 54.117  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(6.13))




COMPLIANCE MONITORING




§ 54.130  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   (1)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the
premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder.



      (2)   Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent or his or her
agent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.



   (C)   The Superintendent or his or her agent shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



   (D)   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated at a minimum of once per year to ensure their
accuracy.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.



   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent or his or
her agent access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(7.1))



§ 54.131  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the County Circuit Court.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(7.2))




ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES




§ 54.145  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.
Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.1))



§ 54.146  AGREED ORDERS.



   The Superintendent may enter into agreed orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for non-compliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the non-compliance within
a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same
force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to § 54.999 of
this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.2))



§ 54.147  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to
appear before the Superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such action and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not
be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.3))



§ 54.148  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
non-compliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.4))



§ 54.149  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.5))



§ 54.150  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Superintendent may fine such user in an amount less than
$1,000 and not to exceed $2,500 as provided by I.C. 36-1-3-8. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly
or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each
day during the period of violation.



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 60 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.8% per month. A lien against
the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties.



   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the Superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a
request has merit, the Superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In
the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Superintendent
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as
notices and orders, to the fine.



   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.6))



§ 54.151  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after formal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings in this chapter are initiated
against the user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under § 54.999 of this chapter.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.7))



§ 54.152  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions in § 54.090 of this chapter,
any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 54.030
through 54.035 of this chapter.



   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 54.999 of this
chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(9.8))




SEWER RATES




§ 54.165  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall be as adopted in
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and American
Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation and as
set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136. Waste constituents and characteristics shall
be measured by Standard Methods unless a mutually agreed upon acceptable
alternative method is adopted, or in such other method established by state
or federal regulatory agencies. Monitoring and metering will be carried out
by customarily accepted methods.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. (of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes). The quantity of dissolved oxygen in
milligrams per liter required during stabilization of the decomposable
organic matter by aerobic biochemical action under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C. The laboratory determinations of BOD shall
be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods, therein
and conventionally referred to as BOD5.



      BOARD. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city. It is
the governing body of the sewerage system of the city, which system is a
public service.



      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. (of sewage, sewage effluent,
polluted waters or industrial wastes). A measure of the oxygen equivalent of
the portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to
oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. The laboratory determination shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



      CITY. The City of Decatur, Indiana.



      DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment
works to fund debt service on outstanding revenue bonds and current capital
costs.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
forms of energy discharges, permitted to flow into or enter the sewerage
system from an industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business process or
from the development, recovery or processing of any natural resource carried
on by any person and shall further mean any waste from an industrial user,
but not including sanitary sewage or storm water.



      MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR. A user discharging or introducing into the
sewerage system a flow of more than 50,000 gallons per average workday; a
toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in § 307 of U.S. Pub. Law No.
92-500 as now adopted or as hereafter amended; a flow or pollutant
concentration as now or hereafter defined or identified as a problem
pollutant or flow by applicable state or federal regulations or by the Board
of Public Works and Safety; an effluent of significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributors, on the wastewater treatment plant
or the quality of its effluent; or any substance unusual or unique in quality
or quantity requiring special attention or processing in order to effect
proper wastewater treatment.



      NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Sewage such as discharged by residential
users with a BOD5 concentration not in excess of 230 mg/l and a suspended
solids concentration not in excess of 250 mg/l.



      OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All expenses related directly to the
operating and maintaining including replacement of the sewage works as
identified in the Uniform System of Accounts for Wastewater Utilities or as
prescribed the State Board of Accounts under the general headings, Plant
Operation and Maintenance, Sewer Operation and Maintenance, Customer
Accounts, Administrative and General, Insurance and Taxes.



      PERSON. Any natural person, or public or private corporation, or
any other entity whatever.



      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned by the city.



      RECEIVING SEWER SYSTEM. The municipal sewer system.



      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes REPLACEMENT.



      SANITARY SEWAGE. Sewage such as, and having the characteristics
of, domestic sewage from dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions, free from storm and surface
water and industrial wastes.



      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial waste waters from residences, commercial buildings,
government buildings, industrial buildings and institutions.



      SEWAGE CHARGES. The total of the user charge and the debt service
charge.



      SEWERAGE SYSTEM. The network of publicly owned sewers and
appurtenances used for collection, transporting and pumping wastewater to the
wastewater treatment plant, and the wastewater treatment plant itself.



      SEWER. A pipe or conduit laid by carrying sewage or other
liquids, and solids suspended or entrained therein.



      SEWER USE ORDINANCE. The currently effective ordinance of the
city, codified as §§ 54.001 through 54.015, 54.030 through 54.035, 54.050
through 54.052, 54.065 through 54.071, 54.085 through 54.092, 54.105 through
54.117, 54.130, 54.131, 54.145 through 54.152 and 54.165 through 54.180 of
this chapter, together with any amendments, which regulates the connecting to
and use of public and private sewers and drains, the installation and
connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into
the sewerage system of the city, and which provides for the registration of
and the metering of private wells, and provides penalties for violations
thereof and other matters pertaining thereto.



      SURCHARGE. A charge for sewerage services in addition to the
basic sewage charge. This charge is assessed users whose sewage is of such a
nature that it imposes upon the sewage works a burden greater than that
covered by the basic sewage charges.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids which either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquid and which are removable by
laboratory filtration. Their concentration shall be expressed in milligrams
per liter. Quantitative determinations shall be made in accordance with
procedures set forth in Standard Methods.



      USER. A person who introduces into or discharges into, including
both the owner and occupant of real estate from which is introduced or
discharged into the sewerage system, any substance whatever.



      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a treatment works, or
that portion of the ad valorem taxes paid by a user, for the user’s
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance (including)
replacement of such works.



      USER CLASSES.



         (a)   COMMERCIAL USER. Transit lodging, retail and
wholesale establishments or places engaged in providing merchandise for
personal, household or industrial consumption or rendering services to others.



         (b)   GOVERNMENTAL USER. A user engaged in legislative,
judicial or administrative activities of federal, state and local
governments, such as court houses, police and fire stations, city halls and
similar governmental users.



         (c)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user who discharges
industrial wastes, as defined above.



         (d)   INSTITUTIONAL USER. A publicly or privately owned
school, hospital, nursing home, prison or other similar institution whose
wastes are segregated domestic wastes.



         (e)   RESIDENTIAL USER. A user who introduces only
normal domestic sewage from a single-family or multi-family dwelling into the
sewerage system.



      WASTE. Sanitary sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or
of human or animal origin, or from any producing, processing, manufacturing
or industrial operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed
within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of disposal.



      WASTEWATER. The water-carried waste from residences, commercial
buildings, government buildings, institutions and industrial buildings,
singular or in any combination, together with such ground, surface and storm
waters as may be present.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and
structures used by the city for treatment and disposing of sewage, sludge and
other sewage constituents and products.



(Prior Code, § 50.30)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.166  PERSONS SUBJECT TO FEES AND SEWER CHARGES.



   For the use and service rendered by the sewerage works, sewer charges
shall be collected from the person who owns each and every parcel of real
estate that is connected directly or indirectly to the city’s sewerage
system or otherwise discharges wastewater either directly or indirectly into
the sewerage system of the city, which sewer charges shall be payable as
provided in §§ 54.166 through 54.178 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 50.31)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.167  EFFECTIVE DATE; EXTENSION TO ADDITIONAL PROPERTY.



   The sewer charges fixed by §§ 54.166 through 54.178 of this chapter
shall become effective at the time the user first discharges to the sewerage
system. These sewer charges shall be extended to and cover any additional
premises thereafter served, without the necessity of any hearing or notice.



(Prior Code, § 50.32)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.168  RATE BASIS; METER READING SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The sewer flow charges shall be based on the quantity of water
as measured by the water meter used on or in the premises subject to such
sewer charges, except as otherwise provided in §§ 54.166 through 54.178 of
this chapter.



   (B)   Water meters shall be read once each month, or at the option
of the city, at other intervals.



(Prior Code, § 50.33)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.169  WATER OBTAINED FROM SOURCES OTHER THAN CITY WATERWORKS.



   (A)   In the event a user obtains water partially or wholly from
sources other than the city waterworks, the total water used must be measured
or determined as provided herein or by other reasonable means as the Board of
Public Works and Safety may direct.



   (B)   In the case of a single-family household having a private well
but no city water supply, the sewer flow charge shall be for 1,076 cubic feet
per month, unless a meter is installed on the well at the request of either
the user or the city, in which case the cost of installation will be paid for
by the user.



   (C)   The installation of any such meter shall be approved by the
city.



(Prior Code, § 50.34)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.170  ONE OR MORE LOTS OR DWELLING UNITS SERVED BY A SINGLE METER.



   (A)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging wastewater into the city’s sewerage
system, either directly or indirectly, are consumers of water, and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in such case, for
billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be the average for each
user and the minimum charge and the sewage rates and charges shall apply to
each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real estate or buildings
served through the single water meter.



   (B)   In the event two or more dwelling units such as trailers,
apartments or housekeeping rooms discharging sanitary sewage, water or other
liquids into the city’s sanitary sewage system either directly or
indirectly, are users of water and the quantity of water is measured by a
single water meter, then in such case billing shall be for a single service
in the manner set out elsewhere herein; except that, an additional charge
shall be added thereto in the amount of $2.05 per month for each dwelling
unit over one served through the single water meter if the property of the
user is situated within the corporate limits of the city and $3.10 per month
times the number of dwelling units over one served by such meter if the
property of the user is situated outside the corporate limits of the city.



   (C)   In the case of trailer parks, the number of dwelling units
shall be computed and interpreted as the total number of trailers located and
installed in the park, plus any other dwelling units served through the meter.



   (D)   A dwelling unit shall be interpreted as a room or rooms or
other living space or spaces in which cooking facilities are provided.



(Prior Code, § 50.35)  (Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-30-1995)



§ 54.171  PORTION OF WATER NOT ENTERING SEWAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   In the case of a user utilizing more than 1,000 cubic feet of
water per month, who can substantiate to the city that a portion of the water
does not and cannot enter the sewerage system, the Board of Public Works and
Safety shall either determine the portion of the measured water to be used in
determining the appropriate sewer charges, or approve the manner and
technique of flow measurement provided by the user for determining wastewater
discharged to the sewerage system.



   (B)   Facilities utilized to accomplish this shall be installed and
maintained in a serviceable condition by the user at his or her expense. The
city shall have the right to access to such flow measurement equipment at all
times in order to verify the accuracy of the equipment and obtain samples.



(Prior Code, § 50.36)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.172  SWIMMING POOL CHARGE.



   The owner of any residential swimming pool shall pay to the city in
addition to other charges provided herein, the sum of $1.62 per 100 cubic
feet of water capacity of the pool per annum provided that, if the pool is
filled with water that has been measured by a water meter that is acceptable
to the city, payment shall not be applicable. Such payment shall be billed by
the city in June of each year, and shall be collected as other sewage service
charges are collected.



(Prior Code, § 50.37)  (Ord. 1995-8, passed 10-3-1995)



§ 54.173  SPRINKLING RATES.



   In order that the domestic and residential users of sewage service
shall not be penalized for sprinkling lawns during the months of June, July
and August, the billing for sewage service for residences or domestic users
for the months of June, July and August shall be based upon 100% of the water
usage for the previous months of December, January and February. In the event
100% of the water usage for the previous months of December, January and
February is greater than the water usage for the months of June, July and
August, then the billing for sewage services shall be computed on the actual
water used in the month for which the sewage service bill is rendered.
Domestic or residential sewage service as applicable to the sprinkling rate
shall apply to each lot, parcel of real estate or building which is occupied
and used as a residence. The sprinkling rate shall not apply to any premises
which are partially or wholly used for commercial or industrial purposes. In
the event a portion of the premises shall be used for commercial or
industrial purposes, the owner shall have the privilege of separating the
water services so that the residential portion of the premises is served
through a separate meter and in such case the water usage as registered by
the water meter serving that portion of the premises used for residential
purposes would qualify under the sprinkling rate.



(Prior Code, § 50.38)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.174  BILLING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Sewer billings and invoices shall be rendered and collected
approximately monthly.



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall make and enforce
such bylaws and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the regulation,
collection, rebating and refunding of the sewer charges prescribed by this
section of this subchapter.



   (C)   The Board may, on proper cause being shown by the applicant
that in a singular occurrence, metered water did not reach the sewerage
system, adjust the user’s sewer charge with respect to such occurrence.



   (D)   Major contributors with a flow in excess of 50,000 gallons per
average workday shall have billing determined on the basis of wastewater
discharged as monitored, with the following exception.



   (E)   At its option, the city may accept monitoring data and
information from such a major contributor to substantiate billing
determination on a more frequent basis than as established. Such allowance,
however, does not exempt the major contributor from the surveillance survey
fee set by the city.



   (F)   In the event there is a difference in analytical results that
is not explainable by normal variation in the testing procedure, the user
may, within 30 days of billing, appeal to the Board.



(Prior Code, § 50.39)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.175  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The procedures, rates and charges for the use of and the service
rendered by the city's Wastewater/Sewage Department established in Chapter
54, and liability therefore, shall be the responsibility of the owner of each
and every lot, parcel of real estate, or building connected to the sewage
collection system, regardless of occupancy. In the case of a commercial
property, if the city permits utility bills to be invoiced to an occupant,
liability for payment shall be the joint and several liability of the
occupant and owner. In addition, it shall be the owner's responsibility to
verify payments are timely made by an occupant. Failure on the part of the
owner to pay or cause payment for such services and other city services
included on the utility bill referenced in § 50.40 shall result in the
exercise of remedies against the owner set forth in this chapter as well as
that set forth in §§ 50.40 and 50.41.



(Prior Code, § 50.40)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983; Ord. 2018-15, passed
8-7-2018)



§ 54.176  LIABILITY OF CITY FOR CHARGES.



   For the service rendered to any department or agency of the city,
except the Sewer Department, the city shall be subject to the sewer charges
provided herein.



(Prior Code, § 50.41)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.177  SEWAGE CHARGES.



   (A)   Sewage charges shall be effective upon the passage of this
chapter. For the use and the service rendered by the city’s sewage works,
sewage charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an
amount determinable as follows:



 


Consumption per Month

 

Total Sewage Charge per 100 Cubic Feet





Users Inside City Limits


   First 360 cubic feet
 

$8.23



   Next 900 cubic feet
 

$7.19



   Next 1,000 cubic feet
 

$6.48



   Next 2,000 cubic feet
 

$5.64



   Over 4,260 cubic feet
 

$4.87



Users Outside City Limits


   First 360 cubic feet
 

$12.34



   Next 900 cubic feet
 

$10.78



   Next 1,000 cubic feet
 

$9.72



   Next 2,000 cubic feet
 

$8.46



   Over 4,260 cubic feet
 

$7.30





 



   (B)   The flat monthly sewage charge for any residential user who is
not a metered water user shall be:



 



 

Total Sewage Charge



Inside city limits
 

$61.19



Outside city limits
 

$91.78




 



   (C)   The Board is empowered to determine and to collect such
charges as it may reasonably provide for under special agreements entered
into by the Board, on behalf of the city.



(Prior Code, § 50.43)  (Ord. 1995-8, passed 6-30-1995)



§ 54.178  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Charges for sewerage service levied pursuant to this
subchapter shall be due and payable on or before the due dates shown on the
bills.



   (B)   Any service charge not paid by the due date (approximately 15
days after the bill is rendered) shall be considered delinquent and a
delinquent charge of 10% of the amount due shall be added to the amount due.



   (C)   Delinquent sewage charges together with costs and other
expenses of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, may be collected
by any lawful remedy, including, where applicable, the placing of and
foreclosure of liens on real estate as provided by state law.



(Prior Code, § 50.44)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)  (Amended 9-16-2008)



§ 54.179  BIENNIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   The city shall review not less often than every two years, the
wastewater contribution of users and user classes; the total costs of
operation and maintenance of the treatment works, and its approved user
charge system. The city shall revise the charges for users or user classes
to: maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
costs necessary among users and user classes; generate sufficient revenues to
pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to the proper
operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the treatment works; and
apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the costs of
operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and
adjust the rate accordingly.



   (B)   The city shall notify each user annually in conjunction with a
bill of that portion of the user charge attributable to wastewater treatment
services.



(Prior Code, § 50.45)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.180  APPROVAL OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.



   Approval of this subchapter by the Regional Administrator of Region V
of the Environmental Protection Agency is evidenced by the authorization
received by the city on 10-12-1982 which authorization is reproduced in Ord.
1983-2.



(Prior Code, § 50.46)  (Ord. 1983-2, passed 2-15-1983)



§ 54.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Superintendent finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may petition the
County Circuit Court through the city’s Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The
Superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(10.1))



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the city for a minimum civil penalty of $100 and a maximum civil penalty
$2,500 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.



      (2)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’
fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.



      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factor as justice requires.



      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(10.2))



   (C)   Remedies non-exclusive. The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive. The Superintendent may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Superintendent may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Superintendent
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
non-compliant user.



(Prior Code, § 50.20(10.3))



CHAPTER 55:  KOOS DITCH TRUNK SANITARY SEWER



Section



   55.01   Written permit required



   55.02   Application for permit



   55.03   Permit fee



   55.04   Exceptions



§ 55.01  WRITTEN PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No unauthorized person, firm or corporation shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb the public sanitary
sewer known and designated as the Koos Ditch Trunk Sanitary Sewer, without
first obtaining a written permit therefore from the Clerk-Treasurer and
paying any required tap permit fee as hereinafter prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 50.50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for a permit to tap into and use the Koos Ditch Trunk
Sanitary Sewer, whether by direct  connection or by tap into a lateral sewer
draining into the same, shall be on forms furnished the city. Such
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Building Inspector of
the city.



(Prior Code, § 50.51)



§ 55.03  PERMIT FEE.



   Except as hereinafter provided, a tap permit fee of $250 is hereby
fixed and levied upon any person, firm or corporation desiring to tap into
and to use the Koos Ditch Trunk Sanitary Sewer whether by direct connection
thereto or by tap into a lateral sewer draining into the same. This tap
permit fee shall be paid to the city when the application for the permit
required by § 55.02 of this chapter is filed.



(Prior Code, § 50.52)



§ 55.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   No tap permit fee shall be required of the School Corporation, North
Adams Community Schools, which contributed to the cost of construction of
such sewer and such school shall be entitled to tap into the same for school
purposes without the payment of any tap permit fee. Further, the Board of
Public Works and Safety in consideration of the grant of right-of- way for
sewer construction or other adequate and valuable considerations furnished
the city may waive in writing the collection of such tap permit fee as to
persons furnishing such grants and considerations and may permit any such
persons to tap into such sewer without the payment of a tap permit fee.



(Prior Code, § 50.53)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      72.   TOY VEHICLES



      73.   SCHOOL PROPERTY



      74.   BICYCLES



      75.   PARKING RULES



      76.   [RESERVED]



      77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      78.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions generally



   70.02   Authority of police



   70.03   Authority to install traffic-control devices



   70.04   Parades, permit required



   70.05   Traction engines on streets



   70.06   Muffler; noise



   70.07   Pedestrians



   70.08   Permitting loads to drop or spill on street



   70.09   Unlawful to use street as playground



   70.10   Board of Works authority



   70.11   Operating motor vehicle on sidewalk prohibited



   70.12   Operating motor vehicles on city property prohibited



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Terms used in this traffic code shall have the meanings
prescribed for such terms by the State Motor Vehicle Laws, unless otherwise
specifically defined as a part of this traffic code.



(Prior Code, § 70.1)



   (B)   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The City of Decatur.



(Prior Code, § 70.2)



      COUNTY. The County of Adams.



(Prior Code, § 70.3)



      COUNCIL. The Common Council of the city.



(Prior Code, § 70.5)



      ORDINANCES. The ordinances of the city and all amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 70.7)



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership,
association or corporation. Whenever the word PERSON is used in any section
of this traffic code prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships
or associations, the word includes the partners, or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations includes officers, agents or employees thereof who
are responsible for any violations of the section. The singular includes the
plural. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.



(Prior Code, § 70.6)



      POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the city and any other duly
constituted law officer who may be aiding the police force of the city at any
time, including state and county officers.



(Prior Code, § 70.9)



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



(Prior Code, § 70.4)



      TRAFFIC CODE. The Decatur Traffic Code.



(Prior Code, § 70.8)



      TRUCK. A vehicle that has more than two rear wheels, or more than
one rear axle, or has an empty vehicle weight of more than 5,000 pounds.



(Prior Code, § 70.12)



   (C)   All reference to time contained in this traffic code shall be
the time standard that is used by the city at any given time and which may
change periodically.



(Prior Code, § 70.10)



   (D)   Any reference in this traffic code to a specific street,
avenue or drive shall be deemed to be a reference to the exact and correct
name of such street so long as the first part of the name before the word
street, avenue or drive, as the case may be is correctly stated.



(Prior Code, § 70.11)



(Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY OF POLICE.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Police Department to enforce the
provisions of this traffic code. Additionally, the provisions of this traffic
code may be enforced by any officer of the city and any other duly
constituted law officer of the county or of the state.



   (B)   The Police Department is empowered to make and enforce
regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this traffic code
and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies.



(Prior Code, § 71.1)  (Ord. 2002-11, passed 11-19-2002)



§ 70.03  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.



   The city shall place and maintain official traffic- control devices
when and as required under the traffic code of the city to make effective the
provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional
official traffic-control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn
or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or the State Motor
Vehicle Laws.



(Prior Code, § 71.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 70.04  PARADES, PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to have any parade on any street or
streets in the congested district without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Board of Public Works and Safety, which permit shall designate the
route, time and purpose of the parade.



   (B)   Any person participating in any such unauthorized parade shall
be deemed to have violated this section.



(Prior Code, § 81.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.05  TRACTION ENGINES ON STREETS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall propel or move, or cause to be
propelled or moved over and along any street within the limits of the city,
any tractor or other engine unless the tires of the wheels thereon are
smooth, except by permission of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 81.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.06  MUFFLER; NOISE.



   No person at any time shall operate any vehicle of any kind in the city
with the exhaust open or in any way to make noise unusual to the normal
operation of such vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 81.3)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.07  PEDESTRIANS.



   (A)   All pedestrians crossing streets in the congested district
shall cross at right angles and shall not cross diagonally at such
intersection.



   (B)   Pedestrians shall pass to the right in passing others from an
opposite direction and to the left in overtaking others.



   (C)   In cases of emergency, pedestrians shall use only the
sidewalks and crosswalks and not cross the street, except at regular
crossings and at right angles.



(Prior Code, § 81.4)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.08  PERMITTING LOADS TO DROP OR SPILL ON STREET.



   No person, firm or corporation shall permit any stone, dirt or other
material to drop from any vehicle driven upon the streets.



(Prior Code, § 81.5)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.09  UNLAWFUL TO USE STREET AS PLAYGROUND.



   It shall be unlawful for children to use the roadway of any street as a
playground.



(Prior Code, § 81.6)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.10  BOARD OF WORKS AUTHORITY.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to promulgate such
rules and regulations, to establish such procedures and to do any and all
other acts as are, in its discretion, necessary to carry out the provisions,
intent and purpose of this traffic code.



(Prior Code, § 81.7)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 70.11  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be a violation for anyone to operate a motor vehicle
upon the public sidewalks of the city.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section will be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in § 70.99 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 81.8)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.12  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLES ON CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MOTORIZED VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle (gas or electric),
regardless of whether it navigates on wheels or any other mechanism. This
definition includes, but is not limited to, all-terrain vehicles,
four-wheelers, snowmobiles, automobiles and motorcycles.



      OFF ROAD. Those areas of city owned property which are grassed,
landscaped, mounded, wooded or not otherwise designed for use by motorized
vehicles or those areas which have been marked “No Trespassing”.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to
operate a motor vehicle off road on city owned property unless authorized by
state law, authorized by other provisions of the 2014 Decatur City Code of
Ordinances or authorized by the City Board of Public Works.



   (C)   Employees of the city, as well as city contracted personnel,
shall be exempt from this section.



(Ord. 2012-7, passed 8-7-2012)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Fines. Every person convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this traffic code for which another penalty is not
provided herein shall, for the conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not more than $100.



(Prior Code, § 85.1)



      (2)   Removal of vehicle. In addition to the foregoing
penalty, any police officer, upon discovering any vehicle parked or stopped,
in violation of this traffic code, may remove the vehicle or cause the same
to be removed by private towing contractors approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety of the city to their vehicle impoundment sites where such
vehicle shall be released only upon payment for the cost of towing such
vehicle away from the place where it was illegally parked or stopped together
with the cost to storage.



(Prior Code, § 85.2)



      (3)   Penalty; miscellaneous violations. Any person who
violates any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter or in any other chapter of this traffic
code, shall, upon conviction, be fined any sum not less than $10, nor more
than $100.



(Prior Code, § 85.4)



   (B)   A person who violates § 70.12 of this chapter shall be
assessed a fine of at least $100, but not more than $500. Each violation of
§ 70.12 of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense subject to
separate fines. In addition, a person who violates § 70.12 of this chapter
and causes damage to city owned property shall be responsible for making full
restitution to the city for such damage.



(Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 1986-8, passed 9-23-1986; Ord. 2012-7,
passed 8-7-2012)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   71.01   Exhibition, operation of a motor vehicle prohibited



   71.02   Motor vehicular noise



   71.03   Exemptions




Turn Restrictions




   71.15   Restricted turn intersections



   71.16   Restricted turns on red at signalized intersections




Trucks




   71.30   Prohibitions



   71.31   Exceptions




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 71.01  EXHIBITION, OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of
the city in such a manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise,
tire squeal, skidding or sliding upon acceleration or stopping or that causes
the front wheel or wheels to rise above the ground; that simulates a
temporary race; or that causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or
sway.



(Prior Code, § 84.1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  MOTOR VEHICULAR NOISE.



   (A)   No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played,
used or operated any audio device for the producing or re-producing of sound
if it is located in or on any motor vehicle on a public right-of-way, highway
or public space if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet
from the device producing the sound.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle with or without the
attachment of various appurtenances thereto so as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise or noises. This shall
include the use of any vehicle, said use of which causes excessive noise as a
result of a defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of
unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, revving the engine or tire
squeal.



   (C)   No person shall use or operate, except in emergency
situations, on any street within the city, any vehicle engine compression
brake, commonly known as “Jake Brake”.



(Prior Code, § 84.2)  (Ord. 2005-6, passed 6-7-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   A sound emitted from sirens of authorized emergency vehicles;



   (B)   Lawn mowers, garden tractors and similar home power tools
properly muffled;



   (C)   Burglar alarms or other warning devices when properly
installed on motor vehicles;



   (D)   Celebrations on Halloween and legal holidays;



   (E)   Permitted parades or festivals;



   (F)   Attendant noise connected with the actual performance of
athletic or sporting events;



   (G)   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency or for the performance of emergency work; and/or



   (H)   If a noise is the result of a defect of a defective or
modified exhaust system if the cause is repaired or otherwise remedied within
seven calendar days.



(Prior Code, § 84.3)




TURN RESTRICTIONS




§ 71.15  RESTRICTED TURN INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described by the city shall have certain turning
movements restricted. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements
of this traffic code are erected that no right or left or U-turn is
permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of any such
sign.



(Prior Code, § 74.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 71.16  RESTRICTED TURNS ON RED AT SIGNALIZED INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described by the city shall restrict turns on red at
signalized intersections. When appropriate signs conforming to the
requirements of this traffic code are erected that no turn on red may be made
at signalized intersections, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the sign.



(Prior Code, § 74.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99




TRUCKS




§ 71.30  PROHIBITIONS.



   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated any
truck upon the streets, bridges and culverts within the city, except on
designated and marked city truck routes as hereinafter described in Ch. 77,
Schd. VI, of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 76.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 71.31  EXCEPTIONS.



   The restrictions on trucks as hereinabove set forth in § 71.30 of this
chapter shall not be applicable to trucks delivering or picking up goods and
property at places not located on designated and marked city truck routes;
provided, such trucks are only operated by the shortest way possible between
the designated and marked city truck route and the place of delivery or
pickup or as otherwise directed by a police officer. The restriction is not
applicable to refuse or garbage trucks regularly operating within the city
while in the process of picking up refuse and garbage from the residences and
business places within the city.



(Prior Code, § 76.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



CHAPTER 72:  TOY VEHICLES



Section




Skateboards and the Like




   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Operating skateboard, wheeling or sliding device prohibited




Golf Carts




   72.15   Definitions



   72.16   Operation generally



   72.17   Operator requirements



   72.18   Registration; fee



   72.19   Proof of financial responsibility



   72.20   Equipment



   72.21   Occupants of golf carts



   72.22   Time of operation



   72.23   Exempt vehicles



 



   72.99   Penalty




SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE




§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECKLESS OR HAZARDOUS OPERATION. Operation of a skateboard, wheeling or
sliding device in a manner such that the wheels of the wheeling device leave
the ground or that the skateboard or sliding device is separated from the
ground at the time, (i.e., airborne) and is further defined to mean the use
of disability ramps, steps, walls, retention walls, doors, handrails,
planters, curb or gutter edges, barriers and barricades, benches, picnic
tables, sculptures, stages, platforms, playground equipment or other device
or structure which is not intended for pedestrian or vehicular  traffic,
jumping or stepping on or off such devices or structures using wheeled
equipment, or in a manner that is likely to cause damage to property or to
cause personal injury or failing to yield the right-of-way to or otherwise
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



   SKATEBOARD. A footboard mounted upon four or five wheels and usually
propelled by the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels or lies upon the
device while it is in motion.



   WHEELING OR SLIDING DEVICES. Includes, but is not limited to,
skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates or bicycles, or any other device
containing wheels which can be ridden on or  otherwise utilized by an
individual or individuals in order to move about other than walking.



(Prior Code, § 83.1)



§ 72.02  OPERATING SKATEBOARD, WHEELING OR SLIDING DEVICE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The reckless or hazardous operation of a skateboard, wheeling
or sliding device, as defined in § 72.01 of this chapter, is hereby
prohibited in the city limits.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the definition of skateboard, wheeling or
sliding device, nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of a
wheelchair, a stroller or similar devices, for the purposes of helping an
elderly, disabled individual, infant, or other individual needing assistance
in moving from place to place.



(Prior Code, § 83.2)  Penalty, see § 72.99




GOLF CARTS




§ 72.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Decatur, Indiana.



   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A valid license to operate a motor vehicle issued
by the state or any other state.



   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Liability insurance coverage on a golf cart
in an amount not less than required by state law for motor vehicles operated
on public highways in the state.



   GOLF CART. A four-wheeled motor vehicle originally and specifically
designed to transport individuals and golf clubs for the purpose of playing
golf.



   GOLF COMMUNITY. The subdivisions of Cross Creek, platted in conjunction
with the expansion and development of Cross Creek Golf Course to the extent
such subdivision is located within the municipal boundary of the city.



   HIGHWAY. A U.S. highway under the jurisdiction and control of the state
and/or the United States Federal Government, including U.S. Hwy. 27, U.S.
Hwy. 33 and U.S. Hwy. 224.



   MANUFACTURING FACILITY. Any site or sites located within the municipal
boundary of the city, which are zoned for industrial or manufacturing
purposes and which are owned and operated by the same or affiliated parties
who, in the normal course of business, utilize golf carts on city streets for
the transportation of personnel from one plant location to another.



   MUNICIPAL BOUNDARY. The existing corporate limits of the city and
future annexations thereto.



   OPERATE. To exercise any control over the function or movement of a
golf cart.



   STREET. A street, alley, park or parking area under the jurisdiction
and control of the city.



   TRAIL PASS. A decal affixed to a golf cart which indicates that an
annual fee has been paid to Cross Creek Golf Course or Grey Goose Golf Course
authorizing the use of a privately owned golf cart on golf cart trails
located within or adjacent to Cross Creek Golf Course or Grey Goose Golf
Course.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2009-10, passed 9-15-2009)



§ 72.16  OPERATION GENERALLY.



   (A)   The operation of a golf cart on streets within the municipal
boundary of the city is hereby authorized only so long as the golf cart is
registered, operated, insured and equipped as hereinafter required. Failure
to register, operate, insure and equip a golf cart as required herein shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter and any subsequent codification of
this subchapter in the code of ordinances.



   (B)   Violations shall be punishable by fines, costs and penalties
as hereinafter set forth. No golf cart may be operated on a highway, as
defined herein, except for the purpose of crossing a highway,
perpendicularly, at an intersection with a city street.



   (C)   Golf carts must obey posted speed limits and may not be
operated in excess of 30 mph.



   (D)   Golf carts shall be operated to the right side of the street
and may not impede the flow of normal traffic.



   (E)   An operator of a golf cart on a city street shall obey all
traffic rules and regulations adopted by the state and/or the city.



   (F)   No golf cart may be operated or parked on city sidewalks.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.17  OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.



   Only a person with a valid driver’s license shall be authorized to
operate a golf cart on a city street, which license must be in the possession
of the operator while operating the golf cart. Operation without a valid
driver’s license on a city street shall constitute a violation of this
section. It shall also be a violation of this section for a golf cart owner
to authorize or permit a person without a valid driver’s license to operate
a golf cart on a city street.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.18  REGISTRATION; FEE.



   (A)   Unless otherwise excepted herein, no golf cart may be operated
on a city street unless validly registered with the city. The City Police
Department shall register all golf carts to be operated on city streets in
the name of the owner upon the owner applying for such registration, upon the
owner providing proof of financial responsibility covering the golf cart,
upon an inspection of the golf cart by the City Police Department which
confirms that the golf cart is equipped as required by this subchapter, and
upon payment of the required registration fee. The registration of a golf
cart shall be effective as of the date of registration and shall expire on
December 31 of the year of registration Upon being registered, a registration
sticker for the current calendar year shall be issued by the city, which
sticker shall be affixed to the left side of the rear bumper of the golf cart
as proof of registration.



   (B)   Unless otherwise exempted herein, the owner of a golf cart
shall pay a registration fee of $30 to the city at the time of registration
of a golf cart. The registration fee may hereafter be amended from time to
time by resolution adopted by the City Common Council. All registration fees
collected shall be deposited by the City Clerk-Treasurer into the city’s
Local Law Enforcement Continuing Education Fund.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2018-5, passed 2-20-2018)  Penalty, see
§ 72.99



§ 72.19  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   At all times during the operation of a golf cart on city streets, proof
of financial responsibility covering the golf cart and its operation shall be
kept in or on the golf cart. Failure to keep such proof of financial
responsibility in or upon the golf cart shall constitute a violation of this
section by the owner of the golf cart. Failure to do produce proof of
financial responsibility, when requested by a law enforcement officer, shall
constitute a violation of this section by the operator.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.20  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Unless otherwise exempted herein, all golf carts shall be
equipped with the following minimum safety equipment in order to be
registered and operated on city streets:



      (1)   Factory seating for all occupants;



      (2)   Rear view mirror;



      (3)   Head lights;



      (4)   Tail lights;



      (5)   Brake lights;



      (6)   Turn signals (front and back);



      (7)   Windshield; and



      (8)   “Slow moving vehicle” sign attached to the rear of
the golf cart.



   (B)   All safety equipment shall be maintained in good operating
order. Lights shall be used when time of day or weather conditions
necessitate such use in order for the golf cart to be visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet. Failure to equip, maintain and use such equipment as
required herein shall constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.21  OCCUPANTS OF GOLF CARTS.



   Maximum occupancy of a golf cart when in use on a city street shall be
limited to four persons, including the operator. When in motion, all
occupants must be seated. No child under the age of three shall be allowed to
occupy a golf cart while operated on a city street. Occupants shall keep all
parts of the body within the perimeter of the golf cart while the golf cart
is being operated on a city street. Failure by an operator of a golf cart on
a city street to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section shall
constitute a violation of this section by the operator.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2009-10, passed 9-15-2009)  Penalty,
see § 72.99



§ 72.22  TIME OF OPERATION.



   No golf cart shall be operated on a city street between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. Operation of a golf cart during such prohibited
time shall constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.23  EXEMPT VEHICLES.



   (A)   The city’s Board of Public Works and Safety may exempt
public safety personnel and/or the use of golf carts during special events
from compliance with this subchapter; provided that, any operator of a golf
cart so exempted must have a valid driver’s license and provided proof of
financial responsibility is provided for an exempted golf cart. In addition,
within a golf community, any golf cart properly marked with a current and
valid trail pass shall be exempt from compliance with §§ 72.18 and 72.20 of
this chapter within a golf community if the golf cart is used exclusively to
travel to and from a golf cart owner’s residence and golf cart trails
located within or adjacent to Cross Creek Golf Course in the case of the
Cross Creek golf community, for use of golf course facilities and/or
participation in and during a round of golf at the golf course.



   (B)   In addition, any golf cart used in the ordinary course of
business for the transportation of personnel at a manufacturing facility
shall be exempt from compliance with §§ 72.18, 72.20 and 72.22 of this
chapter. Except as stated in this section, nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt compliance with any other sections of this subchapter.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall exempt compliance with §§
72.18, 72.20 and 72.22 of this chapter if the golf cart with a trail pass or
manufacturing facility golf cart is operated on a city street for any purpose
other than exempted herein.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2009-10, passed 9-15-2009)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any violation of §§ 72.15 through 72.23 of this chapter,
after its adoption and publication as required by law, shall constitute a
Class C infraction, Multiple violations may be cited as separate offenses.
Each time of an offense shall constitute a new and separate offense. Each
violation shall carry a minimum fine of $50 not to exceed a fine of $100, the
maximum penalty allowed by law. In addition to civil penalties imposed
herein, a person cited for violation of §§ 72.15 through 72.23 of this
chapter shall also be responsible for all court costs. Payment of fine and
costs imposed shall be made to the Clerk of the county. In the event an
operator of a registered golf cart or the owner of a golf cart is cited a
second time in a calendar year for a violation(s) of §§ 72.15 through 72.23
of this chapter, unrelated to the first offense, in addition to the
imposition of a fine and court costs, the registration of the golf cart
operated at the time of the second offense shall be revoked by the City
Police Department if such golf cart was being operated at the time of the
first citation.



   (C)   All fines assessed and collected pursuant to § 72.18 shall be
deposited by the City Clerk-Treasurer into the city’s Local Law Enforcement
Continuing Education Fund.



(Ord. 2009-6, passed 7-21-2009; Ord. 2018-5, passed 2-20-2018)



CHAPTER 73:  SCHOOL PROPERTY



Section



   73.01   Incorporation of plats



   73.02   Plat available to public



   73.03   Particular traffic-control regulations applicable to
controlled school property



   73.04   Through traffic prohibited



   73.05   Integration of chapter into title



§ 73.01  INCORPORATION OF PLATS.



   Certain public school property near Bellmont High School, Northwest
Elementary School and Southeast Elementary School in the city, consisting of
the boundary areas set out on certain plat maps designated “Plat Map to be
Used in Conjunction with an Ordinance for Regulation of Traffic upon Certain
School Property near Bellmont High School in the City of Decatur, Indiana”,
“Plat Map to be Used in Conjunction with an Ordinance for Regulation of
Traffic upon Certain School Property near Northwest Elementary School in the
City” and “Plat Map to be Used in Conjunction with an Ordinance for
Regulation of Traffic upon Certain School Property near Southeast Elementary
School”, respectively, by this reference incorporated herein and
hereinafter in this chapter designated plats, respectively, are designated
controlled school property. These plats, together with all school motor
vehicle routes, school traffic lanes, traffic signs, one-vehicle parking
spaces, one-angle vehicle parking spaces, sidewalks, turn indicators,
direction of travel indicators, medians or curbs, no parking areas and
crosswalks, all as shown by the plats and the legends thereon, are a part of
this chapter, each respectively, as if they were fully described in the text
hereof.



(Prior Code, § 79.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 73.02  PLAT AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC.



   Two copies of each plat shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk-Treasurer and shall be subject to public inspection during the regular
office hours of that office.



(Prior Code, § 79.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 73.03  PARTICULAR TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CONTROLLED
SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Controlled school property near Bellmont High School.



      (1)   At a point where North Adams Drive meets Stadium Drive
West, all traffic on North Adams Drive shall turn left or right on Stadium
Drive.



      (2)   Vehicle traffic at locations designated on the plat
shall be controlled by yield signs indicating that drivers of vehicles
traveling in a traffic lane in the direction the arrow is pointing, who want
to cross or enter another traffic lane, shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles approaching such location from another direction, or another traffic
lane.



      (3)   Upon school corporation’s prior written undertaking to
pay the reasonable expense to the city of same, the City Traffic Director is
directed to place and replace adequate signs, traffic-directional indicators
or arrows upon controlled school property indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles and restrictions upon the direction of lawful traffic
movement all as shown on the plat.



      (4)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall yield to
the pedestrians properly utilizing pedestrian crosswalks, as shown on plat,
across school motor vehicle routes.



      (5)   No vehicle shall park or stand on designated no parking
areas or traffic lanes for more than five continuous minutes.



      (6)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall not
travel in excess of 20 mph.



      (7)   No vehicle coming upon controlled school property shall
enter upon a parking space, except for the purpose of parking, standing or
stopping therein, or in a parking space immediately adjacent thereto.



      (8)   School buses may park on school days and for
school-related activities only on North Adams Drive between the intersection
of Reppert Drive West and North Adams Drive and the intersection of North
Adams Drive and Stadium Drive West.



      (9)   No vehicle may park on designated parking areas on
controlled school property in the same location for more than two hours after
the completion of a school-sponsored activity.



      (10)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on
controlled school property in violation of the State Motor Vehicle Laws.



   (B)   Controlled school property near Northwest Elementary School.



      (1)   At a point where Dayton Street meets with an unnamed
north-south street, traffic shall be permitted to travel in either direction.



      (2)   At a point where the unnamed north-south street
intersects with the west point on an unnamed circular drive, traffic shall be
permitted to travel in a one-way direction east only.



      (3)   Vehicle traffic at locations designated on the plat
shall be controlled by yield signs indicating that the driver, of vehicles
traveling in a traffic lane in the direction the arrow is pointing who want
to cross or enter another traffic lane, shall yield the right-of- way to
vehicles approaching such location from another direction or another traffic
lane.



      (4)   Upon school corporation’s prior written undertaking to
pay the reasonable expense of same to the city, the City Traffic Director is
directed to place and replace adequate signs, traffic-directional indicators
or arrows upon controlled school property indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles and restrictions upon the direction of lawful traffic
movement, all as shown on the plat.



      (5)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall yield to
pedestrians properly utilizing pedestrian crosswalks as shown on plat, across
school motor vehicle routes.



      (6)   No vehicle shall park or stand on designated no parking
areas or traffic lanes for more than five continuous minutes.



      (7)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall not
travel in excess of 20 mph.



      (8)   No vehicle coming upon controlled school property shall
enter upon a parking space, except for the purpose of parking, standing or
stopping therein, or in a parking space immediately adjacent thereto.



      (9)   School buses may park in an easterly direction on the
unnamed circular drive on school days and for school-related activities only.



      (10)   No vehicle may park on designated parking areas on
controlled school property in the same location for more than two hours after
the completion of a school-sponsored activity.



      (11)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on
controlled school property in violation of the state motor vehicle laws.



   (C)   Controlled school property near Southeast Elementary School.



      (1)   At a point where Everhart Street meets with the south
point of an unnamed circular drive, traffic shall be permitted to travel in a
one-way direction north only.



      (2)   Vehicle traffic at locations designated on the plat
shall be controlled by yield signs indicating that the driver of vehicles
traveling in a traffic lane in the direction the arrow is pointing who want
to cross or enter another traffic lane shall yield the right-of- way to
vehicles approaching such location from another direction or another traffic
lane.



      (3)   Upon school corporation’s prior written undertaking to
pay the reasonable expense of same to the city, the City Traffic Director is
directed to place and replace adequate signs, traffic-directional indicators
or arrows upon controlled school property indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles and restrictions upon the direction of lawful traffic
movement, all as shown on the plat.



      (4)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall yield to
pedestrians properly utilizing pedestrian crosswalks, as shown on the plat,
across school motor vehicle routes.



      (5)   No vehicle shall park or stand on designated no parking
areas or traffic lanes for more than five continuous minutes.



      (6)   Vehicles upon controlled school property shall not
travel in excess of 20 mph.



      (7)   No vehicle coming upon controlled school property shall
enter upon a parking space, except for the purpose of parking, standing or
stopping therein, or in the parking space immediately adjacent thereto.



      (8)   School buses may park in a northerly direction on the
unnamed circular drive that intersects with Everhart Street, on school days
and for school-related activities only.



      (9)   No vehicle may park on designated parking areas on
controlled school property in the same location for more than two hours after
the completion of a school-sponsored activity.



      (10)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on
controlled school property in violation of the State Motor Vehicle Laws.



(Prior Code, § 79.3)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 73.04  THROUGH TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on, over, along,
across or through controlled school property, except for a purpose related to
the education of one or more persons enrolled as a student or students of the
North Adams Community Schools or for a purpose related to any lawful activity
being conducted thereon, which activity is expressly or impliedly permitted
by the authority of the Board of Trustees of the North Adams Community
Schools.



(Prior Code, § 79.4)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 73.05  INTEGRATION OF CHAPTER INTO TITLE.



   This chapter of this traffic code is enacted to meet a particular need
and, where possible, each provision hereof shall be integrated into, applied
and interpreted in conjunction with the other provisions of this traffic
code. Where such application is not possible, or is in irreconcilable
conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail and control as to
interpretation and application of this chapter only.



(Prior Code, § 79.5)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES



Section



   74.01   Definitions



   74.02   Effect of regulations



   74.03   Education campaign for bicycle riders



   74.04   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   74.05   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   74.06   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   74.07   Number of passengers, seats



   74.08   Speed



   74.09   Emerging from alley or driveway



   74.10   Clinging to vehicle



   74.11   Carrying articles



   74.12   Parking



   74.13   Riding on sidewalks



   74.14   Lamps and other equipment



 



   74.99   Penalty



§ 74.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. Any foot-propelled vehicle irrespective of the number of
wheels in contact with the ground.



   OPERATE. Any form or tense thereof shall mean and refer to the use of a
bicycle, by a person mounted thereon, causing it to function.



(Prior Code, § 80.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 74.02  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The parent of any child, the guardian of any ward or any
person standing in loco parentis to any child shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.



   (B)   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated
upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.



(Prior Code, § 80.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.03  EDUCATION CAMPAIGN FOR  BICYCLE RIDERS.



   The Chief of Police, or an officer assigned such responsibility, shall
develop and supervise activities designed to promote better bicycle riding
habits, knowledge and observance of traffic regulations by bicycle riders,
and other activities which increase the safe operation of bicycles on the
city streets.



(Prior Code, § 80.3)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 74.04  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles, or other traffic ordinances of the city, except as to
those provisions of laws and ordinances which, by their nature, have no
application.



(Prior Code, § 80.4)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 74.05  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right, left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts
from the bicycle to make any such turn; in which event, such person shall
then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Prior Code, § 80.5)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.06  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons
riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast, except
on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 80.6)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.07  NUMBER OF PASSENGERS, SEATS.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



(Prior Code, § 80.7)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.08  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Prior Code, § 80.8)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.09  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building,
upon approaching a sidewalk or a sidewalk area extending across any alley
way, shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the
sidewalk or sidewalk area and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of- way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 80.9)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.10  CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



   No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.



(Prior Code, § 80.10)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.11  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.



(Prior Code, § 80.11)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 74.12  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway, against the curb, upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle, against the building, or at the curb, in such manner as to afford
the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic; provided that, no person shall
park a bicycle on the sidewalks along Second Street from Jackson to Jefferson
Street nor on the sidewalks along Monroe Street from First to Third Street in
the city, unless such bicycle shall be parked within an area or areas
designated and set aside for the parking of bicycles by the Board of Public
Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 80.12)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.13  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride, lead or push a bicycle upon the
sidewalks along Second Street from Jackson to Jefferson Street, nor upon the
sidewalks along Monroe Street from First Street to Third Street in the city.



   (B)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



(Prior Code, § 80.13)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.14  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped
with and have in operation a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light
visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to the front, and at all times
with a red reflector on the front and rear thereof, of a type which shall be
visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly
in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.



   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level and clean pavement.



(Prior Code, § 80.14)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100, by the removal and
detention of the license plate from such person’s bicycle for a period not
to exceed 30 days, or by the impounding of such person’s bicycle for a
period not to exceed 30 days, or by any combination thereof.



(Prior Code, § 80.99)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING RULES



Section



   75.01   Alley parking



   75.02   Parking position



   75.03   Snow emergencies



   75.04   Parking near churches and the like



   75.05   Parking prohibited on special occasions



   75.06   Parking near curb; authority of Board of Public Works and
Safety



   75.07   Parking on sidewalk



   75.08   Enforcement of chapter; issuance of citations



   75.09   Oversize vehicle parking



   75.10   Drop off containers



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  ALLEY PARKING.



   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley, except for a period not
exceeding 30 minutes while loading or unloading the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 77.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
75.99



§ 75.02  PARKING POSITION.



   Except where angle parking is permitted, a vehicle stopped or parked
upon a roadway shall be stopped or parked with the curb-side wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the
roadway. On a two-way traffic street, a vehicle shall only be parked on the
right side of the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 77.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)  Penalty, see §
75.99



§ 75.03  SNOW EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   This section shall hereafter be referred to as the “Snow
Control Route Regulation”.



   (B)   It is declared to be in the best interest of the public policy
and the public safety of the city to regulate and restrict the parking of
vehicles on public streets during snow emergencies.



   (C)   A snow emergency is hereby declared to be a period of time
prior to a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau during and after a
snow fall, during which vehicular traffic is expected to be hazardous or
congested due to the elements, and during which period of time the parking of
such vehicles could hinder, delay and obstruct the safe flow of traffic and
the proper cleaning, clearing and making safe of certain heavily traveled
public streets of the city.



   (D)   A snow emergency shall commence by executive order,
determination and proclamation by the County Emergency Management Director,
either before, during or after a snow fall when, in his or her sound judgment
and discretion, the circumstances warrant the determination of such an
emergency for the public safety of the city. Such snow emergency shall
continue in effect until the Mayor of the city determines that an emergency
no longer exists and accordingly terminates such emergency.



   (E)   No owner, driver or operator of any vehicle shall park or stop
the same or permit the same to be parked or to stand any time during the
period of any snow emergency on an of the streets so identified in Ch. 78,
Schd. IV, of this code of ordinances as snow routes. Should a vehicle be
parked or left to stand on a designated snow route during a snow emergency,
the city shall have the right to cause such vehicle to be towed to the
nearest reasonable and available parking space to clear the snow route of
such vehicle to allow snow removal. Towing shall be at the owner’s,
driver’s or operator’s risk and cost, if any.



(Prior Code, § 77.11)  (Ord. 2010-4, passed 5-18-2010)  Penalty, see §
75.99



§ 75.04  PARKING NEAR CHURCHES AND THE LIKE.



   No vehicle shall be parked in front of or within 15 feet on either side
of a line projected at right angles to the curb line from the center point of
the main entrance of any church, factory, club, lodge, public building or
fire engine house. No vehicle shall be parked in front of any private or
public drive or alley so as to block such driveway.



(Prior Code, § 77.12)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.05  PARKING PROHIBITED ON SPECIAL OCCASIONS.



   It shall be the duty of all owners of vehicles to remove them from
streets which are directed, by police order, to be cleared at a certain hour
for any special occasion. Any vehicle which is not so removed by the owner or
person in charge thereof, before the hour designated for the street to be
cleared, may be removed by the police to a convenient parking place and the
removal shall be done at the risk of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 77.13)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.06  PARKING NEAR CURB; AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   (A)   No vehicle, unless in an emergency or upon order of a police
officer, shall be allowed or permitted to stop in any street within the
corporate limits of the city, unless the same is parked parallel with and
within one foot of the right hand curb, except on Court Street, where
vehicles shall be allowed and permitted to stop between the painted lines on
the street.



   (B)   Where, in the judgment of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, parking should be prohibited along any curb not herein expressly
restricted from parking by the terms of this chapter, the Board may, by
police order, restrict such curb space from the parking area, and they shall
designate such restricted area by appropriate signs or markings; thereafter,
it shall be unlawful for any such parking of any automobile or other vehicle
in the space so designated.



(Prior Code, § 77.14)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.07  PARKING ON SIDEWALK.



   It shall be a violation for anyone to park a motor vehicle upon the
public sidewalks of the city.



(Prior Code, § 77.15)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.08  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER;  ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to employ
personnel to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the enforcement personnel or police
officers of the city to report:



      (1)   The number or location of each parking violation;



      (2)   The state license number of such vehicle;



      (3)   The time during which such vehicle is parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; and



      (4)   Any other facts, any knowledge of which is necessary to
a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.



   (C)   All such enforcement personnel or police officers shall also
attach to such vehicle a notice  to the owner or operator thereof that such
vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 77.16)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983)



§ 75.09  OVERSIZE VEHICLE PARKING.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter and Ch. 70 of this code of
ordinances, a vehicle, not registered and licensed as a passenger vehicle,
passenger truck or passenger van, or capable of being registered as such,
shall be considered an oversized vehicle. No oversized vehicle shall park on
any city street, except for the purpose of temporarily making deliveries or
picking up goods or persons. An oversized vehicle may be used to make
deliveries or pick up goods or persons, but shall park within 50 feet of the
site of the delivery or pick up point and shall not remain parked for more
than two hours.



   (B)   Oversized vehicles include, but are not limited to, the
following vehicles and equipment:



      (1)   Camper/trailer;



      (2)   Motor home;



      (3)   Dump truck;



      (4)   Car carrier;



      (5)   Semi-tractor;



      (6)   Semi-trailer, including box, tanker and flat bed
trailers;



      (7)   Box truck;



      (8)   Construction equipment;



      (9)   Garbage truck;



      (10)   Dumpster truck;



      (11)   Ready-mix truck;



      (12)   Snow mobile trailer;



      (13)   Boats on trailer;



      (14)   Utility trailer;



      (15)   Agricultural equipment; and



      (16)   Snow removal vehicles and equipment.



(Prior Code, § 77.17)  (Ord. 2000-9, passed - -2000; Ord. 2010-4, passed
5-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.10  DROP OFF CONTAINERS.



   No drop off waste containers or boxes shall be parked on a city street
unless approved by the City Street Department Superintendent. The
Superintendent may permit the location of such container or box for up to 14
days. No such container or box shall be permitted on a city street unless
such container or box has reflective warnings or stripes attached thereto
sufficient to warn operators of vehicles of the container’s or box’s
location on the city street. Any property owner or contractor who obtains
permission to locate a drop off waste container or box on a city street shall
be responsible for the proper marking or barricading of such container or box
and shall be solely liable for any damages or personal injury arising from or
related to the placement of such container or box on a city street.



(Ord. 2010-4, passed 5-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter,
or any person who aids, abets or assists therein, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of an amount not less than $10, nor more than
$100, for each offense or violation; provided, however, that, if, within 48
hours after a violation of Ch. 78, Schd. II, of this code of ordinances
regarding limited parking, the owner or operator of a vehicle identified in a
citation pays the sum of $5, no prosecution will be initiated; after 48
hours, a fine of $25 must be paid to avoid prosecution. If prosecution is
initiated, a fine of up to $100 may be sought; further provided, however,
that, if, within 48 hours after a violation of Ch. 78, Schd. III, of this
traffic code regarding handicapped parking, the owner or operator of a
vehicle identified in a citation pays the sum of $10, no prosecution will be
initiated; after 48 hours, a fine of $25 must be paid to avoid prosecution.
Payments of a fine may be made by enclosing the required payment in the
envelope provided with the notice of violation and depositing the envelope in
the fine box located at the city hall, 225 West Monroe Street, Decatur,
Indiana, or may be paid in person at City Hall. All fines paid shall be
deposited into the City General Fund. Failure to pay a fine within 30 days
will result in prosecution being initiated. Once prosecution has been
initiated, the fine shall increase to $50, plus court costs, which shall be
paid into the office of the Clerk of the county to avoid a trial. If a trial
is held, up to a $100 fine maybe sought, which shall be in addition to court
costs.



   (B)   In addition to any fine which may be imposed or sought under
division (A) above, any vehicle parked in violation of Ch. 78, Schd. II, of
this code of ordinances regarding the parking of trailers on city parking
lots or parked in violation of § 75.09 of this chapter regarding oversized
vehicles may be towed and impounded at the owner’s expense, and will not be
released to the owner until all fines, towing and storage costs are paid.



(Prior Code, § 77.99)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed 10-1-1996; Ord. 2010-4, passed
5-18-2010)



CHAPTER 76:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Stop intersections



      II.   Multi-stop intersections



      III.   Yield intersections



      IV.   Alley intersections



      V.   One-way streets



      VI.   Truck routes



      VII.   No passing zones



      VIII.   Speed limits



      IX.   School speed zones



      X.   Reduced speed limits in parks



SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described below are designated stop intersections.
When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this traffic code
are erected at the entrances to such intersections, the operator of a vehicle
approaching any of the streets where a sign has been erected shall bring such
vehicle to a full and complete stop before entering the intersection, except
when directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



 

Traffic On
 
Shall Stop for Traffic On




1st Street
 
Jackson


Oak


Rugg


2nd Street
 
Jackson


3rd Street
 
Adams Street


Jackson


Jefferson


4th Street
 
Adams


Jackson


Marshall


5th Street
 
2nd Street


Adams


Elm


Lopez Lane


Patterson


Alleys platted at south end of 5th Street


6th Street
 
Jefferson


Madison


North alley between Madison and Monroe


Nuttman Avenue


7th Street
 
Adams


Nuttman Avenue


8th Street
 
Adams


Jefferson


Nuttman Avenue


9th Street
 
Adams


Dayton


Jefferson


Nuttman Avenue


10th Street
 
Adams


Dayton


Elm


Nuttman Avenue


Washington


11th Street
 
Adams


Dayton


Elm


Marshall


Nuttman


Washington


12th Street
 
Alley south of Madison


Dayton


Jackson


Madison


Nuttman


Washington


14th Street
 
CR 500 North


Adams


Madison


15th Street
 
Adams


Madison


Monroe


16th Street
 
Adams


Monroe


17th Street
 
Monroe


28th Street
 
CR 500 N


West Monroe and CR 550 N


All traffic
 
At posted stop signs on school property


Adams
 
1st Street


2nd Street


Winchester Street


Angus Drive
 
Dormac


Mercer Avenue


Beal Drive
 
Washington


Bear’s Pass
 
Tiger’s Trail


Bellmont Boulevard
 
Monroe


Berkley Court
 
Canterbury Drive


Berkshire
 
Monroe


Brandywine Lane
 
Monroe


Briarwood
 
Country Brook Road (CR 200 E)


Brookwood Drive
 
Eastbrook Drive


County Brook Road (CR 200 E)


Bush
 
Grant


Cambridge Court
 
Yorkshire Drive


Canterbury Drive
 
Winchester Road


Central Avenue
 
Second Street


Washington


City Parking Lot
 
Jackson


3rd Street


Cherry Lane (north)
 
16th Street


Cherry Lane (south)
 
16th Street


Chamber Drive
 
Patterson


Clermont
 
Bellmont Boulevard


Cleveland
 
Oak


Grant


Closs
 
Park


Marshall


Commerce Drive
 
28th Street


Community Pass
 
Stratton Way


Limberlost Trail


Country Brook Road
 
Monroe


Court
 
3rd Street


Cross Pointe
 
Washington


Woodridge Drive


Dayton
 
7th Street


Dear Run Trail
 
28th Street


Decatur Church of God
 
Mercer


Dierkes
 
Washington


Dayton


Dormac
 
Parkview Drive


Kekionga Park Road


Dorwin
 
Line


Schirmeyer


Down Ridge Drive
 
Country Brook Road


East Ridge Drive


Eagle Glen
 
Woodridge Drive


East Branch Beal Drive
 
Meibers


Washington Street


East Ridge Drive
 
Country Brook Road


Eastbrook Drive
 
Briarwood


North Brook Court


Piqua Road


Edgemont Drive
 
Monroe


Bellmont Boulevard


Elm
 
Grant


Line


Winchester Street


Evergreen Lane
 
Monroe


Everhart Drive
 
Grant


Rod


Fallen Timbers
 
Yorktown Road


Brandywine Lane


Faurote Avenue
 
Bollman


Rod


Georgia
 
Bollman


Grant
 
High


Line


Mercer Avenue


Winchester


Grey Goose Boulevard
 
West Monroe


Guy Brown Drive
 
Chamber Drive


Patterson


Harrison
 
Meibers


Washington


Harvester Lane
 
Monroe


Stratton


Hickory Court
 
Sycamore Street


High
 
Mercer Avenue


Highland Park
 
Mercer Avenue


Highview Court
 
Cross Pointe


Homestead (north)
 
High


Homestead (south)
 
High


Hospital Property - all traffic
 
At posted stop signs on hospital property


Indiana
 
5th Street


7th Street


Industrial Park Road
 
Patterson


Monroe Street and 50 N


Jackson
 
8th Street


9th Street


10th Street


11th Street


Jefferson
 
1st Street


2nd Street


10th Street


John
 
3rd Street


5th Street


Kekionga
 
Grant


Elm


Krick
 
11th Street


Lake Court
 
Monroe


Lake Shore Court
 
Piqua Road


Lake Shore Drive
 
Piqua Road


Lewis Drive
 
Washington


2nd Street


Line
 
Adams


Winchester


Linn
 
10th Street


11th Street


Locust
 
Mercer Avenue


Lopez Lane
 
Line


Madison
 
1st Street


2nd Street


3rd Street


5th Street


7th Street


8th Street


9th Street


10th Street


11th Street


16th Street


Manchester
 
Yorkshire Drive


Maple Street
 
5th Street


Maplecrest
 
Evergreen Lane


Marshall
 
2nd Street


3rd Street


5th Street


7th Street


9th Street


10th Street


12th Street


Master Drive
 
2nd Street


Washington


McBarnes
 
Russell


Everhart Drive


Meadow Lane
 
Angus Drive


Meibers
 
5th Street


10th Street


11th Street


12 Street


Dierkes


Walnut


Platted alley located adjacent to and parallel with the railroad right-of-way
known as Penn Central Railroad


Mix Avenue
 
2nd Street


Washington


Monmouth Road
 
2nd Street


Niblick
 
Elm


South alley, between Winchester Niblick and Line, South of Elm


North Adams Drive
 
Monroe


Northbrook Court
 
Country Brook Road (CR 200 E)


Nuttman Avenue
 
5th Street


Oak
 
Mercer Avenue


Winchester Street


Oakgrove
 
CR 500 North


Oakridge Place
 
Monroe


Ogg
 
North Adams Drive


Monroe


Park Street
 
3rd Street


5th Street


Park Place - East and West
 
Grant


Parkview Drive (north)
 
Mercer Avenue


Parkview Drive (south)
 
Mercer Avenue


Patterson
 
3rd Street


10th Street


11th Street


28th Street


Elm Street


Line


Winchester


Penn
 
Russell


Winchester


Porter Vista
 
Monroe


Stratton Way


Reiter
 
Winchester Street


Riverside Court
 
Winchester Road


Rochester
 
Canterbury Drive


Rod
 
Russell


Vine


South Winchester Street





 



(Prior Code, § 72.1 and 95.39)  (Ord. 1989-13, passed 6-20-1989; 1992-2,
passed 4-22-1992; Ord. 2010-3, passed 5-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II. MULTI-STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described below are designated as multi-stop
intersections and which may be a four-way stop, a three-way stop or an
all-way stop. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this
traffic code are erected at the entrance to such intersections, the operator
of a vehicle entering any of the streets shall bring such vehicle to a full
and complete stop before entering the intersection, except when directed by a
police officer to do otherwise.



 

Street/Intersection
 

Type of Stop





Alley north and south, between Adams and Patterson
 

4-way



2nd and Jackson
 

4-way



3rd and Jackson
 

3-way



3rd and Jefferson
 

3-way



4th and Jefferson
 

4-way



4th and Madison
 

4-way



5th and Jefferson
 

3-way



Piqua Road and Bellmont Road
 

4-way



Piqua Road and Monroe
 

4-way



7th and Jefferson
 

4-way



Eagle Glen Court, Bears Pass and Woodridge Drive
 

4-way



Bellmont Road and 200 E
 

4-way



Alley north and south, between Madison Street and Jefferson Street
 

4-way



Alley east and west, between 5th Street and 6th Street
 

4-way





 



(Prior Code, § 72.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 2010-3, passed
5-4-2010; Ord. 2016-2, passed 4-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described below are designated as yield
intersections. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this
traffic code are erected at the entrance to such intersections, the operator
of a vehicle approaching any of the streets where a sign has been erected
shall slow down and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle on the cross
street, except when directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



 

Traffic On
 
Shall Yield to Traffic On




Beal Drive
 
Meibers


Blue Heron Cove
 
Grey Goose Boulevard


Brant Court
 
Grey Goose Boulevard


Champions Point
 
Hogans Alley


Colonial Court
 
Highland Park


Dearfield Court
 
Whitetail Drive


Eagle Ridge Court
 
Woodridge Drive


Edgewater Court
 
Waters Edge Drive


Fairway Drive
 
Rural King


Fawn Court
 
Dear Run Trail


Freemont Lane
 
Edgemont Drive


Hogans Alley
 
Tiger Trail


Homestead Drive North Entrance Island
 
Homestead Drive



   Southwest corner of Lot 42

 
Northwesterly traffic south of Island



   Northeast corner of Island

 
Northeasterly and southwesterly traffic east of Island



   West point of Lot 4

 
Northeasterly and southwesterly traffic east and south of Island



   Northeast corner of Lot 36

 
Northwesterly and southwesterly traffic east and south of Island


Homestead Drive South Entrance Island
 
Homestead Drive



   West side of Lot 15, southeast corner of Island

 
Northwesterly traffic west of Island



   Park side, west of the southwest corner of Island

 
Easterly and westerly traffic south of Island


Homestead Drive
 
Westerly traffic south of Island


Old Course Court
 
Tiger Trail


Piedmont Lane
 
Clermont Avenue


Pintail Lane
 
Grey Goose Boulevard


Quinn Court
 
Highland Park


South Whitetail Drive
 
Deer Run Trail


Twin Lakes Drive
 
Lakeshore Drive


Windmiller Court
 
Woodridge Drive


Woodhue Court
 
Briarwood Court


Woodland Court
 
Woodridge Court


Yearling Court
 
Whitetail Drive




 



(Prior Code, § 72.3)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 2010-3, passed
5-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV. ALLEY INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections described below are designated as alley
intersections. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this
traffic code are erected at the entrance to such intersections, the operator
of a vehicle traveling on an alley and approaching any such intersection,
where a sign has been erected at the entrance of such an intersection, shall
bring such vehicle to a full and complete stop before entering the
intersection, except when directed by a police officer to do otherwise.



 

Traffic On
 
Shall Stop for Traffic On




Alley between 5th and Elm, east of Line
 
Elm and Lopez Lane


Alley between Central Avenue and Soya Drive
 
2nd Street


Alley between Master Drive and Mix Avenue
 
2nd Street


Alley between Indiana and Short
 
5th Street and 7th Street


Alley between Linn and Elm
 
10th Street


Alley between Jackson and Monroe
 
11th Street


Alley between Linn and Elm
 
11th Street


Alley between Madison and Monroe
 
11th Street


Alley between Jackson and Monroe
 
12th Street


Alley between Madison and Monroe
 
12th Street


Alley between Russell and Vine
 
Bollman


Alley by Penn Central, east of railroad
 
Dayton


Alley between Russell and Vine
 
Penn


Alley between Russell and Vine
 
Rod


Alley by Penn Central, east of railroad
 
Washington


Alley between Master Drive and Mix Avenue
 
Washington


Alley between 11th and 12th Street
 
Adams




 



(Prior Code, § 72.5)  (Ord. 2010-3, passed 5-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described
below, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.



 


Street

 
From
 
To
 
Direction of Travel




3rd Street
 
Adams
 
5th Street
 
North


5th Street
 
3rd Street
 
Adams
 
South


7th Street
 
Monroe
 
Nuttman Avenue
 
North


Adams
 
2nd Street - Mercer Avenue
 
1st Street
 
East


Court
 
2nd Street
 
3rd Street
 
West


Jackson
 
5th Street
 
3rd Street
 
East


Madison
 
Second Street
 
First Street
 
East*


Maple
 
3rd Street
 
5th Street
 
West


Marshall
 
3rd Street
 
5th Street
 
West


Alley between Madison and Monroe
 
Madison Street
 
Alley between 2nd Street and 3rd Street
 
North


Alley between Madison and Monroe
 
Monroe Street
 
Inlot number 86
 
South


Alley between 2nd Street and Third Street
 
2nd Street
 
Alley between Madison Street and Monroe Street
 
West




 



   *   Provided, however, at such times as Madison Street between
Second Street and First Street is blocked off as a plaza for community
events, such street shall be limited to pedestrian use only and vehicular
traffic shall be prohibited on said street during such events. The city
Street Department is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate
street signs along Madison Street to give effect to this schedule.



      The west 132 feet of the east-west alley between Second Street
and First Street in the block between Monroe Street and Madison Street is
hereby established as a pedestrian alley for pedestrian use only and
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited on said alley portion, unless the city
authorizes temporary vehicular use to allow short term, local deliveries to
adjoining businesses.



(Prior Code, § 73.1)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 2010-3, passed
5-4-2010; Ord. 2017-2, passed 5-2-2017; Ord. 2017-16, passed 11-21-2017) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI. TRUCK ROUTES.



 

Street
 
From
 
To




2nd Street
 
13th Street
 
Monmouth Road


9th Street
 
Dayton
 
Nuttman Avenue


28th Street
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 
Deer Run Trail


Bellmont Road
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 
Fleetwood


Dayton
 
13th Street
 
Dierkes


Guy Brown Drive
 
South Chamber Drive
 
Patterson Street


Monmouth Road
 
2nd Street
 
Filtration Plant Entrance


Patterson
 
13th Street
 
28th Street


South Chamber Drive
 
Patterson Street
 
Dean Foods


Soya Drive
 
Washington
 
2nd Street


Washington
 
Beal Drive
 
Soya Drive


Winchester Road
 
13th Street
 
West city limits


Winchester Street
 
27 South
 
Fred Isch Drive


U.S. Hwy. 27 South
 
Patterson Street




 



(Prior Code, § 76.3)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 2010-3, passed
5-4-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VII. NO PASSING ZONES.



 

Street
 
From
 
To




1st Street
 
Rugg
 
Jackson


2nd Street
 
5th Street
 
Alley 700 block


2nd Street
 
Monroe
 
Jackson


28th Street
 
Commerce Drive
 
Monroe


28th Street
 
Deer Run Trail
 
500 North


28th Street
 
Monroe
 
U.S. Hwy. 224


500 North
 
13th Street
 
Oak Grove Place


Adams
 
3rd Street
 
2nd Street


Bellmont Road
 
Piqua Road
 
U.S. Hwy. 224


Jackson
 
3rd Street
 
U.S. Hwy. 224


Mercer Avenue
 
Angus Drive
 
County Road 200 East


Monmouth Road
 
2nd Street
 
North city limits


Patterson Street
 
200 feet West of 13th Street
 
13th Street


Patterson
 
Chamber Drive
 
28th Street


Washington
 
2nd Street
 
75 feet west


Washington Street
 
11th Street
 
13th Street


Washington
 
13th Street
 
City limits west


Winchester Road
 
13th Street
 
Tiger Trail


Winchester Street
 
Village Green Drive
 
U.S. Hwy. 224




 



(Prior Code, § 82.1)  (Ord. 2010-3, passed 5-4-2010; Ord. 2017-20, passed
11-21-2017)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VIII. SPEED LIMITS.



   It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that the speed limit permitted by the State Motor Vehicle Laws
upon the streets listed below, is greater or less, than is necessary for the
reasonable or safe operation of vehicles thereon. It is declared that the
maximum speed limit shall be as herein designated when signs are erected
giving notice thereof.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 

Maximum Speed





2nd Street
 
Adams
 
Jackson
 

25 mph



2nd Street
 
US Highway 27 (13th Street)
 
Central Avenue
 

25 mph



28th Street
 
500 N
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 

40 mph



500 N
 
Oak Grove Place
 
13th Street
 

30 mph



Alley east and west
 
5th Street
 
6th Street
 

10 mph



Alley north and south
 
Madison Street
 
Jefferson Street
 

10 mph



Bellmont Road
 
Piqua Road
 
The Crossings
 

40 mph



Bellmont Road
 
200 East
 
City limits
 

45 mph



Bollman Street
 
13th Street
 
Village Green Drive
 

20 mph



Country Brook Road (CR 200 E)
 
East Monroe (CR 600 N)
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 

30 mph



Industrial Park Road (CR 50 W)
 
Patterson
 
782 feet north of Monroe
 

30 mph



Industrial Park Road
 
West Monroe St.
 
US 224
 

30 mph



Mercer
 
200 East
 
City limits
 

45 mph



Mercer Avenue
 
Angus Drive
 
County Road 200 East
 

45 mph



Monmouth Road
 
South edge of St. Mary’s Bridge
 
2nd Street
 

30 mph



Monroe (CR 550 N)
 
Industrial Park Road  (CR 50W)
 
28th Street
 

35 mph



Stratton Addition



   Community Pass

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph




   Harvester Lane

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph




   Limberlost Trail

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph




   Stratton Way

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph




   Sunset Lane

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph




   Trails End

 
 
 
 
 

25 mph



Washington
 
U.S. Hwy. 27 (13th Street)
 
West to city limits
 

30 mph



Winchester Street
 
U.S. Hwy. 27 (13th Street)
 
West property line of Wal-Mart or a distance of 1,242 feet
 

30 mph



Winchester Street (CR 450 N)
 
1,242 feet west of the intersection with U.S. Hwy. 27 (13th Street)
 
West to city limits or a distance of 1,749 feet
 

45 mph





 



(Prior Code, § 75.1)  (Ord. 1990-7, passed 7-3-1990; Ord. 2010-1, passed
3-2-2010; Ord. 2011-1, passed 3-15-2011; Ord. 2016-2, passed 4-19-2016; Ord.
2016-16, passed 10-4-2016; Ord. 2017-20, passed 11-21-2017)  Penalty, see §
70.99



SCHEDULE IX. SCHOOL SPEED ZONES.



   It is determined that school speed zones shall be established as listed
below. When appropriate signs are erected on said streets, conforming to the
requirements of this traffic code, no person shall drive a vehicle at a speed
greater than 20 mph; except that, the time of such reduced speed limits are
confined to periods when children are present.



 

Street
 
From
 
To




4th Street
 
Jefferson
 
Jackson


5th Street
 
Adams
 
Nuttman Avenue


10th Street
 
Dayton Avenue
 
Madison


11th Street
 
Madison
 
Nuttman Avenue


12th Street
 
Dayton
 
Nuttman Avenue


Dayton Street
 
10th Street
 
12th Street


Everhart Drive
 
Rod
 
Grant


Grant
 
Russell
 
Everhart


McBarnes
 
Russell
 
Everhart


Monroe
 
Ogg
 
Brandywine


Ogg
 
Monroe
 
North Adams Drive


Rod
 
Russell
 
Everhart




 



(Prior Code, § 75.2)  (Ord. 1983-11, passed 6-21-1983; Ord. 2010-1, passed
3-2-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE X.  REDUCED SPEED LIMITS IN PARKS.



   Whenever the Common Council shall determine, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed of 20 mph is greater
than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection, playground, picnic area or other place upon any art of the
area, roads or drives within the park, the City Council may determine and
declare a reasonable and safe prima facie speed limit thereat, which
declaration and determination so made shall be effective when appropriate
signs giving notice thereof are erected at the intersections, playgrounds,
picnic areas and other places upon the park roads or drives.



(Prior Code, § 95.38)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



CHAPTER 78:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   No parking zones



      II.   Limited parking zones



      III.   Handicapped parking



      IV.   Snow emergency routes



SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING ZONES.



   The streets described below are designated no parking zones. When
appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of this traffic code are
erected, no person shall park a vehicle on the side of the street at the
times designated in the schedule.



 


Street

 
From
 
To
 

Side of Street

 

Restriction





1st Street
 
Madison
 
Intersection 100 block of south 1st Street
 

West

 

Any time



Madison
 
83 feet north
 

West

 

Any time



First alley north of Rugg
 
Jackson
 

East

 

Any time



2nd Street
 
Monmouth Road
 
Soya Drive
 

North

 

Any time



Monroe
 
88 feet north of Monroe
 

West

 

Any time



3rd Street
 
Jefferson
 
Monroe
 

East

 

Any time



Patterson
 
Adams
 

East

 

Any time



4th Street
 
First alley north of Adams
 
Jefferson
 

Loading and unloading zone

 




5th Street
 
3rd Street
 
2nd Street
 

East

 

Any time



Adams
 
First alley north of Adams
 

West

 

Any time



6th Street
 
Monroe
 
Nuttman
 

East

 

Any time



7th Street
 
Adams
 
Monroe
 

West

 

Any time



Monroe
 
65 feet south of Monroe
 

Both

 

Any time



First Alley north of Adams
 
Jefferson
 

East

 

Any time



8th Street
 
Monroe
 
200 feet South
 

East

 

Any time



Nuttman
 
50 feet South
 

East

 

Any time



9th Street
 
Nuttman Avenue
 
South 100 feet
 

West

 

Any time



11th Street
 
Adams
 
Patterson
 

West

 

Any time



Monroe
 
First alley north of Monroe
 

West

 

Any time



Jackson
 
Nuttman
 

East

 

Any time



Patterson
 
Bollman
 

Both

 

Any time



12th Street
 
Nuttman Avenue
 
First alley north
 

East

 

Any time



Nuttman Avenue
 
Dayton
 

West

 

Any time



Adams
 
3rd Street
 
2nd Street
 

South

 

Any time



10th Street
 
13th Street
 

North

 

Any time



13th Street
 
First alley west of 13th
 

South

 

Any time



13th Street
 
16th Street
 

North

 

Any time



Line
 
10th Street
 

South

 

Any time



Bollman
 
Centerline of U.S. Hwy. 27
 
Village Green Drive
 

Both

 

Any time



Commerce Drive
 
28th Street
 
To end of street
 

Both

 

Any time



Court
 
2nd Street
 
3rd Street
 

Both

 

10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



Grant
 
High
 
Mercer
 

South

 

Any time



Line
 
High
 

North

 

Any time



High
 
Mercer Avenue
 
South city limits
 

East

 

Any time



Industrial Park Road
 
Patterson
 
W. Monroe Street
 

Both

 

Any time



Jackson
 
1st Street
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 

Both

 

Any time



3rd Street
 
1st Street
 

South

 

Any time



Jefferson
 
3rd Street
 
60 feet east
 

North

 

Any time



4th Street
 
3rd Street
 

South

 

Any time



Line
 
Patterson
 
Adams
 

East

 

Any time



Madison
 
2nd Street
 
3rd Street
 

South

 

10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.



Marshall
 
3rd Street
 
2nd Street
 

South

 

Any time



Meadow Lane
 
Cul-de-sac
 
 
 


 

Any time



Meibers
 
13th Street
 
First alley west of 13th Street
 

Both

 

Any time



Monroe
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 
East city limits
 

Both

 

Any time



Ninth Street
 
Monroe Street
 
Nuttman Avenue
 

West

 

Any time



North Adams Drive
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 
Bellmont High School
 

Both

 

Any time



U.S. Hwy. 224
 
East Monroe
 

Both

 

Any time



Nuttman Avenue
 
5th Street
 
12th Street
 

North

 

Any time



13th Street
 
12th Street
 

North

 

Any time



Patterson
 
3rd Street
 
90 feet east of 3rd Street
 

North

 

Any time



13th Street
 
28th Street
 

Both

 

Any time



Line
 
5th Street
 

North

 

Any time



Rugg
 
Winchester
 
Mercer
 

South

 

Any time



Russell
 
Grant
 
McBarnes
 

East

 

Any time



Rod
 
Winchester
 

West

 

Any time



Southampton
 
Washington
 
Yorkshire
 

East

 

Any time



Stadium Drive
 
U.S. Hwy. 224
 
East end of Worthman Stadium
 

Both

 

Any time



Sunset Lane
 
Porta Vista Lane
 
Cul de sac
 

Both

 

Any time



Walnut
 
Dayton
 
Curve
 

Both

 

Any time



Washington
 
13th Street
 
Soya Drive
 

North

 

Any time



13th Street
 
West of city limits
 

Both

 

Any time



Winchester Street
 
Adams
 
200 feet south
 

East

 

Any time



13th Street
 
Adams
 

West

 

Any time



13th Street
 
Rod
 

East

 

Any time





 



(Prior Code, § 77.5)  (Ord. 2010-4, passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 2017-23, passed
12-19-2017; Ord. 2018-17, passed 8-21-2018)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING ZONES.



   (A)   General. The streets and areas described below are designated
limited parking zones. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements
of this traffic code are erected, no person shall park a vehicle (on a street
or in an area) for any continuous period of time longer than designated in
the schedule.



 

Street
 
From
 
To
 

Side of Street

 
Limit




2nd Street
 
Court
 
South to alley between Jefferson and Adams
 

West

 
2 hours; 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Jackson
 
South to alley between Jefferson and Adams
 

East

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Jackson
 
Madison
 

West

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


3rd Street
 
First, second and third spaces north of Monroe
 
 
 

East

 
10 minutes


Fourth through eighth spaces, inclusive, north of Monroe
 
 
 

East

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


1st alley north of Monroe
 
Jackson
 

East

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Monroe
 
Jefferson
 

West

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


11th Street
 
Monroe
 
Jackson
 
East
 
Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.


Adams
 
2nd Street - Mercer Avenue
 
1st Street
 

South

 
3 hours


Court
 
2nd Street
 
3rd Street
 

North

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


2nd Street
 
West to alley
 

South

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Dayton
 
First alley west of 10th Street
 
12th Street
 

South

 
No parking school days


Jefferson
 
2nd Street
 
East to alley
 

South

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


2nd Street
 
West to alley
 

South

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Madison
 
1st Street
 
3rd Street
 

Both

 
2 hours; 8:00 am to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday


Oak
 
Mercer Avenue
 
Fornax
 

South

 
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except Sunday and holidays




 



   (B)   Parking on municipal lots.



      (1)   Supervision. The municipal parking lots now owned or
hereafter acquired or established by the city shall be under the supervision
of the Chief of Police.



      (2)   Use. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any
parking lot in violation of any section, or to so park contrary to the rules
established by the Common Council of the city for the use of such parking
lots, or in any place or manner other than that designated by the Board of
Public Works and Safety. No commercial or freight-carrying vehicle shall be
parked in the city parking lot unless a special parking permit is obtained
from the Chief of Police or his or her assistant, except as provided under
division (B)(3)(c) below.



      (3)   Hours.



         (a)   Except for the parking lot described in division
(B)(3)(c) below, it shall be unlawful to park any car, truck, bus,
motorcycle, recreational vehicle or vehicle or husbandry in municipal parking
lots for a period of longer than 16 hours in any 24-hour period. In the event
that it shall become necessary for a motor vehicle to park for a greater
length of time, such person desiring to do so shall first obtain a permit
from the Chief of Police of the city.



         (b)   However, for the parking lot bounded on the west
by Third Street, on the east by the adjoining public alley, on the north by
City Hall and adjacent premises and on the south by those buildings adjacent
to and abutting the south edge thereof, commonly known as the Third Street
city parking lot, a two-hour parking limit is hereby established.



         (c)   For the parking lot bounded on the west by Front
Street, on the east by the St. Mary’s River, on the north by Jackson Street
and on the south by Monroe Street, commonly known as the Chamber of Commerce
parking lot, a 60-hour parking limit is hereby established for commercial and
freight carrying vehicles. No trailer shall be uncoupled from the towing
vehicle and parked on the lot described in this division (B)(3) or any other
lot.



(Prior Code, § 77.6)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed 10-1-1996; Ord. 2010-4, passed
5-18-2010)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III. HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The parking spaces described below are designated as reserved parking -
handicapped only. When appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of
this traffic code are erected no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
other than those vehicles displaying official state handicapped license
plates or window placards, or displaying official handicapped identification
issued by another state.



 


Street

 
Description
 

Side of Street





2nd Street
 
First space north of Jefferson
 

West



Second space north of Jefferson
 

East



First space north of first alley north of Adams
 

East



Fourth space south of Jefferson
 

West



First space south of Monroe
 

East



First space north of Monroe
 

East



3rd Street
 
3 spaces in third city parking lot as marked
 

East



75 feet south of Monroe
 

West



4th Street
 
220 feet south of Monroe
 

West



7th Street
 
3 spaces north of first alley of Nuttman Avenue
 

East



7th Street
 
115th South 7th Street
 

East



10th Street
 
Fourth space south of Dayton
 

West



Court
 
First space east of 3rd Street
 

South



2 spaces across from Post Office
 

North



Jefferson
 
First space west of 3rd Street
 

North



Madison
 
First space west of 2nd Street
 

South



Madison
 
Near 615 Madison Street, at the corner of the north-south alley which
intersects Madison Street midway between 6th Street and 7th Street
 

South



Madison
 
Near 103 South 7th Street, second parking space nearest to the intersection
of Madison Street and 7th Street
 

South



New City Hall Parking Lot
 
2 parking spaces as marked
 






 



(Prior Code, § 77.10)  (Ord. 1992-16, passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 2010-4,
passed 5-18-2010; Ord. 2011-8, passed 9-20-2011; Ord. 2016-18, passed
11-1-2016; Ord. 2017-9, passed 9-5-2017; Ord. 2017-19, passed 12-5-2017) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   The following streets are hereby designated as snow routes in the event
of a snow emergency:



 

Street
 
From




1st Street
 
From Monroe Street to Rugg Street


2nd Street
 
From Adams Street to U.S. Hwy. 27


5th Street
 
From Park to Monroe Street


7th Street
 
From Adams to Monroe Street


28th Street
 
From CR 500 N to U.S. Hwy. 224


Adams Street
 
13th Street to 2nd Street


CR 500 N
 
From U.S. Hwy. 27 to 28th Street


Grant Street
 
From Mercer Avenue to Winchester Street


High Street
 
From U.S. Hwy. 33 to Mercer Avenue


Mercer Avenue
 
From 200 feet east of Adams Street


Monroe Street
 
From U.S. Hwy. 224 to Piqua Road


Nuttman Avenue
 
From 13th Street to 5th Street


Park Street
 
From 3rd Street to 5th Street


Patterson Street
 
From 28th Street to 13th Street


Piqua Road
 
From East Monroe to U.S. Hwy. 224


Village Green Drive
 
From Winchester Street to Bollman Street


Washington Street
 
From 13th Street to 5th Street


West Monroe
 
From 28th Street to 13th Street


Winchester Street
 
From U.S. Hwy. 27 to Mercer Avenue




 



(Prior Code, § 77.11)  (Ord. 2010-4, passed 5-18-2010)  Penalty, see §
70.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



      92.   NUISANCES



      93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; DRAINAGE STRUCTURES



      94.   PARKS



      95.   ASSEMBLIES; PARKING FACILITIES



      96.   TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION



      97.   FAIR HOUSING



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




Dogs




   90.01   Harboring and keeping of dogs



   90.02   Licensing of dogs



   90.03   Enforcement of regulations



   90.04   Impounding of dogs



   90.05   Licensed dogs, when impounded



   90.06   Disturbances prohibited



   90.07   Running at large prohibited



   90.08   Dogs to be impounded after biting another animal or human
being



   90.09   Unlawful to hinder authorized person




Miscellaneous




   90.20   Horses, cattle running at large



   90.21   Overcrowding small animals; selling as pets



   90.22   Duty of humane officer, peace officer, Sheriff or Health
Officer




Dangerous Animals and Reptiles




   90.35   Definitions



   90.36   Determination of potentially dangerous animal or reptile



   90.37   Determination of dangerous animal or reptile



   90.38   Exceptions



   90.39   Contents of orders with respect to potentially dangerous
animals or reptiles



   90.40   Contents of orders with respect to dangerous animals or
reptiles



   90.41   Duration of orders



   90.42   Unlawful acts



 



   90.99   Penalty




DOGS




§ 90.01  HARBORING AND KEEPING OF DOGS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, any person who shall allow any dog
habitually to remain and be lodged and be fed within his or her house, store
or enclosure or on his or her premises shall be deemed to harbor and keep a
dog.



(Prior Code, § 90.01)



§ 90.02  LICENSING OF DOGS.



   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person, firm or
corporation to own, harbor or to have in his, her or their possession, within
the city limits, any dog unless such dog is vaccinated and regulated in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set out.



(Prior Code, § 90.02)  (Amended 8-19-2008)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The regulation and control of this subchapter shall be under
the direction and supervision of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board will direct any department or departments of the
city as it may see fit to carry out the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 90.06)



§ 90.04  IMPOUNDING OF DOGS.



   It shall be the duty of any department of the city, so directed by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, to examine each and every dog found running
at large at any place within the city limits to ascertain whether or not such
dog is duly vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
Any dog found that is not vaccinated may be returned to the rightful owner or
may be placed in a facility which provides such services to the city. Within
and including the period of five days any owner of the impounded dog may
claim the dog by paying all costs of impoundment and costs of vaccinating the
dog. At the expiration of five days, if the impounded dog is not claimed and
redeemed, the person designated to be in charge of the impoundment facility
shall dispose of the dog, the method and manner of such disposition to be
determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 90.09)  (Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.05  LICENSED DOGS, WHEN IMPOUNDED.



   Any duly vaccinated dog or dogs found running at large within the city
limits, destroying property, flower beds or shrubbery, upsetting garbage cans
or creating a general nuisance may, upon proper complaint, be impounded. The
owner or owners of such dog or dogs may redeem or recover such dog or dogs by
paying restitution for damages, if any, and by paying all costs of
impoundment.



(Prior Code, § 90.10)  (Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.06  DISTURBANCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to harbor or
keep any dog within the city which, by loud and frequent or habitual barking,
howling or yelping, shall cause serious annoyance or disturbance to the
neighborhood. It shall further be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter
for any person to fail to pick up and properly dispose of such person’s dog
excrement deposited upon the streets or other public places within the city
or in or upon any other place beyond the premises of such person.



(Prior Code, § 90.11)  (Amended 8-19-2008; Amended 1-6-2009)  Penalty, see
§ 90.99



§ 90.07  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person being
the owner of or having the care, custody or control of any dog, or harboring
or keeping any dog, to allow, suffer or permit the dog to be at large upon
the streets or other public places within the city, or in or upon any other
place beyond the premises of such person unless the dog is:



      (1)   On a leash, controlled by some person physically able to
control the dog; and



      (2)   Displaying a tag showing that anti-rabic vaccine had
been administered to that particular animal within the last 12 months.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the humane officer of the
city or the person designated to be in charge by the Board of Public Works
and Safety, upon proper complaint, to apprehend and impound all dogs running
at large contrary to the provisions of this subchapter. Any dog so impounded
may be redeemed by the owner within five days after the impounding of the dog
by reclaiming the dog at the city dog pound where it is impounded; provided
that, the owner shall first pay to the city for the city dog tax fund a
redemption fee of $5. Upon presentation of a receipt for the payment of the
redemption fee to the person designated to be in charge of the city dog pound
by the Board of Public Works and Safety, such impounded dog shall be released
to the owner thereof; provided that, no such impounded dog will be released
unless the owner shall have obtained a city license therefor and shall also
show a current county dog tax receipt as proof of ownership.



      (2)   All impounded dogs not reclaimed and redeemed by the
owner thereof within five days after being impounded may be placed in
suitable homes or otherwise disposed of or destroyed in a humane manner by
the humane officer or person designated to be in charge by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 90.12)  (Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.08  DOGS TO BE IMPOUNDED AFTER BITING ANOTHER ANIMAL OR HUMAN BEING.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the humane officer of the city or the
person designated to be in charge by the Board of Public Works and Safety to
impound any dog which has bitten another animal or has bitten a human being.



   (B)   All such dogs shall be impounded for a period of not less than
14 days for observation for rabies. In the event the dog is determined not to
be rabid, such dog shall be released to its owner, provided that the owner
shall first pay impoundment fees. All impounded dogs not reclaimed by the
owner thereof within five days after a receipt of written notice to reclaim
the same from the humane officer, may be placed in suitable homes or
otherwise disposed of or destroyed in a humane manner by the humane officer
or person in charge.



   (C)   No dog being held for observation shall be released or
destroyed until the expiration of the period of observation for rabies.



(Prior Code, § 90.13)



§ 90.09  UNLAWFUL TO HINDER AUTHORIZED PERSON.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person
to hinder, molest or interfere with any person authorized to perform any duty
described herein.



(Prior Code, § 90.14)  Penalty, see § 90.99




MISCELLANEOUS




§ 90.20  HORSES, CATTLE RUNNING AT LARGE.



   When any horse, mule, horned cattle, swine (either hogs, shoats or
pigs), sheep, geese or goats are found running at large within the city
limits, it shall be the duty of any police officer to capture and cause such
animals to be confined and treated humanely until redeemed or disposed of as
provided in § 90.04 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 90.15)



§ 90.21  OVERCROWDING SMALL ANIMALS; SELLING AS PETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
overcrowd in any cage, crate, box or other receptacle, chicks, ducklings,
goslings, rabbits, fowl or domestic animals, or fail to provide adequate
food, water, shelter or sanitation for the same.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation as an
owner, manager, operator, agent or employee of a store, shop, business or
commercial establishment in the city to sell, offer for  sale, barter or
give away baby chicks, ducklings, goslings, other fowl or rabbits in such
store, shop or business, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise
artificially treated. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the
sale or display of baby rabbits, natural chicks, goslings, ducklings or other
fowl in proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the
business of selling and raising the same for commercial purposes.



(Prior Code, § 90.16)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  DUTY OF HUMANE OFFICER, PEACE OFFICER, SHERIFF OR HEALTH OFFICER.



   In the event of a violation of this subchapter, it shall be the duty of
any duly appointed humane officer, peace officer, Sheriff or Health Officer
to seize such fowl or animal and provide the necessary care and attention for
the same. Such fowl or animal may be redeemed within two days of the seizure
thereof by the owner paying the cost of all such care and attention and if
not so redeemed, the officer seizing the same may dispose of such fowl or
animal in a humane manner.



(Prior Code, § 90.17)




DANGEROUS ANIMALS AND REPTILES




§ 90.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY. A city police officer or his or her designee.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL OR REPTILE. Any animal or reptile that:



      (1)   Causes an injury to a person or domestic animal; or



      (2)   Has been determined to be a potentially dangerous animal
and engages in behavior that poses a threat to public safety as described
herein.



   IMPOUND. Taken into the custody of the city.



   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in or having control or
custody of an animal.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL OR REPTILE. An animal or reptile that may
reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as demonstrated by
any of the following behaviors:



      (1)   Causing an injury to a person or domestic animal that is
less severe than a serious injury;



      (2)   Without provocation, chasing or menacing a person or
domestic animal in an aggressive manner;



      (3)   Running at large and impounded or owners cited by the
animal control authority for a violation of this chapter two or more times
within any 12-month period; and



      (4)   Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced
yard/enclosure and appears to a reasonable person able to break through, jump
over or escape under such enclosure.



   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Secure confinement indoors or secure confinement in a
locked pen, fenced yard or structure measuring at least six feet in width, 12
feet in length, and six feet in height, capped if there is a dog house inside
or if an animal or reptile can climb over or under a fence, with secure
sides, which provided proper protection from the elements for the animal or
reptile, is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and is designed
to prevent the animal or reptile from escaping while on the owner’s
property.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person at least 18 years old who is familiar with
the animal or reptile and has the size and experience to be able to keep the
animal or reptile under complete control at all times.



   SERIOUS INJURY. Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
lacerations that require multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.36  DETERMINATION OF POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL OR REPTILE.



   (A)   Upon receiving a complaint that an animal or reptile has
engaged in conduct described herein, the animal control authority shall
within five days make a determination whether the animal or reptile is a
potentially dangerous animal or reptile as described herein. If the animal
control authority determines that the animal or reptile is a potentially
dangerous animal or reptile, the animal control authority shall issue to the
owner of the animal or reptile an order in accordance with § 90.41 of this
chapter which shall be complied with by the owner within 30 days of the date
of the order, subject to review by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Upon receiving an order from the animal control authority, the
owner of the animal or reptile may, within five business days after the date
of the order, petition the Board of Public Works and Safety seeking review of
the determination and order. The Board shall convene a hearing on the
petition within ten days of the receipt thereof and shall, at said hearing,
either confirm, modify or rescind the order. A decision to rescind the order
of the Animal Control Officer shall not affect the authority of the Animal
Control Officer to issue subsequent orders to the owner of the animal or
reptile based upon the animal’s or reptile’s subsequent behavior.



   (C)   If the animal control authority has probable cause to believe
that an animal or reptile is a potentially dangerous animal or reptile and
probable cause to believe that the animal or reptile poses a threat to public
safety unless immediately impounded, the animal control authority shall
impound the animal or reptile until such time as the owner complies with the
terms of the order.



   (D)   If the owner refuses to allow the animal or reptile to be
impounded, the animal control authority may request a warrant for the purpose
of taking custody of the animal or reptile and impounding the animal or
reptile pending disposition of the case or until the owner has complied with
the terms of the order. Failure to comply with the order within the time
allowed shall authorize the animal control authority to humanely euthanize
the impounded animal or reptile. The owner of the animal or reptile shall be
liable for the costs and expenses of keeping the animal or reptile.



   (E)   If any animal or reptile previously determined to be a
potentially dangerous animal or reptile has not exhibited any of the
behaviors specified in § 90.35 of this chapter within 36 months of the date
of the order determining the animal or reptile to be a potentially dangerous
animal or reptile, the owner may request the animal control authority to
review the determination; provided, however, even if the animal control
authority rescinds the determination, the same animal or reptile may again be
declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or reptile if it again
exhibits any of the specified behaviors.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.37  DETERMINATION OF DANGEROUS ANIMAL OR REPTILE.



   (A)   Upon receiving a complaint that an animal or reptile has
engaged in conduct described in § 90.35 of this chapter, the animal control
authority shall within five days make a determination whether the animal or
reptile is a dangerous animal or reptile. If the animal control authority
determines that the animal or reptile is a dangerous animal or reptile, the
animal control authority shall issue to the owner of the animal or reptile an
order in accordance with § 90.41 of this chapter which shall be complied
with by the owner within 30 days of the date of the order, subject to review
by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Upon receiving an order from the animal control authority, the
owner of the animal or reptile may, within five business days after the date
of the order, petition the Board of Public Works and Safety seeking review of
the determination and order. The Board shall convene a hearing on the
petition within ten days of the receipt thereof and shall, at said hearing,
either confirm, modify or rescind the order. A decision to rescind the order
of the Animal Control Officer shall not affect the authority of the Animal
Control Officer to issue subsequent orders to the owner of the animal or
reptile based upon the animal’s or reptile’s subsequent behavior.



   (C)   If the animal control authority has probable cause to believe
that an animal or reptile is a dangerous animal or reptile and probable cause
to believe that the animal or reptile poses a threat to public safety unless
immediately impounded, the animal control authority shall impound the animal
or reptile until such time as the owner complies with the terms of the order.



   (D)   If the owner refuses to allow the animal or reptile to be
impounded, the animal control authority may request a warrant for the purpose
of taking custody of the animal or reptile and impounding the animal or
reptile pending until disposition of the case or until the owner has complied
with the terms of the order. Failure to comply with the order within the time
allowed shall authorize the animal control authority to humanely euthanize
the impounded animal or reptile. The owner of the animal or reptile is liable
for the costs and expenses of keeping the animal or reptile.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.38  EXCEPTIONS.



   No animal or reptile shall be declared a dangerous or potentially
dangerous animal or reptile if:



   (A)   The animal or reptile was used by a law enforcement official
for legitimate law enforcement purposes;



   (B)   The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person:



      (1)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or
other tort upon the premises lawfully occupied by the owner of the animal or
reptile;



      (2)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal or reptile or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past,
provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or reptile; or



      (3)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



   (C)   The animal or reptile was:



      (1)   Responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself,
its offspring; or



      (2)   Protecting or defending a human being within the
immediate vicinity of the animal or reptile from an attack or assault.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.39  CONTENTS OF ORDERS WITH RESPECT TO POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS
OR REPTILES.



   If the animal control authority determines that an animal or reptile is
a potentially dangerous animal or reptile under § 90.36 of this chapter, the
animal control authority shall issue an order to the owner of the animal or
reptile requiring the owner to do any of the following:



   (A)   Show evidence that the owner of the potentially dangerous
animal or reptile is 18 years of age or older;



   (B)   Obtain a valid license for the potentially dangerous animal or
reptile pursuant to state law;



   (C)   Show evidence that the animal or reptile has a current rabies
vaccination;



   (D)   Provide a proper enclosure (as defined in this subchapter) for
the animal or reptile;



   (E)   Require the owner to register the animal or reptile as a
potentially dangerous animal or reptile and pay an annual fee for such
registration as determined by the Board;



   (F)   Spay or neuter the animal or reptile;



   (G)   Implant a microchip into the animal or reptile which is
registered with the animal control authority;



   (H)   Require the owner to enter the animal or reptile in a
socialization and/or behavior program approved by the animal control
authority; or



   (I)   Require the owner to provide the animal control authority with
the name and address of the new owner if the ownership or physical custody of
the animal or reptile is transferred.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.40  CONTENTS OF ORDERS WITH RESPECT TO DANGEROUS ANIMALS OR REPTILES.



   If the Animal Control Authority determines that an animal or reptile is
a dangerous animal or reptile under § 90.36 of this chapter, the animal
control authority shall issue an order to the owner of the animal or reptile
requiring the owner to do any of the following:



   (A)   Show evidence that the owner of the potentially dangerous
animal or reptile is 18 years of age or older;



   (B)   Obtain a valid license for the potentially dangerous animal or
reptile pursuant to state law;



   (C)   Show evidence that the animal or reptile has a current rabies
vaccination;



   (D)   Provide a proper enclosure (as defined in this subchapter) for
the animal or reptile;



   (E)   Require the owner to register the animal or reptile as a
potentially dangerous animal or reptile and pay an annual fee for such
registration as determined by the Board;



   (F)   Spay or neuter the animal or reptile;



   (G)   Implant a microchip into the animal which is registered with
the animal control authority;



   (H)   Require the owner to enter the animal or reptile in a
socialization and/or behavior program approved by the animal control
authority;



   (I)   Require the owner to provide the animal control authority with
the name and address of the new owner if the ownership or physical custody of
the animal or reptile is transferred;



   (J)   Show that he or she has written permission from the property
owner or homeowner’s association allowing him or her to keep the dangerous
animal or reptile in or upon the property occupied by him or her;



   (K)   Maintain the animal or reptile exclusively on the owner’s
property, except for medical treatment or examination; and



   (L)   Post on the premises a clearly visible written warning sign
that there is a dangerous animal or reptile on the property with a
conspicuous warning symbol that informs children of the presence of a
dangerous animal or reptile. The sign shall be visible from the public
roadway or 50 feet, whichever is less.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.41  DURATION OF ORDERS.



   Any order issued by the animal control authority, as modified by the
Board of Public Works and Safety if applicable, shall remain in effect for
the life of the animal or reptile. The order shall apply to the animal or
reptile even if the ownership of the animal or reptile is transferred after
the issuance of an order.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.42  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Keep a dangerous animal or reptile or potentially dangerous
animal or reptile contrary to the terms of an order issued by the animal
control authority;



   (B)   Permit a potentially dangerous animal or reptile to be outside
a proper enclosure unless it is under the control of a responsible person as
defined in § 90.35 of this chapter, muzzled and restrained by a lead not
exceeding four feet in length. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will
not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration,
but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal;



   (C)   Fail to maintain a dangerous animal or reptile exclusively on
the owner’s property as required except for medical treatment or
examination. When removed from the owner’s property for medical treatment
of examination, the dangerous animal or reptile shall be caged or under the
control of a responsible person as defined in § 90.35 of this chapter,
muzzled and restrained with a lead not exceeding four feet in length. The
muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any
human being or animal;



   (D)   Fail to notify the animal control authority immediately upon
the happening of any of the following:



      (1)   A dangerous animal or reptile is outside of its proper
enclosure, except when under control of a responsible person;



      (2)   A dangerous animal or reptile or potentially dangerous
animal has attacked another domestic animal or reptile; or



      (3)   A dangerous animal or reptile or potentially dangerous
animal or reptile has attacked a human being.



   (E)   Fail to notify the animal control authority immediately upon
the happening of any of the following:



      (1)   The death of a dangerous animal or reptile or
potentially dangerous animal or reptile;



      (2)   The transfer of ownership or physical custody of a
dangerous animal or reptile or potentially dangerous animal or reptile;



      (3)   Fail to advise the potential owner of a dangerous animal
or reptile or potentially dangerous animal or reptile if the owner intends to
transfer ownership of the animal or reptile; and/or



      (4)   Fail to comply with any special security or care
requirements for a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal or reptile the
animal control authority may have established pursuant to the finding that
the animal or reptile is a dangerous animal or reptile or potentially
dangerous animal or reptile.



(Amended 8-19-2008)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined in any sum not less than $25, nor more than $500.



   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions
of §§ 90.06 through 90.09 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100.The court in its discretion,
however, upon the conviction of any person for violating or failing to comply
with the provisions of these sections, may order any dog running at large or
causing annoyance as described herein turned over to the humane officer or
person designated by the Board of Public Works and Safety to be destroyed in
a humane manner. When any violation of these sections has been called to the
attention of the violator by any law enforcement officer, each day’s
continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
90.21 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine
not to exceed $100. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 90.99)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



Section




General Provisions




   91.01   Inspection of premises for fire hazards; orders



   91.02   Fire limits



   91.03   Depositing combustibles within the city



   91.04   Storage of combustible materials



   91.05   Burning of combustible materials



   91.06   Storing explosives



   91.07   Flammable or combustible gas or liquids



   91.08   False alarm of fire



   91.09   Steam boilers



   91.10   Conflict with other provisions



   91.11   Fireworks



   91.12   Rapid access key boxes; security connection caps




Fire Codes; Enforcement




   91.25   Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes



   91.26   Enforcement of Codes



   91.27   Inspections



   91.28   Fire Department policy on enforcement



   91.29   Emergency lanes established




Open Burning




   91.40   Open burning restricted; general prohibitions



   91.41   Limited burning for special purposes



   91.42   Emergency burning



   91.43   Liability



   91.44   Enforcement of open burning



 



   91.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  INSPECTION OF PREMISES FOR FIRE HAZARDS; ORDERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, or person designated
by the Fire Chief, to inspect, as often as may be necessary, but not less
than once a year structures throughout the city, other than one- or
two-family dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining, and causing to be
corrected, any conditions liable to cause fire or any violations of the
provisions or intent of any ordinance of the city affecting the fire hazard.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department and/or his or her assistants,
designated by the Fire Chief, are authorized and directed to enter into and
examine all places within the city where fire is liable to occur, and to take
all necessary means to prevent danger therefrom. Such inspections shall be
made at reasonable hours.



   (C)   In the event that during the inspection as set out in division
(B) above, the Fire Chief and/or his or her assistants discovers a condition
or code violation which is deemed unsafe or dangerous, the Fire Chief or the
Fire Chief’s designee shall serve the owner of the premises and/or the
occupant of the premises, a written notice of such unsafe or dangerous
condition. Further notices, if any, shall be served by United States
certified mail, with return receipt requested, in which he or she shall set
forth the dangerous conditions, and shall further require action to remove
such condition or code violation.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall state in the notice a time in which the
means prescribed by the Fire Chief shall be complied with.



   (E)   In the event that the recipient of the notice does not take
the necessary action to correct the dangerous condition or code violation as
set out in the notice, the recipient shall be in violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 91.01)



§ 91.02  FIRE LIMITS.



   (A)   The fire limits in the city shall consist of all territory
lying within the municipal city limits.



   (B)   No person, persons, firm, company or corporation shall erect
or cause to be erected any building on any lot or parcel of ground within the
territory described in division (A) above, which is not in compliance with
the City Building Code.



(Prior Code, § 91.02)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  DEPOSITING COMBUSTIBLES WITHIN THE CITY.



   No person or persons shall deposit or stack any hay, straw or other
combustible substance within 100 feet of any dwelling house, barn, stable,
outhouse or building of any description with in the limits of the city,
without first having obtained permission from the Common Council.



(Prior Code, § 91.04)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.



   No person or persons shall deposit or store combustible substances or
materials near a structure which produces conditions that create a nuisance
or a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.



(Prior Code, § 91.05)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05 BURNING OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS.



   Except as allowed in § 91.41, no person or persons shall burn
combustible substances or materials near a structure which produces
conditions that create a nuisance or fire hazard.



(Prior Code, § 91.06)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  STORING EXPLOSIVES.



   No person shall store explosives or explosive materials within the city
limits in violation of the Indiana Fire Prevention Code, and amendments
thereto.



(Prior Code, § 91.07)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.07 FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE GAS OR LIQUIDS.



   (A)   No person shall store flammable or combustible gas or liquids
within the city limits in violation of the Indiana Fire Prevention Code, and
amendments thereto.



   (B)   No person shall keep or store more than one barrel of gasoline
at any place in the city outside of the boundary lines fixed in division (A)
above.



   (C)   No owner of any building or other structure or of any vacant
lot or tract of land lying within the city shall permit any tenant or
occupant to keep or store at, in or upon such building or other structure,
vacant lot, or tract of land, gasoline in greater quantities than is
specified in divisions (A) and (B) above.



   (D)   All gasoline, whenever kept or stored in the city, shall be
kept or stored in an airtight metal can or receiver, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to take or draw gasoline therefrom at any time, except during
daylight. The gasoline shall be kept or stored not less than 20 feet from
where the owner or occupant of such real estate uses any artificial light.



(Prior Code, § 91.08)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  FALSE ALARM OF FIRE.



   No person shall willfully give or make a false alarm of fire.



(Prior Code, § 91.09)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.09  STEAM BOILERS.



   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, within the corporate
limits of the city a boiler, water heater and pressure vessel in violation of
the Indiana Mechanical Code, and amendments  thereto.



(Prior Code, § 91.10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   If any provision of this chapter prescribing construction standards
conflicts with any provision of Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances, the
provision of the Building Code shall control.



(Prior Code, § 91.11)



§ 91.11  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The use, ignition or discharging of consumer fireworks within
the corporate limits of the city is hereby prohibited, except for the
following times and dates as permitted by statute:



      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after
sunset on June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7,
July 8 and July 9;



      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
July 4; and



      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00
a.m. on January 1.



   (B)   The use of all fireworks and the residue from the use thereof
shall be contained or confined to the using property owner’s property.



   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and publication required by law.



(Ord. 2007-4, passed 6-19-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  RAPID ACCESS KEY BOXES; SECURITY CONNECTION CAPS.



   (A)   Covered buildings. Building owners, whether public or private,
shall provide and install at their own expense, rapid access key boxes for
all newly constructed buildings not yet occupied or buildings currently under
construction as well as for any existing building changing ownership or in
which a new tenant will be occupying all or a portion of a building for which
the following applies:



      (1)   The building is protected with an automatic sprinkler
system equipped with a local or transmitted water flow alarm;



      (2)   The building is provided with any fire alarm system
equipped with an outside audible/visible signaling device; or



      (3)   The building is provided with any fire alarm system
where the alarm is transmitted to an off- site location or to the fire alarm
center for the City Fire Department.



   (B)   Rapid response key boxes. Key boxes are to be provided by the
building owner and shall contain the following:



      (1)   Keys to lock points of egress, whether in interior or
exterior of such buildings;



      (2)   Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;



      (3)   Keys to the locked elevator rooms;



      (4)   Keys to the elevator controls;



      (5)   Keys to any fence or secured areas;



      (6)   Keys to any other areas that may be required by the
Chief of the City Fire Department; and



      (7)   A card containing emergency contact people and phone
numbers for such building.



   (C)   Apartment buildings. Key boxes for apartment buildings are not
required to contain keys to individual apartment dwelling units but a key
shall be provided for the common area of the apartment building.



   (D)   Security caps. When a building is protected by an automatic
sprinkler system or standpipe system and the Fire Department connection is
exposed to undue vandalism, then the Chief of the City Fire Department may
require that a Fire Department connection security cap be installed. The Fire
Department connection security cap shall be a type approved by the Chief of
the City Fire Department.



   (E)   Non-applicability to certain buildings. This section shall not
apply to owner occupied one- and two-family dwellings, nor those buildings
that have staffed 24-hour security.



   (F)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect
from and after its passage and publication required by law.



(Ord. 2007-6, passed 7-17-2007)  Penalty, see § 91.99




FIRE CODES; ENFORCEMENT




§ 91.25  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODES.



   (A)   The following mechanical and fire safety rules of the Indiana
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in 675 I.A.C. 18
and 22 are hereby incorporated by reference in this Code, and shall include
later amendments to that article as the same are published in the Indiana
Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed
therein: Arts. 18 and 22 - Mechanical and Fire Prevention Codes:



      (1)   Indiana Mechanical Code;



      (2)   Indiana Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Gases
Code; and



      (3)   Indiana Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   Copies of the adopted mechanical and fire safety rules, codes
and standards are on file in the offices of the City Clerk-Treasurer, the
City Engineer, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Superior Court Judge.



(Prior Code, § 91.20)



§ 91.26  ENFORCEMENT OF CODES.



   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department and/or any other officer of the Fire Department designated by the
Chief of the Fire Department. It shall be unlawful for any person properly
served with an order or citation under provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
to fail to comply with such orders or citations.



(Prior Code, § 91.21)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.27  INSPECTIONS.



   Prior to any new construction, remodeling or change of occupancy of a
class I or II building, a final inspection by the Fire Department may be
conducted and occupancy may not occur until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Department and countersigned by the Fire
Department Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 91.22)



§ 91.28  FIRE DEPARTMENT POLICY ON ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall be responsible for the enforcement
of laws and regulations for safeguarding, to a reasonable degree, of life and
property from hazards of fire and/or explosions and from conditions hazardous
to life and property in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises and
their contents.



   (B)   It is the intent of the Fire Department to achieve compliance
by traditional means of inspection, notification, granting of reasonable time
to comply and reinspection. The citation shall be used only after reasonable
means to gain compliance have failed or with proper justification, at the
discretion of the Fire Chief or his/her designee.



(Prior Code, § 91.23)



§ 91.29  EMERGENCY LANES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Any owner of commercial property shall, in accordance with the
provisions of this section, establish emergency lanes upon his, her or their
property.



   (B)   Any new industrial or commercial structure must establish
emergency lanes in accordance with Fire Department regulations. In addition,
any renovation of an existing commercial or industrial structure over 50%,
pursuant to the State Building Code, shall be required to the establishment
of emergency lanes.



   (C)   The Chief of Police and Chief of the Fire Department of the
city are hereby authorized and required to establish and maintain emergency
lanes on private commercial property upon the request of the owner thereof.



   (D)   Location and marking of emergency lanes upon said commercial
property shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police and the
Chief of the Fire Department.



   (E)   Emergency lanes shall be approximately 15 feet in width and
shall be marked with the appropriate yellow marks or lines. Signs designating
the emergency lanes shall be marked “No Parking - Emergency Lane” and
shall be placed at least every 50 feet along the curb or side of building
wherein the lanes are established.



   (F)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the commercial
property to bear the cost of the signs and marking of said emergency lanes
and curbs.



   (G)   Police officers and/or fire officials of the city shall remove
or cause the removal of any vehicle from any emergency lane established in
accordance with this section. Such vehicle shall be impounded into a storage
yard. The owner of said vehicle shall pay reasonable towing and storage
charges before any vehicle may be released.



   (H)   Any person who stops, stands or parks any vehicle other than
an emergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any emergency lane
established according to the provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in § 91.99 of this chapter.



   (I)   (1)   Those vehicles displaying a state “Disabled” or
other “Disabled” identifying insignia or by the attesting officers
certain knowledge of the person in question being “Disabled” or
“Handicapped”, may stand in an emergency lane while loading or unloading.



      (2)   All areas already established and marked as
“Handicapped Parking” shall remain as placed and marked, and shall not be
moved or changed in any manner as to conflict with the establishing of
emergency lanes, except when they cannot be complied with in accordance to
division (D) above.



(Prior Code, § 91.24)  Penalty, see § 91.99




OPEN BURNING




§ 91.40  OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED; GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful at all times to cause, suffer or allow
any open burning at any place within the city, except as permitted herein;
provided, no person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission into
the atmosphere of any product as allowed therein in such quantities as to
cause annoyance or constitute a nuisance so as to interfere with the health
or well-being of any individual in his or her home, or place of employment or
recreation, or as to interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of any such
place.



   (B)   The burning of leaves and garbage is expressly prohibited.



   (C)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds or air
stagnation.



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.41  LIMITED BURNING FOR SPECIAL PURPOSES.



   Open burning which does not create a nuisance or a fire hazard and
which is attended by a responsible person at all times until completely
extinguished is allowed for the following purposes.



   (A)   Open burning of wood products only.



      (1)   Ceremonial fires and bonfires. A bonfire in connection
with a religious ceremony, school pep rallies, scouting activities and
similar purposes; and



      (2)   Camp fires and fires for cookouts.



   (B)   Open burning of agriculture waste.



      (1)   Open burning of vegetative matter grown on the premises
in the course of agricultural operations, when it can be shown that such open
burning is necessary and that no fire hazard will occur; provided, the person
intending to dispose of vegetative matter by open burning obtains approval
from the local Fire Chief or Police Department which has jurisdiction.



      (2)   Any burning of agricultural waste permitted under the
provision of this section shall be allowed only between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., and only at times when the actual National Weather
Service recorded wind speed is greater than five mph and less than 20 mph.
Such fires shall consist of vegetative matter only.



   (C)   Stoves for heating and fireplaces. Fires shall be permitted in
wood stoves for heating and fireplaces if such fire does not create an air
pollution problem or a fire hazard.



§ 91.42  EMERGENCY BURNING.



   (A)   The City Council may allow emergency burning of petroleum
products, high explosives or other dangerous materials where such fires are
properly controlled by a responsible person and are deemed necessary in the
public interest.



   (B)   The City Council may allow open burning of refuse consisting
of material resulting from a disaster if the City Council has declared such a
disaster in the corporate limits of the city.



§ 91.43  LIABILITY.



   (A)   Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of
combustible material which constitutes or contributes to a fire shall not be
excused from responsibility therefore on the basis that such fire was
accidental or an act of God.



   (B)   The person in possession of property where open burning in
violation of this subchapter and its regulations occurs, shall be prima facie
liable for the violation.



§ 91.44  ENFORCEMENT OF OPEN BURNING.



   The open burning provisions of this subchapter are enforceable by the
law enforcement officers, within the corporate limits of the city, acting on
his or her own initiative or at the request of the Fire Department or the
City Council.



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or fails to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certification or permit issued thereunder, shall for each
and every such violation and non-compliance respectively, be fined not less
than $10, nor more than $2,500.



      (2)   The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and, when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held
to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Prior Code, § 91.99)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of § 91.11 of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100.



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of § 91.12 of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10 and not more than $100.



(Ord. 1991-8, passed - -1991; Ord. 2007-4, passed 6-19-2007; Ord. 2007-6,
passed 7-17-2007)



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



Section



   92.01   Nuisances; definitions



   92.02   Common law and statutory nuisances



   92.03   Abatement of nuisances



   92.04   Inspection of premises



   92.05   Test for nuisance



   92.06   Nuisances created by others



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  NUISANCES; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the existence of the
conditions, circumstances or situations defined in division (B) below are
declared to be nuisances and, if allowed to exist or to occur, constitutes a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH. An accumulation on any premises of
filth, refuse, trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the
public health, welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger
of its catching or communicating fire, its attracting and propagating vermin,
rodents or insects, or its blowing into any street, sidewalk or property of
another. It shall be the duty of persons owning or being in charge of those
business establishments whose patrons purchase goods or services from their
automobiles, commonly known as “drive-ins”, to furnish sufficient covered
receptacles for the deposit of wastes created in the operation of such
business and to clean up such wastes as are not deposited in receptacles at
the close of business each day (or if such business operates continuously, at
least once each day) and at such other times as weather conditions are such
that waste from the operation of such business is being blown to adjoining
premises.



      AUTOMOBILE PARTS. The accumulation and/or storage of any portion
of parts of any motor- driven vehicle as detached from the vehicle as a whole.



      DANGEROUS BUILDINGS. Any building, house or structure so out of
repair and dilapidated that it shall, if such condition is suffered to
continue, endanger the life, limb or property of, or cause hurt, damage or
injury to persons or property using or being upon the streets or public ways
of the city adjoining such premises, because of the collapse of such
building, house or structure or by the falling of parts thereof or of objects
therefrom.



      DANGEROUS TREES, STACKS AND THE LIKE. Any tree, stack or other
object, adjoining a street, standing upon premises in a condition that shall,
if suffered to continue, endanger the life, limb or property or cause hurt,
damage or injury to persons or property adjacent thereto.



      DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS. Any building, house or structure which is
so out of repair and dilapidated that it constitutes a fire hazard because of
its condition and lack of repair or that, due to lack of adequate maintenance
or neglect, endangers the public health, welfare or safety, or materially
interferes with the peaceful enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent
property.



      DWELLING UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Any part of any building or
its premises used as a place of residence or habitation or for sleeping that
is dangerous or detrimental to life or health because of want of repair,
defects in the drainage, plumbing, lighting, ventilation or construction,
infection with contagious disease or the existence on the premises of  any
unsanitary condition likely to cause sickness among occupants of the dwelling.



      JUNK, SCRAP METAL, MOTOR VEHICLES. The storage of motor vehicles
in an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile
parts or scrap metal within the city limits.



      MOTOR VEHICLE IN AN INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Any style or type of
motor-driven vehicle used or useful for the conveyance of persons or property
which is unable to move under its own power due to defective or missing
parts, or any vehicle which is unlicensed, or any vehicle which is uninsured
and which has remained in such condition for a period of not less than ten
consecutive days, unless, said vehicle is stored in a building.



      MOTOR VEHICLE UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE. Any style or type of
motor-driven vehicle used for the conveyance of persons or property, which is
in a dangerous condition, has defective or missing parts, or is in such a
condition generally as to be unfit for further use as a conveyance, unless
said vehicle is stored within a building.



      NOXIOUS NOISE. Sound emitted from premises which destroys the
enjoyment of dwelling houses or other uses of property in the vicinity by
interference with the ordinary comforts of human existence shall constitute
noxious noise.



      NOXIOUS ODORS OR SMOKE. Odors, smoke, dust or other matter
emitted from premises into the surrounding atmosphere and which render
ordinary use or physical occupation of other property in the vicinity
uncomfortable or impossible.



      OPEN STRUCTURES. The construction, maintenance or existence of
any open or uncovered, or insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well, pit,
excavation or vault situated on any open, unsecured or unfenced lot or place
located within the city.



      SCRAP METAL. Any pieces and/or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc,
copper, aluminum or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any
other materials, whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness
in its original intended purposes.



      SIGNS. Placement of a sign(s) on property which does not comply
with size, type and location restrictions contained in other provisions of
this code of ordinances, unless otherwise posted on a temporary basis for
political advertising or for the sale of property; provided, such SIGNS are
located on property with the permission of the owner thereof and such
placement does not obstruct the view of traffic on streets or at
intersections.



      SLAUGHTER/DRESSING OF ANIMALS/ POULTRY. The slaughter or dressing
of animals or poultry within the city limits for wholesale or retail, unless
such activity is permitted under applicable provisions of Ch. 150 of this
code of ordinances.



      TREES AND SHRUBBERY OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.  The
growing and maintenance of trees with less than 14 feet clearance over
streets or less than eight feet over sidewalks, or the growing and
maintenance of shrubbery in excess of three feet in height above curb level
within the radius of 25 feet from the point where the curb line of any street
intersects the curb line of another street. No shrub shall be planted between
the curb line and the property line of any street within a radius of 25 feet
from the point where the curb line of any street intersects with the curb
line of another street.



      WEEDS and NEGLECTED VEGETATION. Any growth of weeds, grass or
other rank vegetation which is neglected, disregarded or not cut, mown or
otherwise removed and/or which has attained a height of six inches or more;
any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush; or the existence of noxious
weeds including, but not limited to, thistle, burdock, jimson weed, ragweed,
milkweed, poison ivy, poison oak and/or iron weed.



      UNRESTRAINED ANIMALS OR REPTILES. Domesticated animals, wild or
exotic animals and reptiles (non-native to the county) allowed to escape or
run loose from an owner’s premises; which is allowed to otherwise disturb
the peace or endanger the public; or which is allowed to defecate on public
property or the private property of another without such defecation being
promptly removed and properly disposed of by the owner or the person charged
with the supervision of such animal or reptile.



      UNSAFE STORAGE. Explosives and combustible material which will
create a safety hazard to other property or persons in the vicinity.



      VEHICLE. Any non-motorized device, conveyance or combination of
conveyances, wheeled or without wheels, titled or not, originally designed to
be towed or propelled by non-motorized means for the purpose of transporting
persons or property, including without limitation, bicycles, scooters,
trailers, campers, wagons, coasters and sleds, which is not currently
registered and licensed, as may be required by law; which is in an unsafe or
dangerous condition; which has defective or missing parts; which is in such a
condition generally, or stored in such a way, as to be unfit for further use
as a conveyance; or which has been converted for use for a purpose other than
that originally intended by its manufacturer, unless said vehicle is stored
or used in a building, outside of public view.



(Prior Code, § 92.01)  (Amended 8-26-2008)  (Ord. 2010-5, passed 7-6-2010;
Ord. 2011-3, passed 5-3-2011)



§ 92.02  COMMON LAW AND STATUTORY NUISANCES.



   In addition to what is declared in § 92.01 of this chapter to be a
public nuisance, those offenses which are known to the common law and the
statutes of the state as public nuisances may, in case any exist within the
city limits, be treated as such and be proceeded against as is provided in
this chapter, or in accordance with any other provisions of law. Wherever the
word “nuisance” is used in this chapter, it refers to a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 92.02)



§ 92.03  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   (A)   In any case where public complaints have been received by the
City Police Department or the Building and Planning Department, or where a
city official or employee has observed a situation, condition or circumstance
which may constitute a nuisance identified in §§ 92.01 or 92.02 of this
chapter, it shall be the duty of the City Building Inspector and/or City
Police Department to investigate whether a nuisance exists. If such
investigation leads the person investigating such situation, condition or
circumstance to believe a nuisance exists, such person shall report such
findings to the City Building and Planning Department, whereupon the Building
Inspector shall issue a notice to abate a public nuisance to the offending
party or parties. In addition, if such circumstance, condition or situation
constitutes a violation of other provisions of this code, the current
circumstance, condition or situation may also be cited as a separate
violation. While a notice to abate shall allow the owner, occupant or
responsible party or parties a reasonable amount of time to remove or
eliminate the nuisance, the notice shall identify the date by which the
nuisance must be abated. It shall not be necessary for the notice to identify
the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated unless it is deemed
advisable to do so.



   (B)   If the owner, occupant or responsible party or parties so
notified to abate a nuisance shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance
within the designated time after such notice is given, such person shall be
subject to the penalties provided in § 92.99 of this chapter. In addition,
such failure or refusal shall be reported to the City Board of Public Works
and Safety which may authorize city personnel or a city contractor to enter
upon the property where the nuisance exists to abate such nuisance in any
manner authorized by law including, but not limited to, impoundment, removal
and disposal, spraying, cutting or mowing, demolition and the institution of
litigation against the offending party or parties for the purpose of
obtaining an appropriate court order and/or for the purpose of collecting the
costs of abatement. In addition, the city may take steps to file a lien
against the property with the County Recorder, after the city has abated a
nuisance, and the city may enforce the lien as allowed in division (C) below.



   (C)   (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2, if the city, by its
employees or contractors, has taken action to abate a nuisance and bring real
property into compliance with this chapter, the city may issue a bill to the
owner of the real estate for the costs incurred by the city in bringing the
property into compliance with this chapter, including administrative costs
and removal costs. Subject to division (E) below, if the owner fails or
refuses to pay the billed amount with 30 days after the date of the issuance
of the bill, the bill shall be considered delinquent.



      (2)   Thereafter, the City Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare a
list or an instrument listing the name or names of the owner or owners of
each lot or parcel of real property on which fees are delinquent, a
description of the premises, as shown on the records of the County Auditor,
and the amount of the delinquent fees and the penalty.



      (3)   Such list or instrument shall be recorded with the
County Recorder and shall constitute a lien against the real property listed.
The amount of the lien shall be placed on the tax duplicate by the County
Auditor. The total amount, including accrued interest, shall be collected in
the same manner as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to
the city’s General Fund, with the exception that collected abatement costs
associated with abating weeds and neglected vegetation by mowing shall be
deposited into the city’s Park and Recreation Fund.



   (D)   The requirement for service of notice under the provisions of
divisions (A) and (B) above shall be deemed met by posting a copy of the
notice to abate a public nuisance in a prominent place or location on a
residence, building or vacant lot where such nuisance exists. The notice
shall also be served upon the record owner of the real estate, where a
nuisance exists, at the last known address of the record owner as shown in
the County Assessor’s office, by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid and
by certified mail, return receipt requested.



   (E)   Any person notified to abate a nuisance may dispute same by
appealing such notice to the City Board of Public Works and Safety on or
before the deadline to abate the nuisance. In the case of an appeal of a
demand for reimbursement of abatement costs, such appeal shall be made on or
before the date on which reimbursement is due. An appeal shall be in writing
and filed with the City Building and Planning Department, which shall cause
the matter to be heard at the first available City Board of Public Works and
Safety meeting. At the hearing, the Building Inspector shall present the
facts relied upon in determining a nuisance existed or shall present evidence
regarding costs of abatement and the method utilized to abate the nuisance,
depending upon the nature of the appeal. The party appealing a notice to
abate or a notice to reimburse costs of abatement shall then be given an
opportunity to present evidence in support of such appeal. At the conclusion
of such hearing, the City Board of Public Works and Safety shall deliberate
and determine whether such notice appealed should be upheld or reversed. The
decision of the City Board of Public Works and Safety shall be final, subject
only to filing for judicial review with the Circuit Court within 30 days of
the decision of the City Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Prior Code, § 92.03)  (Ord. 2010-5, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 2012-6, passed
7-3-2012; Ord. 2018-6, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 92.04  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this chapter into effect,
it is made the duty of all officers and employees of the city to report the
existence of nuisances to the Building and Planning Department and/or the
City Police Department for their investigation. Other city department
officials including, but not limited to, a City Engineer, Zoning Enforcement
Officer, Street Commissioner and Fire Department personnel may assist in the
investigation of a possible nuisance and shall be authorized hereunder to
visit, enter into or upon any building, lot, grounds or premises, within the
city limits to ascertain and discover any such nuisances and/or to make
examination thereof or abatement efforts.



(Prior Code, § 92.04)  (Ord. 2010-5, passed 7-6-2010)



§ 92.05  TEST FOR NUISANCE.



   Whether or not a particular annoyance, as listed in § 92.01 of this
chapter, constitutes a nuisance shall depend on its effect upon persons of
ordinary health and average sensibilities, and not its effect upon persons
who are delicate or super-sensitive, or whose habits, tastes or conditions
are such that they are never sensible of any annoyance.



(Prior Code, § 92.05)



§ 92.06  NUISANCES CREATED BY OTHERS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to by the owner or tenants, or their
agents or representatives, but merely that the nuisance be enacted or
contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests or other persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons for whose conduct
the owner or operator is not liable, but of which, by the exercise of
reasonable care, the owner or operator ought to have become aware.



(Prior Code, § 92.06)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever creates or maintains any nuisance defined in this chapter and
who fails or refuses to abate such nuisance when so ordered, shall be fined
not less than $50, nor more than $500, pursuant to a schedule established by
the City Board of Public Works and Safety. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues
beyond the date fixed for abatement of such nuisance. The action against any
person to enforce a penalty by the city shall constitute a separate and
additional legal remedy, and the fact that any proceedings by way of an
injunction or for the abatement of any such nuisance has been or may be
instituted by the city and may be pending or concluded, shall not affect this
chapter or be considered in any way as a defense to such action for the
penalty herein prescribed. In the case of a violation of § 92.01 of this
chapter, an owner’s failure or refusal to abate or cause to abate a
nuisance when ordered, and failure of an owner to reimburse the city for
costs of abatement as fixed by the City Clerk-Treasurer, shall result in the
city certifying such costs, including administrative costs, to the County
Auditor who shall cause such costs, together with interest, to be added to
the property’s tax duplicate to be collected as delinquent real estate
taxes, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-10.1-1 et seq., which upon collection shall be
deposited into the city’s General Fund. Provided, however, in the event
such amounts collected arise from the mowing of weeds and neglected
vegetation in order to abate a nuisance, such collected amounts shall instead
be deposited into the city’s Park and Recreation Fund.



(Prior Code, § 92.99)  (Ord. 2010-5, passed 7-6-2010; Ord. 2018-6, passed
2-20-2018)



CHAPTER 93:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; DRAINAGE STRUCTURES



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Cutting in street or alley right-of- ways, permit



   93.02   Application to Building Department



   93.03   Permit fee



   93.04   Insurance, bonding, indemnification



   93.05   Backfilling



   93.06   Leaving cellar doors or underground accesses open



   93.07   Sidewalk construction, material



   93.08   Placing ashes on streets, sidewalks



   93.09   Littering streets



   93.10   Gasoline emergency cuts



   93.11   Erection of utility poles, license required



   93.12   Street Department fees for disposal of demolition concrete




Drainage Structures




   93.25   Repair of all cuts existing for repair of underground utility



   93.26   Grading and preparation of subgrade for sidewalks



   93.27   Concrete sidewalks



   93.28   Curing of concrete sidewalks



   93.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   City’s power to regulate, see I.C. 36-9-2-5, 36-9-2-7




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 93.01  CUTTING IN STREET OR ALLEY RIGHT-OF-WAYS, PERMIT.



   Except in the case of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person
to enter upon the right-of-way of any platted streets or alleys or public
grounds of the city and dig trenches for the purpose of laying, attaching,
removing or repairing any pipe, line, utility or other underground fixture
used for conducting, supplying or draining; or to dig trenches or make
excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city, for
any purpose whatever; or to injure, destroy or deface any improved street,
alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public property; or to alter or change
the established grade of any street, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk or public
place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the Building
Department as provided in § 93.02 of this chapter, and paying the permit fee
as set out in § 93.03 of this chapter. Cutting of paved areas shall only be
allowed at the discretion of the Building Department after consultation with
the Street Superintendent and City Engineer it being the policy of the city
to utilize directional boring where practical.



(Prior Code, § 93.01)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  APPLICATION TO BUILDING DEPARTMENT.



   Before any person, firm or corporation shall enter upon any of the
streets, alleys or public grounds of the city, and dig any trenches, make any
excavations, or make any improvements which require cutting pavement, they
shall first make application, in writing, to the Building Department of the
city, setting forth when and where such excavation or trenches are to be
made, or grade is to be changed, and receive a permit.



(Prior Code, § 93.02)



§ 93.03  PERMIT FEE.



   A permit fee of $100 per cut shall be charged to an applicant seeking a
permit. An applicant desiring the cut(s) shall be responsible for the work
performed within the city street or alley right-of-way and shall perform the
work and repair the cut surface in a manner and at such times as approved by
the Building Department. Damage to city property or other utilities located
within the city right-of-way shall be properly repaired by the applicant, at
the applicant’s expense.



(Prior Code, § 93.03)



§ 93.04  INSURANCE, BONDING, INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   Proof of insurance acceptable of the city shall be a condition
of permit issuance.



   (B)   Depending upon the complexity of a project and location of
utilities, bonding may also be required.



   (C)   A further issuance shall be the indemnification of the city
against bodily injury and property damage and obligation to defend the city
and hold harmless the city for claims arising from or related to the work
permitted within city right-of- ways.



(Prior Code, § 93.04)



§ 93.05  BACKFILLING.



   (A)   Unimproved streets or alleys shall be refilled with dirt,
after which tamping shall come to within one foot of the top of the surface
dug into and the remaining one foot shall be filled with material approved by
the City Street Department.



   (B)   Improved streets or alleys shall be filled in the following
manner:



      (1)   Six inches of approved fill shall be first placed in the
hole so cut and dug;



      (2)   The fill material shall be compacted to a point below
grade as approved by the Street Department; and



      (3)   The hole shall then be capped with pavement material as
directed by the Street Department.



   (C)   The above operations set out in division (A) above shall be
done in a workmanlike manner, and to the approval of the Street Commissioner,
and shall be completed as soon as possible, but not to exceed 30 days,
weather permitting.



(Prior Code, § 93.05)



§ 93.06  LEAVING CELLAR DOORS OR UNDERGROUND ACCESSES OPEN.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or leave open any cellar
door, or grating of any vault or underground access on any street or
sidewalk, or to allow the same left or kept open, or allow any sidewalk in
front of his, or her or its premises to become or continue in such condition
so as to endanger life or limb.



(Prior Code, § 93.06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, MATERIAL.



   All sidewalks hereafter built, constructed or repaired within the city
shall be built, constructed or repaired with concrete of a good quality to be
approved by the Building Department.



(Prior Code, § 93.07)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  PLACING ASHES ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person(s), firm, company or corporation to
place or pile any ashes upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
highways within the limits of the corporation of the city.



(Prior Code, § 93.08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  LITTERING STREETS.



   It is declared unlawful for any person to put, throw, dump or leave any
tin cans, old iron, brush, boxes, tools, rubbish, wood, logs, glass,
glassware, glass bottles, glass jars, broken glass, broken glassware, dead
animals or fowl, or debris of any kind or character whatsoever in, upon, or
within the limits of any street in the city.



(Prior Code, § 93.09)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  GASOLINE EMERGENCY CUTS.



   In the event of an emergency, the Street Superintendent may authorize a
pavement cut, without the applicant first filing a written application for a
permit with the Building Department. Provided, however, within 72 hours of
making a cut, an applicant shall file the permit application and pay the
permit fee. Failure to do so shall result in a violation of § 93.01.



(Prior Code, § 93.10)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.11  ERECTION OF UTILITY POLES, LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No utility or communication pole, or poles shall be erected or
maintained in the right-of-way of streets, alleys or other public places in
the city unless first approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   It shall further be the duty of the companies, corporations,
firms and individuals to make a chart showing the streets, alleys and other
public places in the city wherein are located the poles enumerated in the
statement herein provided for, and indicate accurately the position of each
of the poles, and file the same as a part of said statement.



(Prior Code, § 93.12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.12  STREET DEPARTMENT FEES FOR DISPOSAL OF DEMOLITION CONCRETE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a fee for
the disposal of demolition concrete by the Street Department at its Elm
Street location.



   (B)   Disposal fee. The city shall charge a fee of $6 per cubic yard
for each cubic yard of demolition concrete delivered to its Elm Street
location by residents or by contractors performing work on projects in or
near the city. The number of cubic yards shall be determined by the city
based upon the area and width of concrete removed from a particular project.



   (C)   Deposit of fees. All fees collected by the Street Department
shall be paid to the city and shall be deposited by the City Clerk Treasurer
into the city MVH Fund.



   (D)   City projects. In the event demolition concrete is delivered
to the Elm Street location by a contractor performing work on a city project
or within a city right-of-way, disposal of such demolition concrete shall be
allowed free of charge.



   (E)   Right to refuse concrete. The city reserves the right to
inspect any material delivered to the Elm Street location to determine its
suitability for recycling and reuse before accepting such material and
reserves the right to refuse delivery of such material if the material is
found to be unsuitable or if the city has reached its capacity to stockpile
the material or its need for the material.



(Ord. 2015-11, passed 9-15-2015)




DRAINAGE STRUCTURES




§ 93.25  REPAIR OF ALL CUTS EXISTING FOR REPAIR OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY.



   All cuts in existing pavement for the repair of any underground utility
shall be made and repaired as shown below.



   (A)   The opening shall be no larger than necessary to make the
required repairs. When ground conditions are unstable and there is danger of
widespread caving, sheeting shall be driven and, if so ordered by the
Engineer, the sheeting shall be left in place. The opening shall be made by
sawing with a concrete saw.



   (B)   After the required repairs are made, the excavated hole shall
be backfilled with bank run gravel in six-inch layers, solidly tamped to the
subgrade of the street base, and compacted to obtain 95% density.



   (C)   The exposed sides of the cut in the pavement shall be
wire-brushed or blown free of all loose particles and dust. Concrete with a
low slump shall then be placed in the opening and tamped tightly to within
two inches below the surrounding surface to permit asphalt topping.



   (D)   The fresh concrete shall be properly protected until
thoroughly cured.



(Prior Code, § 94.01)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.26  GRADING AND PREPARATION OF SUBGRADE FOR SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The subgrade shall be constructed to the required elevation
below the proposed finished surface of the sidewalk and shall be well
compacted with a mechanical tamper and finished to a firm, smooth surface.
Minimum compaction shall be 95% dry density.



   (B)   The finished subgrade shall receive a two- inch layer of bank
run gravel, be thoroughly compacted by tamping or rolling until it is brought
to a firm, unyielding and smooth surface to conform to the grade of the walk
when finished, and where ordered by the Engineer, a compacted stone or gravel
base may be required. The sidewalks, together with the lawns, shall be graded
to the width shown on the plans and the lawns dressed off with the fine
earth, and left perfectly smooth.



(Prior Code, § 94.04)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.27  CONCRETE SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Drainage. When required, suitable drainage shall be installed
and connected with sewers as indicated by the plans.



   (B)   Forms. Forms may be of wood or steel. They shall be straight,
free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist springing during the
process of depositing concrete against them. If of wood, they shall be of at
least two-inch surfaced plank. The height shall be equal to the full depth of
concrete walk, five inches. The use of two-inch by four-inch side forms is
prohibited and sidewalk so built will not be accepted. The height of steel
forms shall also equal the depth of sidewalk. All forms shall be thoroughly
cleaned and oiled before concrete is placed against them. Curved forms shall
be used on curves to conform to the planned radius.



   (C)   Concrete. Class “A” concrete, as elsewhere defined, shall
be used in all sidewalk construction, and shall conform to the concrete
specifications which meets the following conditions:



      (1)   Concrete. Ready mix concrete, conforming to
specification ASTM C-94-55 or revisions. The slump shall not exceed three
inches;



      (2)   Cement. Air-entrained portland cement shall be used with
six bags or 564 pounds per cubic yard. The entrained-air cement shall be 4%
to 7% of the total proportion; and



      (3)   Aggregates. Both fine and coarse aggregates shall have
the approval of the State Testing Laboratory and conform to the proportion as
determined by them.



   (D)   Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, all sidewalks shall be
of the width shown on the plans and not less than five inches thick at all
points. The surface shall be graded one-fourth inch to the foot toward the
street, and longitudinally as directed or shown on the plans.



   (E)   Surface finish. After the concrete is placed and thoroughly
vibrated or puddled, the surface shall be troweled in a rough rosette
pattern, producing an even, gritty finish. Final finish by brooming is also
permissible.



   (F)   Joints. Joints shall be made at intervals of five feet as
nearly as possible. All joints shall be made only with proper joint-cutting
tools or metal division plates. Dummy joints shall be straight and clean cut.



   (G)   Expansion joints. Expansion joints and joint filler shall
conform to the requirements for such joints in street or alley pavements.
Longitudinal expansion joints one-half inch thick shall be placed along
abutting buildings, concrete yard walks, curb walks and intersection
sidewalks. Transverse expansion joints one-half inch thick shall be placed
not more than five feet apart between intersections. Joints one-half inch
thick shall be placed between sidewalk and street curbing.



   (H)   Protection. The contractor shall erect and maintain suitable
barriers to protect the walk from traffic. Any sections damaged prior to its
acceptance shall be replaced by the contractor at his or her own expense.



   (I)   Condition and acceptance. Before the contract will be
considered completed and the sidewalk ready for acceptance, all equipment,
surplus materials and construction debris of every description shall be
removed, and the entire area put in a neat and orderly condition, as stated
under the preceding provisions on grading. All manholes, catch basins or
other structures, disturbed or adjacent thereto, shall be examined, and any
debris caused by the contractor shall be removed therefrom.



   (J)   Repair or replacement of sidewalks. In the repair or
replacement of sidewalks, the following conditions shall apply, in addition
to the foregoing specifications.



      (1)   All broken concrete or other old material must be
removed and taken away.



      (2)   If the old base is soft, spongy or otherwise unstable,
it shall be removed, and specifications under grading shall be complied with.



      (3)   No single square of old sidewalk shall be patched; the
entire square shall be removed and replaced.



   (K)   Backfilling. After the forms have been removed, the space on
each side of the sidewalk shall be filled to the required elevation, firmly
compacted, neatly graded, and all adjacent shoulders and slopes finished to
the required grade and cross-section. If extra fill material such as bank run
gravel is needed, it must have the approval of the Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 94.09)



§ 93.28  CURING OF CONCRETE SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Immediately upon completion of the finished process, the
concrete shall be cured in one of the following ways.



      (1)   Curing blankets shall be placed on the concrete. The
edges of the blanket shall be securely fastened down outside the paved area
with dirt or other weights.



      (2)   Plastic sheets such as visqueen or other polyethylene
material shall be placed over and securely fastened down around the paved
area.



      (3)   By the use of a liquid membrane- forming compound,
conforming to the specifications of the ASTM, designation C-309-53T or
revision. This liquid shall be sprayed in an even coat over the entire paved
area immediately after brooming. The compound shall be applied in a
continuous, uniform film by means of an automatic, self-propelled pressure
sprayer equipment at the rate directed by the Engineer, but not less than one
gallon per 200 square feet of surface.



   (B)   Failure to comply with the requirements of curing will result
in the rejection of the work.



(Prior Code, § 94.10)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of §§ 93.01 through
93.11 of this chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided
shall be fined not more than $200.



      (2)   Whoever violates § 93.09 of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $25, nor more than $500.



(Prior Code, § 93.99)



   (B)   If the average thickness of the cores from any asphalt surface
is less than the required thickness, the following deductions will be made
from the contract prices.



      (1)   If deficiency is more than one-eighths inch but not more
than one-fourth inch, 10% will be deducted. If deficiency is more than
one-fourth inch, but not more than three-eighths inch, 20% will be deducted.
If deficiency is more than three-eighths inch, but not more than one-half
inch, 25% will be deducted.



      (2)   If any core is more than one-half inch deficient in
thickness, then cores will be taken from the surface at intervals of not less
than ten feet, nor more than 25 feet, from deficient core until cores are
found which are within the specified limits. The contractor will then remove
that portion or portions of the surface from which the deficient core or
cores were taken to the nearest point in each direction at which the pavement
is within the specified limits, and will replace it in accordance with the
specifications at his or her own expense.



      (3)   The average chemical analysis of two or more cores from
any asphalt surface shall show the percentages as set out in the asphalt
specifications under finished mixture. If the chemical analyses of such cores
do not fulfill the requirements of the specifications, then the portion or
portions of the asphalt surface which are deficient shall be taken up and
replaced at the contractor’s expense.



      (4)   The contractor will have the right to request that
additional cores be taken from the pavement at intervals of not less than 15
feet on each side of any deficient core and these cores will be  included in
computing the average depth and strength of the pavement as a whole. Not more
than two extra cores shall be taken for each deficient core. The contractor
will pay the extra cost of extra cores drilled at his or her request.



(Prior Code, § 94.99)



CHAPTER 94:  PARKS



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Territorial scope



   94.03   Defacement, destruction or removal of property



   94.04   Defacement of surface



   94.05   Depositing unauthorized waste in park



   94.06   Prohibited noxious or deleterious materials



   94.07   Starting fires



   94.08   Carrying, possession or discharge of firearms



   94.09   Camping in parks



   94.10   Sleeping in parks



   94.11   Equestrians and mounts; riding areas



   94.12   Swimming areas



   94.13   Swimming rules and regulations



   94.14   Use of bow and arrows



   94.15   Boats, motor boats and other watercraft




Disorderly Conduct




   94.30   Disturbing the peace, loudness, fighting, riotous tumult



   94.31   Concessioneering without permit



   94.32   Drinking, under influence of or possession of alcoholic
beverages, dangerous drugs or controlled substances



   94.33   Unlawful entry of toilets



   94.34   Failure to comply with orders of park district ranger




Traffic




   94.45   Speed limits



   94.46   Storage of vehicles in parks prohibited



   94.47   Vehicles restricted to roadways and the like




Enforcement Conditions




   94.60   Hours of closing - 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. curfew



   94.61   Permits and reservations required



   94.62   Fee permits and rental facilities authorized



 



   94.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Shall be defined as defined in I.C. 7.1-1-3-5 and
also amendments thereto.



   BOARD. The Decatur City Park and Recreation Board, Adams County,
Indiana.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES. As defined in the Controlled Substance Act of
the state (I.C. 35-48-1-9) as same is amended from time to time.



   DISTRICT. The Decatur Park and Recreation District, Decatur, Indiana.



   MOTOR BOAT. Any type of watercraft which has for its primary source of
power an internal combustion engine or electric motor, whether inboard or
outboard.



   PARK. All developments, improvements, facilities and any or all land,
minerals, waters, overhead air rights, easements and other reservations
owned, leased, controlled or used by the district.



   PERMIT AND RESERVATION. Any authorization issued by the Superintendent
pursuant to the authority of the Board for any specified park privilege,
activity or event or permitting the performance of a specified act or acts in
any park.



   PERSON. An individual, company, partnership, corporation, incorporation
or association; any combination of individuals; or any employee, agent or
officers thereof.



   RANGER. Any state, city or county police authorities requested by the
Board to assist it in providing police protection for its property and
activities and for enforcement of the rules and regulations herein made and
provided, and any employees of the district deputized as police officers for
such purpose.



   RULES AND REGULATIONS. Any regulations adopted by the Board.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the City Park and Recreation
Board. He or she shall act for the Board, enforce the laws, maintain law
enforcement and maintain good order within the district.



   VEHICLE. Any device, conveyance or combination of conveyances, wheeled
or without wheels (but excepting motor boats), propelled, towed or
unpropelled, that in, around or on which a person or thing is or may be
carried and shall include, without limitation, bicycles, scooters, minibikes
and snowmobiles.



(Prior Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



§ 94.02  TERRITORIAL SCOPE.



   This chapter shall be effective within and upon all areas under the
jurisdiction of the Board and shall regulate the use thereof by all persons.



(Prior Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



§ 94.03  DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF PROPERTY.



   No person shall injure, deface, destroy, disturb, befoul or remove any
part of the park, or any building, sign, equipment or property found therein;
nor shall any person maliciously cut down, destroy or injure a standing or
growing vine, brush, shrub, sapling, tree, flower or other vegetation or
fruit or seed growing on park property, or maliciously injure, destroy,
disturb or sever from the park a product standing or growing or other thing,
such as rock minerals attached thereto or a part thereof.



(Prior Code, § 95.05)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.04  DEFACEMENT OF SURFACE.



   No person shall intentionally accelerate a motor vehicle causing the
rubber tires to spin, mark or deface the park or roadway surface within the
park.



(Prior Code, § 95.06)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.05  DEPOSITING UNAUTHORIZED WASTE IN PARK.



   No person, without authorization of the Board, shall bring into, leave
behind or dump any material of any kind, whether waste or otherwise, in the
park, except refuse, ashes, garbage and other material arising from the
normal use and enjoyment of a picnic, camp or other permitted activity;
provided, the material is deposited in receptacles or pits provided for such
purpose. Nor shall any material of any kind be left or deposited outside or
near the parks so as to pollute the land, waters or air coursing through or
over the parks or otherwise to interfere with the use and enjoyment of the
park. No bottles, cans, refuse or foreign material of any description shall
be deposited or thrown in any of the streams, waterways, ponds or lakes
located in the park.



(Prior Code, § 95.10)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.06  PROHIBITED NOXIOUS OR DELETERIOUS MATERIALS.



   No person shall, either within or outside of the park, place or permit
to be placed in any river, brook, stream, pond, ditch or drain that is
maintained in or flows into or through the park, any noxious or deleterious
material which may render park waters harmful to the public health, or to
animal, vegetation or aquatic life. The Board may cause the park waters as it
deems advisable closed to fishing and shall so post them.



(Prior Code, § 95.11)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.07  STARTING FIRES.



   No person shall start a fire in the park without the written
authorization of the Superintendent, excepting a privately owned grill. All
fires shall be continuously attended under the care and direction of a
competent person. Further, the Superintendent may, at his or her discretion,
prohibit fires for limited periods at any location or for any purpose. All
fires shall be completely extinguished by the person or persons starting or
using the same before leaving the immediate vicinity of the fire.



(Prior Code, § 95.15)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.08  CARRYING, POSSESSION OR DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   The legality of carrying, possessing or discharging a firearm in a park
shall be governed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 95.20)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976; Ord. 2011-9, passed
12-20-2011)



§ 94.09  CAMPING IN PARKS.



   No person shall camp within any park, except in camping areas as may
from time to time be designated by the Board or upon written approval of the
Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 95.25)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.10  SLEEPING IN PARKS.



   Except in areas for camping, no person shall sleep in any park between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 95.26)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.11  EQUESTRIANS AND MOUNTS; RIDING AREAS.



   No person shall ride or drive any horses or other animal within a park,
except in areas that may be designated by the Board as bridle paths or
roadways.



(Prior Code, § 95.40)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.12  SWIMMING AREAS.



   No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any park, except in the
Department swimming pool or in such areas as are designated for that activity.



(Prior Code, § 95.45)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.13  SWIMMING RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All swimmers at the Department pool shall abide by the rules and
regulations posted at the pools.



(Prior Code, § 95.46)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.14  USE OF BOW AND ARROWS.



   The use of bows and arrows of any kind in the park is prohibited,
except in the areas designated by the Superintendent as archery ranges.



(Prior Code, § 95.50)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  (Amended
9-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.15  BOATS, MOTOR BOATS AND OTHER WATERCRAFT.



   No person shall launch, operate or use any watercraft on any park
lands, except in areas as may be designated by the Superintendent, and only
within the limits and regulations as may be established by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 95.55)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  (Amended
9-2-2008)  Penalty, see § 94.99




DISORDERLY CONDUCT




§ 94.30  DISTURBING THE PEACE, LOUDNESS, FIGHTING, RIOTOUS TUMULT.



   (A)   No person shall either by word or act, indulge in any noise,
boisterous, disorderly or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the
peace or good order of the community within the park by any means.



   (B)   No person shall disturb or intrude upon a picnic or gathering
in any park without the consent of those composing the group except park
employees in the proper pursuit of their duties.



(Prior Code, § 95.30)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.31  CONCESSIONEERING WITHOUT PERMIT.



   No person shall advertise, offer or exchange for sale any article or
merchandise or service; or do any hawking, peddling or solicitation; or buy
or offer to buy any article or merchandise; or take up any collection or
solicit or receive contributions of money or articles of value, except when
authorized by written permit from the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 95.31)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.32  DRINKING, UNDER INFLUENCE OF OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES,
DANGEROUS DRUGS OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall drink, sell, possess, make a gift of or offer for sale
any alcoholic beverages, dangerous drugs or controlled substances within the
park.



(Prior Code, § 95.32)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.33  UNLAWFUL ENTRY OF TOILETS.



   No persons, except park maintenance employees on duty, or park rangers
or law enforcement officers, shall enter a toilet room set aside for the
opposite sex.



(Prior Code, § 95.33)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.34  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDERS OF PARK DISTRICT RANGER.



   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the reasonable order
relating to the regulation, direction or control of traffic, or to any other
order lawfully given by any ranger or law enforcement officer acting under
the authority of the Superintendent, willfully resist, obstruct, assault or
abuse any ranger or any other official in the execution of his or her office,
in any manner give aid to any person to escape from the custody, or to
attempt to escape from impending arrest or custody.



(Prior Code, § 95.34)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99




TRAFFIC




§ 94.45  SPEED LIMITS.



   No person shall drive, propel or cause to be driven along or over any
road within the park, any vehicle or conveyance at a rate of speed greater
than the speed limit signs erected along the right-of-way nor, in the absence
of signs, at a speed in excess of 20 mph in all events, at a greater speed
than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic conditions and the use
of the roads, or endangers the safety of any person or property.



(Prior Code, § 95.35)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.46  STORAGE OF VEHICLES IN PARKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park or store any vehicle within the park, except in
places designated by the Board for such purposes and payment of a parking fee
which, if any, may be set by the Board. A vehicle parked in the park in
excess of 25 consecutive hours will be towed away at the expense of the owner
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 95.36)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.47  VEHICLES RESTRICTED TO ROADWAYS AND THE LIKE.



   Except for emergency personnel or law enforcement authorities in the
course of performing their duties, no person shall ride or operate any
motorized vehicle on, over, along or upon any park, except roadways,
driveways and parking areas designated for the use of a vehicle, or except in
special limited areas as may be designated by the Board from time to time for
particular type vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 95.37)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  Penalty, see §
94.99




ENFORCEMENT CONDITIONS




§ 94.60  HOURS OF CLOSING - 10:00 P.M. TO 6:00 A.M. CURFEW.



   No person shall be permitted to remain, stop or park within the
confines of a park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing
local time, except in an overnight fee permit, family or designated youth
group camping areas; in an emergency, or with a special permit for just cause
issued by the Superintendent; or except at special facilities where other
authorized and posted hours are designated by the Superintendent.



(Prior Code, § 95.60)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)  (Amended 9-2-2008;
Amended 1-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.61  PERMITS AND RESERVATIONS REQUIRED.



   A permit or reservation shall first be obtained from the Superintendent
prior to the entrance into the park or the use of any park property or
facility whenever required by this chapter or by any rule or regulation
promulgated by the Board. In addition, the fee, if any, as required by the
Board, must be paid at the time that the permit or reservation is applied
for. All permits and reservations shall be applied for in advance at the park
and recreation office. The Superintendent may, in his or her discretion,
issue the permit or reservation upon application when the same is consistent
with the proper use and protection of the park property and likewise, in his
or her discretion, may refuse the same if consistent with the proper use and
protection of park property.



(Prior Code, § 95.61)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



§ 94.62  FEE PERMITS AND RENTAL FACILITIES AUTHORIZED.



   Fees and charges for the use of various facilities operated by the
Department on property of the Department shall be established by the Board
and may be changed from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 95.65)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine not less than $10, nor more than $200, or by an order or
restitution in an amount equal to the cost of replacing or repairing any
damage done to the park or park property as a result of a violation.



(Prior Code, § 95.99)  (Ord. 1976-11, passed 8-3-1976)



CHAPTER 95:  ASSEMBLIES; PARKING FACILITIES



Section



   95.01   Blocking entrances or exits to parking areas



   95.02   Driving motor vehicles through parking areas or driveways
restricted



   95.03   Prohibiting unoccupied motor vehicles left upon walkways,
driveways or parking areas



   95.04   Entering upon walkways, driveways or parking areas restricted



   95.05   Notice posting provisions; agreement



   95.06   Removing, defacing or tampering with sign posting notice



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks; Drainage Structures, see Ch. 93



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



§ 95.01  BLOCKING ENTRANCES OR EXITS TO PARKING AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful to intentionally block entrances or exits to any
parking area adjacent to any business building in any manner, unless by
direction of the owner or manager of the public, business or church building,
whereby doing so causes any difficulty in entering or exiting the premises,
adjacent drive or parking area, except for the purpose of repairs by
municipal authorities or private contractors engaged by the owners.



(Prior Code, § 96.01)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.02  DRIVING MOTOR VEHICLES THROUGH PARKING AREAS OR DRIVEWAYS
RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle through
any parking area or driveway of any public, business or church building
without attempting to park said vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 96.02)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.03  PROHIBITING UNOCCUPIED MOTOR VEHICLES LEFT UPON WALKWAYS,
DRIVEWAYS OR PARKING AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an unoccupied motor
vehicle upon a walkway, driveway or parking area of a public, business or
church building and leave such premises to go elsewhere without the knowledge
and consent of the owner, manager or person in charge of such premises, if
the premises are so posted by the owner or manager.



(Prior Code, § 96.03)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.04  ENTERING UPON WALKWAYS, DRIVEWAYS OR PARKING AREAS RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon a walkway, driveway
or parking area of a public, business or church building, unless the
individual entering the premises does so for the purpose of conducting
business or does so with the knowledge and consent of the owner, manager or
person in charge of such premises, if the premises are so posted by the owner
or manager.



(Prior Code, § 96.04)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.05  NOTICE POSTING PROVISIONS; AGREEMENT.



   (A)   To come under the provisions of this chapter, the owner or
manager of public, business or church premises shall be required to post
notices in a conspicuous location, by one or more signs displaying the fact
that said premises are protected by the terms of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of the public,
business and church premises to sign an agreement with the Board of Public
Works that the owner or manager shall post notices as described in this
chapter and that the owner or manager shall cooperate to prosecute any person
charged with violation of this chapter.



   (C)   After the above agreement is filed, the city shall design and
furnish, for a fee determined by the Board of Public Works, a notice to the
owner or owners to be posed.



   (D)   The above agreement must be signed and filed in the office of
the City Clerk-Treasurer and notice must have been posted in conspicuous
places on the property intended to be covered by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 96.05)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.06  REMOVING, DEFACING OR TAMPERING WITH SIGN POSTING NOTICE.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone, other than the owner or one designated
by the owner, to remove, deface or tamper with a sign posting notice pursuant
to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 96.06)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $10, nor more than $50.



(Prior Code, § 96.99)  (Ord. 1988-21, passed 9-27-1988)  (Amended 9-9-2008)



CHAPTER 96:  TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION



Section



   96.01   Justification



   96.02   Establishment of Tree Board including duties and
responsibilities



   96.03   Definitions



   96.04   Street tree species to be planted



   96.05   Spacing



   96.06   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   96.07   Distance from street corners and fireplugs



   96.08   Utilities



   96.09   Public tree care



   96.10   Tree topping



   96.11   Pruning and corner clearance on private property



   96.12   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property



   96.13   Removal of stumps



   96.14   Interference with city



   96.15   Permit requisite to trimming, removing or planting street or
park trees



   96.16   Review by the Board of Works



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  JUSTIFICATION.



   (A)   The selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and hedges along public ways and on public grounds substantially
affect such matters as: pedestrian and vehicle safety, the location and
maintenance of utility services, tree maintenance costs, the incidence of
tree diseases, the general appearance of the cityscape and the general
quality of life of the city.



   (B)   It is hereby found and determined that such selection,
planting, maintenance and removal are matters of city wide concern over which
the city must exercise the control set forth in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 97.01)



§ 96.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF TREE BOARD INCLUDING DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   A Tree Board for the city is hereby established which
membership shall consist of the following individuals:



      (1)   The Superintendent of Parks Department;



      (2)   City Street Commissioner;



      (3)   City Council member; and



      (4)   City Forester.



   (B)   The Tree Board has the responsibility for administering the
city tree program as established in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 97.02)  (Amended 1-6-2009)



§ 96.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which
the public has free access as a park.



   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs and all other woody vegetation on land
lying within the city right of way on either side of all streets, avenues or
alleyways within the city.



(Prior Code, § 97.03)



§ 96.04  STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   No tree species other than those trees included in the official list of
trees as promulgated by the Tree Board may be planted as street trees without
written permission by the city.



(Prior Code, § 97.04)  (Amended 1-6-2009)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the tree species
size classes listed in the official list of trees, and no trees may be
planted closer together than the following: small trees: 30 feet; medium
trees: 40 feet; and large trees: 50 feet; except in special planting approved
by the city.



(Prior Code, § 97.05)



§ 96.06  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees must be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species size class as published
in the official list of street trees, no trees may be planted closer, without
written permission, to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees:
two feet; medium trees: three feet; and large trees: four feet.



(Prior Code, § 97.06)



§ 96.07  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.



   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet of any street
corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curblines.
No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fireplug.



(Prior Code, § 97.07)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.08  UTILITIES.



   No street tree, other than those species listed as small trees in the
official list of trees, may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.



(Prior Code, § 97.08)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.09  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the city right-of-way along all
streets, avenues and alleyways and public grounds as may be necessary to
ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.



   (B)   The city may remove, or cause, or order to be removed, any
street tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of
street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance herewith.



   (C)   Expenses of planting, pruning, maintaining and removal of
trees, plants and shrubs under this section for the reasons specified above
shall be borne by the city. However, any removal of street trees, plants or
shrubs at the request of an adjoining property owner for merely aesthetic
reasons, or reason other than safety, prevention of damage to property or
improvements, or prevention of disease, shall be borne by said property
owner. Any removal of street trees at the request of a property owner for
aesthetic reasons or reasons other than promotion of safety, or prevention of
property damage or disease, shall be done only with the concurrence of the 
city.



(Prior Code, § 97.09)



§ 96.10  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires, or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical
may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city.



(Prior Code, § 97.10)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.11  PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   Every owner of any tree located on private property overhanging any
street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such
branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the
view of any street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of
eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or  broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have
the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or
interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or
obstructs the view of any street intersection and charge the cost of pruning
to the owner of said property.



(Prior Code, § 97.11)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.12  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees
constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which
constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will 
notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of
notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the
city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of
removal to the owners of said property.



(Prior Code, § 97.12)



§ 96.13  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   It is preferred policy that stumps of street and park trees shall be
removed at least four inches below the surface of the ground; however, this
statement of preferred policy shall not be treated as a mandatory requirement.



(Prior Code, § 97.13)



§ 96.14  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the city or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of said street trees,
park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 97.14)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.15  PERMIT REQUISITE TO TRIMMING, REMOVING OR PLANTING STREET OR PARK
TREES.



   Other than the pruning of branches of less than two inches in diameter,
it shall be unlawful for any person to trim, remove or plant, injure or
destroy any street or park tree within the city without first applying for
and obtaining a written permit from the City Forester, or if requested while
the City Forester is out of town by any member of the Tree Board. Prior to
issuance of any such permit, the said Street Department will determine
whether or not the proposed trimming, removing, planting or destruction is
within the regulations and guidelines established by this chapter. Any person
may appeal from any ruling of the City Street Department to the Board of
Public Works and Safety which may grant a variance from the strict provisions
of this chapter, in case of hardship or in cases where the granting of a
variance will not substantially conflict with the purpose and intent of this
chapter. The Department of Parks of the city will be exempt from the
provisions of this section and may trim, remove, plant and manage any trees
and other vegetation within the parks under its jurisdiction without the
necessity of approval or issuance of a permit by the city or Street
Department.



(Prior Code, § 97.15)  (Amended 1-6-2009)



§ 96.16  REVIEW BY THE BOARD OF WORKS.



   The Board of Works of the city shall have the right to review the
conduct, acts and decisions of the City Street Commissioner, Superintendent
of Parks Department, City Forester or the Tree Board. Any person may appeal
any ruling or order to the Board of Works of the City of Decatur which may
hear the matter and make final decision.



(Prior Code, § 97.16)  (Amended 1-6-2009)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.



(Prior Code, § 97.17)  (Ord. 1993-10, passed 12-7-1993)



CHAPTER 97:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   97.01   Policy statement



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Unlawful practice



   97.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   97.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   97.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service



   97.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   97.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   97.09   Exemptions



   97.10   Administrative enforcement



   97.11   Separability



   97.12   Effective date



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the Federal Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)



   COMMISSION. The State Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to I.C.
22-9-1-4 et seq.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
97.04 through 97.08 of this chapter or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-7)



   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
one or more families; or any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families (I.C. 22-9.5-2-8).



   FAMILIAL STATUS. One or more individuals who have not attained the age
of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or another person having legal
custody of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other
person. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the
age of 18 years.



   FAMILY. includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status
of such family being further defined herein. Also, pursuant to 24 C.F.R. part
5, the definition of FAMILY is revised to include families regardless of the
actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or marital status of
its members.



   HANDICAP.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment, which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or



         (e)   Any other impairment defined under I.C.
22-9.5-2-10.



      (2)   The term HANDICAP shall not include current illegal use
of or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802
(I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(b); nor does the term HANDICAP include an individual solely
because that individual is a transvestite (I.C. 22-9.5-2-10(c)).



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non- incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant
for a consideration the rights to occupy the premises owned by the occupant.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2012-9, passed 8-21-2012)



§ 97.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, § 97.09 of this
chapter and I.C. 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the
sale or rental of housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 97.04 of this
chapter shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by division (B) below and
I.C. 22-9.5-3;



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
97.04 of this chapter shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that, in the sale of such single- family
house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of
sale or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month
period. The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have
owned or reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a
portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such
single-family house shall be excepted from application of this section only
if such house is sold or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesperson or
person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 97.04(C) of this
chapter, but noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstracters, title companies and other such professional
assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer this title.



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   The person has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   The person has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of the person’s own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more
transaction involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



      (3)   The person is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 97.03 of this chapter and except as exempted
by §§ 97.03(B) and 97.09 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation
or discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



      (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise
make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   The buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   The person;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (3)   For purposes of this division (E), DISCRIMINATION
includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after 9-13-1998, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in
such a manner that:



            1.   Public use and common use portions of such
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space; and



               d.   Compliance with the appropriate
requirement Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American
National Standard for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an
usability for physically handicapped people (commonly cited “ANSIA117.1”)
suffices to satisfy the requirements hereof.



   (F)   Nothing in this section requires that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or
familial status.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation,
on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or
national origin.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encourage any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted
or protected by §§ 97.03, 97.04, 97.05 or 97.06 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiation for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
subsection 15(A); or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate.



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any non-profit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin; nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status
shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.



      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means
housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that
the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the State Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program);



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62
years of age or older; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set
forth in division (B) below shall be vested in the Mayor of the city.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8,
the city, because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under this
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of this
chapter by complainants to the State Civil Rights Commission for
administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6.



      (2)   The Mayor of the city shall refer all said complaints to
the Commission as provided for under division (A) above to said Commission
for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided
for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the city shall
administer their departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the Mayor and the Commission to further such
purposes.



   (D)   The Mayor of the city, or the Mayor’s designees, shall
provide information on remedies available to any aggrieved person or
complainant requesting such information.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.11  SEPARABILITY.



   If any provisions of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances shall be determined to be invalid, the remainder of
this chapter and the application of its provisions to other persons not
similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.12  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective upon its adoption and publication as
required by law.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   A person violating this chapter shall be fined according to local,
state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more
than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death
results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life.



(Ord. 2009-8, passed 8-25-2009)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   PEDDLERS



      111.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 110:  PEDDLERS



Section



   110.01   Definition; compliance



   110.02   Permit and license required



   110.03   Application



   110.04   Investigation and issuance



   110.05   Bond



   110.06   [Reserved]



   110.07   Exhibition of license



   110.08   License fee



   110.09   Transfer



   110.10   Loud noises and speaking devices



   110.11   Duty of police to enforce



   110.12   Records



   110.13   Revocation of license



   110.14   Appeal



   110.15   Expiration of licenses



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  DEFINITION; COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      PEDDLER.



         (a)   Shall include any person who:



            1.   Travels either by foot, wagon, automobile,
motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house
to house or from street to street in the city, selling, offering for sale or
taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, personal property of whatsoever nature for future delivery, or
for services to be performed in the future; and/or



            2.   Hires, leases, uses or occupies any building,
structures, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room, lodging houses,
apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the purpose of
temporarily exhibiting samples of goods, wares and merchandise and/or taking
orders by telephone or otherwise for the future delivery of goods, wares or
merchandise, or for services to be performed in the future.



         (b)   Shall not include:



            1.   A person who has resided in the county for
more than one year last past;



            2.   Commercial travelers, jobbers or selling
agents calling on dealers and businesses in the city; and/or



            3.   Persons engaged in the temporary sale of
goods, wares or merchandise by the members of any service club or non-profit,
charitable, religious or educational organization of the county, where the
proceeds of such sale are to be used exclusively for religious, charitable,
educational or benevolent purposes.



   (B)   No person shall be relieved from complying with the provisions
of this chapter by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer,
trader or merchant or by conducting business temporarily with, as a part of
or in the name of any local dealer, trader or merchant.



(Prior Code, § 115.01) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.02  PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
peddler, as defined in § 110.01 of this chapter, within the corporate limits
of the city, without first obtaining a permit and license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 115.02) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.03  APPLICATION.



   Applicants for a license under this chapter shall file a written
application sworn to and signed by the applicant, with the Clerk-Treasurer of
the city, giving the following information:



   (A)   Name and description of applicant;



   (B)   Permanent and local address of applicant;



   (C)   Name and address of employer;



   (D)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry
on the applicant’s business, and the length of time during which it is
proposed that the business shall be conducted;



   (E)   The place or places, other than the permanent place of
business of the applicant, where the applicant, within the six months next
preceding the date of the application, conducted a transient business,
stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of
any building or office in which such business was conducted;



   (F)   A brief description of the business and goods to be sold.



   (G)   A brief statement of the nature and character of the
advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and
copies of any such advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper
advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits
thereto;



   (H)   A statement whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal
ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor;



   (I)   Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the
applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative; and



   (J)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or
character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of
the applicant’s business or the method or plan of doing such business as
the Clerk-Treasurer may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in
the protection of the public good.



(Prior Code, § 115.03) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.04  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be
referred to the Chief of Police, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant’s business and moral character to be made as he or she deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.



   (B)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse on such application his or her disapproval and his or
her reasons for same, and return the application to the Clerk-Treasurer, who
shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and
that no permit and license will be issued.



   (C)   (1)   If, as a result of such investigation, the character
and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory,
the Chief of Police shall endorse on the application his or her approval,
execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the
business applied for and return the permit, along with the application to the
Clerk-Treasurer, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee,
deliver to the applicant his or her permit and issue a license. The license
shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show
the name, address and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued
and the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date
of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as
the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in
such soliciting or canvassing.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall keep a permanent record of all
licenses issued.



(Prior Code, § 115.04) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.05  BOND.



   Every applicant shall file with the Clerk- Treasurer a surety bond,
running to the city in the amount of $1,000 with surety acceptable to and
approved by the Mayor, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with
all the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the state statutes
regulating and concerning the business of a peddler and guaranteeing to any
citizen of the city that all money paid as down payment will be accounted for
and applied to the representations of the peddler and further guaranteeing to
any citizen of the city doing business with the peddler that the property
purchased will be delivered according to the representations of the peddler.
Action on such bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use or
benefit of the aggrieved person.



(Prior Code, § 115.05) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.06  [RESERVED].



§ 110.07  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE.



   The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in
the place of business named therein. In the event that the person or persons
applying for the license shall desire to do business in more than one place
within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business
and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business.



(Prior Code, § 115.07) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.08  LICENSE FEE.



   The license fee which shall be charged by the Clerk-Treasurer for the
license shall be $100 per year or any part of a year that the license shall
be in force and effect.



(Prior Code, § 115.08) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.09  TRANSFER.



   No license shall be transferred without written consent from the Mayor
as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the license by the Clerk-
Treasurer showing to whom the license is transferred and the date of the
transfer.



(Prior Code, § 115.09) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.10  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.



   No licensee under this chapter, nor anyone on his or her behalf, shall
shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound
device including any loud-speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private
premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or
parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any
goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.



(Prior Code, § 115.10) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.11  DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE.



   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all
places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the
provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied
with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found
to be violating the same.



(Prior Code, § 115.11) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.12  RECORDS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer of the city shall deposit the record of
fingerprints of licensees, together with a license number, with the Chief of
Police. The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk-Treasurer any
complaints against any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter
and any conviction for violation of this chapter. The Clerk-Treasurer shall
keep a record of all such licenses and of such complaints and violations.



(Prior Code, § 115.12) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.13  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may
be revoked by the Mayor of the city, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for license;



      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;



      (4)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and/or



      (5)   Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.



   (B)   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
to the licensee at his or her last known address, at least three days prior
to the date set for the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 115.13) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.14  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the action of the city police or
Clerk-Treasurer, in regard to the denial of an application for license as
provided for in § 110.04 of this chapter or in connection with the
revocation of a license as provided for in § 110.13 of this chapter, shall
have the right to appeal to the Common Council of the city. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Council within 14 days after notice of the
decision by the Clerk-Treasurer has been mailed to such person’s last known
address a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The
Council shall set the time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice
of such hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided
in § 110.13 of this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The order
of the Common Council on such appeal shall be final.



(Prior Code, § 115.14) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.15  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on December 31 in the year when issued.



(Prior Code, § 115.15) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.



(Prior Code, § 115.99) (Ord. 2015-9, passed 7-7-2015)



CHAPTER 111:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section




General Provisions




   111.01   Purpose and findings



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Effective date




Licensing




   111.15   License required



   111.16   Issuance of license



   111.17   Fees



   111.18   Inspection



   111.19   Expiration of license



   111.20   Suspension



   111.21   Revocation



   111.22   Administrative and judicial review



   111.23   Transfer of license




Conditions and Regulations




   111.35   Location of sexually oriented businesses



   111.36   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms



   111.37   Additional regulations concerning public nudity



   111.38   Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business



   111.39   Hours of operation



   111.40   Advertising and display; lighting and signs



   111.41   Exemptions



 



   111.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 111.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose, nor effect, of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect
of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings.



      (1)   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses in other communities, as presented in hearings and in
reports made available to the Council, and based on findings incorporated in
the cases of:



         (a)   Town of Littleton CO v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C.
(2004), 541 U.S. 774;



         (b)   Township of Erie v. Pap’s AM. (2000) 529 U.S.
277;



         (c)   Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. (1991), 501 U.S. 560;



         (d)   Township of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.
(1986), 475 U.S. 41;



         (e)   Young v. American Mini Theatres (1976) 426 U.S. 50;



         (f)   California v. LaRue (1972), 409 U.S. 109;



         (g)   DLS, Inc. v. Township of Chattanooga (6th Cir.
1997), 107 F. 3d 403;



         (h)   East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Township of Memphis
(6th Cir. 1995), 48 F. 3d 220;



         (i)   Harris v. Fitchville Township Trustee (N.D. Ohio
2000), 99 F. Supp. 2d 837;



         (j)   Bamon Corp. v. Township of Dayton (S.D. Ohio
1990), 730 F. Supp 90 affd (6th Cir. 1991) 923 F. 2d 470;



         (k)   Broadway Books v. Roberts (E.D. Term. 1986), 642 F
Supp. 486;



         (l)   Bright Lights, Inc. v. Township of Newport (E.D.
Ky. 1993), 830 F. Supp. 378;



         (m)   Richland Bookmart v. Nichols (6th Cir. 1998), 137
F. ed 435;



         (n)   Deja vu v. Metro Government (6th Cir. 1999), 1999
U.S. App. LEXIS 535;



         (o)   Threesome Entertainment v. Strittmather (N.D. Ohio
1998), 4 F Suppl. 2d 710;



         (p)   J.L. Spoons, Inc. v. Township of Brunswick (N.D.
Ohio 1999), 49 F. Supp. 2d 1032;



         (q)   Triplett Grille, Inc. v. Township of Akron (6th
Cir. 1994), 40 F 3d. 129;



         (r)   Nightclubs, Inc. v. Township of Paducah (6th Cir.
2000), 202 F 3d. 884;



         (s)   O’Connorv. Township and County of Denver (10th
Cir. 1990), 894F.2d 1210;



         (t)   Deja vu of Nashville, Inc. et al. v. Metropolitan
Government of Nashville and Davidson County (6th Cir. 2001), 2001 U.S. App.
LEXIS 26007;



         (u)   State of Ohio ex rel. Rothal v. Smith (Ohio CP.
2002), Summit CP. No. CV 01094594;



         (v)   Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. Township of Aurora (10th
Cir. 1998), 136 F. 3d. 683;



         (w)   Connection Distrib. Co. v. Reno (6th Cir. 1998),
154 F. 3d. 281;



         (x)   Sundance Assocs. v. Reno (10th Cir. 1998), 139 F.
3d 804;



         (y)   American Library Association v. Reno (D.C. Cir.
1994), 33 F. 3d. 78;



         (z)   American Target Advertising, Inc. v. Giani (10th
Cir. 2000), 199 F 3d. 1241;



         (aa)   City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. 535
U.S. 425 (2002);



         (bb)   Pap’s AM. v. City of Erie, 529 U.S. 277 (2000);



         (cc)   City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475
U.S. 41 (1986);



         (dd)   Schultz v. City of Cumberland, 26 F. Supp.2d 1128
(W.D. Wise. 1998) affd in part, rev’d in part, 228 F.3d 831 (7th Cir. 2000);



         (ee)   Blue Canary v. City of Milwaukee, 270 F.3d 1156
(7th Cir. 2001);



         (ff)   Matney v. County of Kenosha, 86 F.3d 692 (7th
Cir. 1996);



         (gg)   Berg v. Health & Hospital Corp., 586 F.2d 797
(1989);



         (hh)   DiMa Corp. v. Town of Hallie, 185 F.3d 823 (1999);



         (ii)   Graff v. City of Chicago, 9 F.3d 1309 (1993);



         (jj)   North Avenue Novelties, Inc. v. City of Chicago,
88 F3d. 441 (1996);



         (kk)   Chulchian v. City of Indianapolis, 633 F.2d 27
(7th Cir. 1980);



         (ll)   Big Wolfe Discount Video v. Montgomery County,
256 F. Supp. 2d 385 (D. Md. 2003);



         (mm)   County of Cook v. Renaissance Arcade and
Bookstore, 122 111. 2d 123 (1988) (including cases cited therein);



         (nn)   World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of
Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004);



         (oo)   Ben’s Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316
F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003);



         (pp)   People ex rel Deters v. Effingham Retail 27 Inc.,
No. 04-CH-26 (4th Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, 111., June 13, 2005);



         (qq)   Annex Books, Inc. v. City of Indianapolis, No.
1:03-CV-918, Summary Judgment Order, Aug. 27, 2004 and Order Denying Motion
to Alter or Amend, Mar. 31, 2005 (S.D. Ind.);



         (rr)   Andy’s Lounge et al v. City of Gary, No.
2:01-CV-327, Order Granting Summary Judgment, Mar 31, 2005 (N.D. Ind.);



         (ss)   LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County, 289 F3d 358 (5th
Cir. 2002); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in
and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to:
Minneapolis, MN (1980), Houston, TX (1983, 1997), Amarillo, TX (1977), Los
Angeles, CA (1977), Austin, TX (1986), Oklahoma Township, OK (1986), Dallas,
TX (1977, 1997), Bellevue, WA (1998), Tucson, AZ (1990), Beaumont, TX (1982),
Ellicottville, NY (1998), Islip, NY (1980), Manatee County, FL (1987), Las
Vegas, NV (1978), Cleburne, TX (1997), El Paso, TX (1986), Phoenix, AR (1979,
1984, 1995-98), Indianapolis, IN (1984), Garden Grove, CA (1991), Whittier,
CA (1978), Seattle, WA (1989), Cleveland, OH (1977), St. Croix County, WI
(1993), Newport News, VA (1996), St. Paul, MN (1988), New York, NY (1994),
Des Moines, IA (1984), Adams County, CO (1987), New Hanover County, NC
(1989), Cattaraugas County, NY (1998), Dallas, TX (1997), Oklahoma Township,
OK (1986 and 1992), Chattanooga, TN (1999-2003), Spokane, WA (2001), St.
Cloud, MN (1994), Littleton, CO (2004), Oklahoma City, OK (1986), Greensboro,
NC (2003), Amarillo, TX (1977), Kennedale, TX (2005); and



         (tt)   New York Times Square Study, (1994) Report to
ACLJ on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (1996); findings
from the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation
of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); and in
testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S. 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135
Cong. Rec. S. 5636; 134 Cong. Rec. E. 3750; and also on findings from the
paper entitled “Strip Clubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace
Sexual Violence,” by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice
Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, MN; and from “Sexually
Oriented Businesses: An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to
the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan. 12, 2000;
and from various other police reports, testimony, newspaper reports, and
other documentary evidence; and subsequent findings in Sensations, Inc. v.
City of Grand Rapids, Michigan Decency Action Council (6th Cir. 2008), 526 F.
3d 291; 729, Inc. v. Kenton County Fiscal Court (6th Cir. 2008), 515 F. 3d
485; and Andy’s Rest. & Lounge, Inc. v. City of Gary (7th Cir. 2006), 466
F. 3d 550.



      (2)   The Council finds:



         (a)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the
activities that occur on their premises;



         (b)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses,
defined in this chapter as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments;



         (c)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and
anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which
provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos
and live sex shows;



         (d)   Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions;



         (e)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult
arcades and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in
sex within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses;



         (f)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to: syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non-A, Non-B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections;



         (g)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
in the United States: 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in
1985; and 253,448 through 12-31-1992;



         (h)   As of February 2012, there have been thousands of
reported cases of AIDS in the state;



         (i)   Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody
test in the city and the surrounding area;



         (j)   The number of cases of early (less that one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November, 1990;



         (k)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United
States reported annually remains at a high level, with over 1,000,000 cases
being reported in 1990;



         (l)   In his report of 10-22-1986, the Surgeon General
of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components and from an infected mother
to her newborn;



         (m)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS
and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts;



         (n)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;



         (o)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that
semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons
view “adult” oriented films;



         (p)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(2)(a) through
(B)(2)(o) above raise substantial governmental concerns;



         (q)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational
characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect
those substantial governmental concerns;



         (r)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing
procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the
actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein;



         (s)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
government interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theaters;



         (t)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented
businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past
employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments;



         (u)   The disclosure of certain information by those
persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance
of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant government interest in the operation of such uses,
will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases;



         (v)   In the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct;



         (w)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use
license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of
this chapter;



         (x)   The barring of such individuals from the
management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and
prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases; and



         (y)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of
the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five for
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting
specified sexually activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial
establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues, or devotes more than 20% of the usable floor area of the
establishment, building or business, or if at least 500 square feet,
whichever is smaller, for the sale, barter or rental, for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs,
slides or other visual representations, which are characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and/or



      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed
for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude;



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or
display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment, which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the exhibition or display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign
visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of
this adult type of photographic reproductions; and either



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or
semi- nude, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase
refers to films which are DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON
the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or
principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
full-time, part-time or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is
denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or by another
status. EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The City Building Inspector or such person as may
be designated by the City Council.



   ESCORT. A person who, for consideration, and for another person, agrees
or offers to:



      (1)   Act as a companion, guide or date;



      (2)   To privately model lingerie; or



      (3)   To privately perform a striptease.



   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association that, for a fee, tip or
other consideration, furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish,
escorts as one of its primary business purpose.



   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT. Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.



   NUDE, NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or anal cleft with less than a fully
opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
in a discernibly turgid state.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To cause the function, or to put or
keep in a state, of doing business. OPERATOR mean any person on the premises
of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational
control of the business, or who causes to function, or who puts or keeps in
operation, the business. A person may be found to be OPERATING OR CAUSING TO
BE OPERATED a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is
an owner, part-owner or licensee of the business.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, association or other legal entity.



   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered, as a part of the
ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.



   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION. The showing of a female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point, or
the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any
portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. A commercial establishment which regularly
features a person (or persons) who appears semi-nude and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured or photographed by other
persons who pay money or any form of consideration, but shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private
college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial establishment, that
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any forms of
consideration, a place were two or more persons may congregate, associate or
consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities. The definition of
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, semi- nude model studio or
sexual encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination
of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child;
engaging in organized criminal activity related to a sexually oriented
business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under
the Indiana Criminal Code or the Penal Codes of other states or countries.



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction, or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling of another person’s genitals, pubic
region, anus or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with,
any of the functions set forth in divisions (1) and (2) above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. The increase
in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas
exist on the date of this chapter takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any
of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sub-lease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gifts or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership control.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.03  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be effective upon adoption by Council, approval by
the Mayor, and publication as required by law. The penalty provisions shall
be effective two weeks following publication.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)




LICENSING




§ 111.15  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is a violation of this chapter:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business
without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city
pursuant to this chapter;



      (2)   For any person to obtain a sexually oriented business
license issued by the city for a particular location which also is permitted
by the State Alcohol Beverage Commission to sell alcohol on the premises;



      (3)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to
this chapter; and/or



      (4)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license
or sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the
enforcement officer a completed application made on a form prescribed and
provided by the City Clerk-Treasurer. An application must include the
information required in this section. The application shall be notarized. The
application shall include the information called for in divisions (C)(1)(a)
through (C)(1)(e) below and, where applicable, division (C)(1)(f) below, as
follows:



         (a)   The full name, residence, phone number, Social
Security number and birth date of the owner(s), applicant(s) and permittee(s)
if an individual; and, if the permittee is a corporation, partnership, LLC or
other business entity, a current certificate of business entity existence
issued by the Indiana Secretary of State, name and address of its registered
owner, together with the names, residences, phone numbers, Social Security
numbers and birth dates of those owner(s) holding a 5% or more ownership
interest in a partnership, LLC, corporation or other business entity;



         (b)   Written proof of age, in the form of either:



            1.   A copy of a birth certificate and current
photo;



            2.   A current driver’s license with picture; or



            3.   Other picture, identification document issued
by a governmental agency.



         (c)   The name, address, phone number, Social Security
number and birth date of the operator and manager of such operation, if
different from the owner(s), applicant(s) or permittee(s);



         (d)   The street address of the sexually oriented
business;



         (e)   A statement detailing each misdemeanor or felony
relating to a sex offense and/or operation of adult uses and/or sexually
oriented businesses or related activities of which the owner(s) or
applicant(s) or, for a corporation, the owner(s) of 5% or more of the issued
and outstanding stock of the corporation, or ownership interest in a
partnership, LLC or other business entity, have been convicted, and whether
the applicant(s) or owner(s) has ever applied for or held a permit to operate
a similar type of business in other cities; and



         (f)   If the application is for a sexually oriented
business license:



            1.   A detailed description of the activities and
types of business to be conducted;



            2.   The hours of operation;



            3.   A detailed description of the provisions made
to restrict access by minors;



            4.   A building plan of the premises detailing
internal operations and activities;



            5.   A description or building plan that details
all proposed interior and exterior changes to an existing building or
structure; and



            6.   The street address and legal description of
the real estate of the site where a sexually oriented business is to be
located, and the identification of buildings and improvements on said site to
be used for such purpose.



      (2)   The information provided pursuant to divisions (C)(1)(a)
through (C)(1)(f) above shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the enforcement officer within ten working days
of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally
submitted false or incomplete.



   (D)   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to a designated scale, or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises, to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



   (E)   If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license
as applicant. If the person that wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual (such as a corporation), each officer,
director, general partner or other person who has a 5% or more ownership
interest shall sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each
applicant must be qualified under § 111.16 of this chapter, and each
applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is granted.



   (F)   A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt
from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business
license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a
business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this
chapter, where applicable.



   (G)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with
the application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
enforcement officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only:



      (1)   To other government agencies in connection with a law
enforcement or public safety function; or



      (2)   As may otherwise be required by law or a court order.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.16  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   Upon the filing of a complete application for a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license, the enforcement officer or is designee shall file stamp the
application. Within three business days thereafter, the enforcement officer
shall cause all required criminal background checks to be performed. Receipt
of a criminal background check result shall also be filed stamped.



      (2)   In the case of a sexually oriented business employee
license, the enforcement officer shall issue or deny such license within two
business days of receipt of a criminal background check result. Within 20
business days after the receipt of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license, the enforcement officer shall either issue a
license or deny the license.



      (3)   The enforcement officer shall approve the issuance of a
license unless one or more of the following is found to be true, in which
case, the license shall be denied:



         (a)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age;



         (b)   An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business;



         (c)   An applicant has failed to provide information as
required by § 111.15 of this chapter for issuance of the license;



         (d)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect under this division (A)(3)(d). For the purpose of this division
(A)(3)(d), CONVICTION:



            1.   Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and



            2.   Includes a conviction of any business entity
for which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the
conviction for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or
a controlling interest.



         (e)   The license application fee required by this
chapter has not been paid;



         (f)   An applicant has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form; and



         (g)   The proposed sexually oriented business is located
in a zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented
businesses are allowed to operate under Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances,
or is not in compliance with the location restrictions established for
sexually oriented businesses in the I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts as set forth
in § 111.35 of this chapter.



   (B)   An applicant that is ineligible for a license due to division
(A)(3) above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when
the time period required by § 111.15 of this chapter has elapsed.



   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued
to that applicant, the expiration date and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. A sexually
oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the
licensee. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business
employee shall keep the employee’s license on his or her person or on the
premises where licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce such
license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other
authorized city official.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.17  FEES.



   (A)   A non-refundable fee of $125 shall be paid at the time of the
submittal of an initial or renewal application for a sexually oriented
business employee license. A minimum non-refundable fee of $250 shall be paid
at the time of the submittal of an initial or renewal application for a
sexually oriented business.



   (B)   (1)   Each application shall contain a provision on the
application in bold print stating that any withholding of information or the
providing of false or misleading information will be grounds for the denial
or revocation of a permit. Any changes in the information provided on the
application or provided during the investigation shall be reported in writing
to the city by the owner(s) or applicant(s) or permittee within ten days of
change. If said changes take place during the investigation, the data shall
be provided to the enforcement officer in writing.



      (2)   Failure to report said changes by the applicant(s) or
owner(s) or the permittee within ten days may result in a denial or
revocation of a permit.



   (C)   (1)   The enforcement officer shall cause criminal
background checks to be performed on each owner, applicant and licensee as
well as 5% or more owners of a corporation, partnership, LLC or other
business entity who is required to sign an application. Costs of up to four
criminal background checks are included as part of the permit fee for a
sexually oriented business license.



      (2)   In the event more than four criminal background checks
are required, an additional charge of $30 shall be charged for each
additional criminal background check required.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.18  INSPECTION.



   For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, an applicant,
operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any other
federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any function
connected with the enforcement of this chapter, normally and regularly
conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is occupied
or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually oriented
business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.19  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 111.15 of
this chapter. An application for renewal shall be made no earlier than 90
days, but at least 30 days, before the expiration date. When made less than
30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be
affected.



   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.20  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for
a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated any
section of this chapter or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee of
a sexually oriented business to violate any section of this chapter; or



      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



   (B)   The issuance of a written notice of intent to suspend shall
not be a prerequisite to issuance of a written notice of intent to revoke a
permit pursuant to § 111.21 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.21  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of
suspension in § 111.20 of this chapter occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The enforcement officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the officer
determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   Licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed possession,
use or sale of alcohol or controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee has knowingly or recklessly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act
to occur in or on the licensed premises; and/or



      (6)   A licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed any
dissemination or obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material
to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of
child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity related to a sexually oriented
business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or similar offenses
described herein or in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above, which constitutes a
criminal violation of the Indiana Criminal Code.



   (C)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in §
111.22 of this chapter, the enforcement officer revokes a license, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation
becomes effective.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.22  ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   If facts exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a
license under this chapter, the enforcement officer shall notify the
applicant or licensee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend
or revoke the license, including the grounds therefore, by personal delivery
or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current
business address on file with the enforcement officer. Within five business
days of receipt of the notice, the respondent may provide to the enforcement
officer, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why
the license should not be denied, suspended or revoked. Within three business
days of the receipt of respondent’s written response, the enforcement
officer, after consultation with the City Mayor, shall notify the respondent
in writing of the hearing date on respondent’s denial, suspension or
revocation proceeding.



      (1)   (a)   Within 14 business days of the receipt of
respondent’s written response, the City Common Council shall conduct a
hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by
counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. The City
Common Council shall issue a written opinion and decision within five days of
the hearing.



         (b)   If a response is not received by the enforcement
officer in the time provided or, if after a hearing, the City Common Council
finds that grounds as specified in this chapter exist for denial, suspension
or revocation, then the denial, suspension or revocation shall be come final
five days after the City Common Council sends, by certified mail, written
notice that the permit has been denied, suspended or revoked. The notice
shall include a statement advising the applicant or permittee of the right to
appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   If the City Common Council finds that no grounds exist
for denial, suspension or revocation of a license, then within five days
after the hearing, the City Common Council shall withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing
by certified mail of the action and, in the case of an application for a
license, shall contemporaneously direct the enforcement officer to issue the
license.



   (B)   (1)   When a decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license
becomes final, the applicant or permittee (aggrieved party) whose application
for a license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or
revoked, shall have the right to appeal the action to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



      (2)   The following shall apply to businesses that have
previously obtained a license under this chapter: upon the filing of any
court action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise enjoin the city’s
enforcement of the denial, suspension or revocation, the city shall
immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional
permit shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually
oriented business, and will expire upon the court’s entry of a judgment on
the aggrieved party’s action to appeal, challenge, restrain or otherwise
enjoin the city’s enforcement.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.23  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)




CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS




§ 111.35  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   A person violates this chapter if that person operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in any zoning district
other than I-1 Industrial District or I-2 Industrial Expansion District, as
defined and described in Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   A person violates this chapter if the person operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:



      (1)   A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;



      (2)   A public or private educational facility including, but
not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does not
include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school;



      (3)   A boundary of a residential district as defined in Ch.
150 of this code of ordinances;



      (4)   A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities included, but not limited to,
a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or
other similar public land within the city which is under the control,
operation or management of the city park and recreation authorities;



      (5)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use
as defined in Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances;



      (6)   An entertainment business which is oriented primarily
towards children or family entertainment; and/or



      (7)   Any premises licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage
control regulations of the state.



   (C)   A person violates this chapter if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business.



   (D)   A person violates this chapter if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof, or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.



   (E)   For the purpose of division (B) above, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as the
part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in division (B) above.
The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall
be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.



   (F)   For the purposes of division (C) above, the distance between
any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.



   (G)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating and open for
business on 4-3-2012 that is in violation of divisions (A) through (F) above
shall be deemed a non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be
permitted to continue, unless terminated for any reason or voluntarily
discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such non-conforming uses shall
not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered; except that, the use may be
changed to a conforming use.



   (H)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered non- conforming use by the location,
subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license,
of a use listed in division (B) above within 1,000 feet of sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and
does apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant’s
previous license has expired or been revoked.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.36  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS,
VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less
than 150 feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or
other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the
application shall be a accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a
plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, and
the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion
of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station
may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate
the place at which the permit, if granted, will be conspicuously posted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object, and should
be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises
to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without prior approval of the city.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations. The view required in this division (A)(5) must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains unobstructed by any
doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which
patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division
(A)(1) above.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five foot-candles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in booths
to be non-porous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
non-porous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or
other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



      (15)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
display of materials and devices to be sold or viewed on the premises of a
sexually oriented business or activities or entertainment which occurs within
the premises of a sexually oriented business is not subject to public view
through windows, entrances or other openings. Failure to prevent viewing of
displayed materials, devices, images, activities or entertainment from
outside a building licensed as a sexually oriented business constitutes a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(14)
above violates this chapter if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.37  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY.



   (A)   It shall be a crime and violation of this chapter for a person
to knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business as defined in
this chapter, appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual
activities.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude
condition, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least
six feet away from any patron or customer and on stage at least two feet from
the floor.



   (C)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee, while
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or
gratuity from any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or
give any gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude
in a sexually oriented business.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for an employee, while
semi-nude, to knowing and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a
customer.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.38  PROHIBITION AGAINST CHILDREN IN A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



   A person commits a crime and a violation of this chapter if the person
knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a
sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.39  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 10:00 a.m. of
any day. A person violates this chapter if the person knowingly or recklessly
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business during
prohibited times as set forth in this section.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.40  ADVERTISING AND DISPLAY; LIGHTING AND SIGNS.



   (A)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface
and walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees
and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting
shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.



   (B)   All signage and displays visible from the outside of sexually
oriented business shall not include any photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of nudity, semi-nudity or sexual activity. All
signs shall be flat wall or freestanding signs. No signs shall be located on
the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving elements or electronically
or mechanically changing messages. No sign shall be over 32 square feet. A
sexually oriented business may have only one electrically lit sign attached
to the front of the place of business. No window signs or displays are
allowed. A sexually oriented business shall place a two-foot square sign on
each entrance door stating hours of operation and admittance to adults only.
These signage regulations are to protect children from exposure to sexually
oriented signs and materials and to preserve the value of property near
sexually oriented businesses.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operators
of a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of the
city in this chapter, commonly known as the “Sexually Oriented Business
Ordinance”, as it may be amended from time to time, or any subsequently
enacted city ordinance or regulations.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.41  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 111.37 of this chapter
that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so:



      (1)   In a modeling class operated by a proprietary school,
licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or by a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;



      (2)   In accordance with medical treatment or sexual therapy
performed by or under the auspices of physicians or therapists licensed by
the state; or



      (3)   Where any provision or offense herein fails to state a
necessary level of culpability to establish a violation or liability, the
offense shall be established upon a showing that the person acted knowingly
or recklessly with regard to the predicate act.



   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of
this chapter, an act by an employee shall be imputed to the sexually oriented
business permittee for the purpose of establishing a violation of this
chapter, or for purposes of license denial, suspension or revocation only if
a permittee allowed, either knowingly or recklessly, a violation of this
chapter to occur. It shall be a defense to liability that the sexually
oriented business licensee was powerless to prevent the violation.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person or entity that knowingly or recklessly operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of any
section of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction. Also the city
shall have the right to collect all costs, fees, including attorney fees, and
other costs of litigation incurred in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, such person or entity that violates any section of this
chapter shall, for each and every violation or non- compliance, be fined
$1,000. Each day that such violation or non-compliance shall be permitted to
exist constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, a person or entity knowingly or
recklessly operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in
violation of this chapter, if such person or entity engages in conduct, and
in so doing, he or she is aware of a high probability that he or she in so
doing, is doing so in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, a person or entity recklessly
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation
of this chapter, if such person or entity engages in the conduct in plain,
conscious and unjustifiable disregard of harm that might result and the
disregard involves a substantial deviation from acceptable standards of
conduct.



(Ord. 2012-2, passed 4-3-2012)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Firing guns, fireworks



   130.02   Slaughtering animals



   130.03   Synthetic cannabinoids



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  FIRING GUNS, FIREWORKS.



   The legality of carrying, possessing or discharging a firearm within
the municipal limits of the city shall be governed by state law. No squib,
cracker or other thing containing powder or any other combustible material
shall be fired, exploded or detonated within the city limits unless the
Common Council has approved such firing, explosion or detonation.



(Prior Code, § 130.01)  (Ord. 2011-9, passed 12-20-2011)  Penalty, see §
130.99



§ 130.02  SLAUGHTERING ANIMALS.



   No person within the city shall slaughter or dress out any animal. It
shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of slaughtering
animals for sale within the city limits or to keep or maintain a
slaughterhouse within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 130.04)  (Amended 4-9-2009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS.



   (A)   It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or
business to use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly
display for sale or attempt to sell, give or barter any one or more of the
following chemicals within the boundaries of the city:



      (1)   2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-
(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol; also known as CP 47,497 and its C6, C7, C8 and C9
homologues;



      (2)   (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-
dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-0l;
also known as HU-210;



      (3)   Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone; also
known as 1 Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole or JWH-018; and/or



      (4)   Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone; also
known as 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole or JWH-073.



   (B)   This section shall be enforced by the City Police Department.
If any of the substances listed in division (A) above are found in the
possession of any person or business, they may be confiscated and destroyed
by law enforcement officials.



   (C)   It is not an offense under division (A) above if the person
was acting at the direction of an authorized law enforcement agent to enforce
or ensure compliance with this section prohibiting the sale of the
aforementioned substances.



   (D)   This section does not apply to any person who commits any act
described in this section pursuant to the direction or prescription of a
licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
This section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a
medical purpose or dental purpose.



   (E)   If any provision of this section is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of the section which
shall remain effective absent the invalid provision and, to this end, the
provisions of the section are declared to be severable.



   (F)   City department heads are hereby directed to take all action
necessary and proper for the implementation of this section.



(Ord. 2010-8, passed - -2010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be fined not more than $100.



(Prior Code, § 130.99)



   (B)   (1)   Any business found to be in violation of § 130.03 of
this chapter will be subject to a civil fine of $2,500. Any person found in
violation of § 130.03 of this chapter will be subject to a civil fine not to
exceed $1,000. All fines collected shall be deposited into the city’s
General Fund.



      (2)   The City Attorney shall have the authority to seek an
injunction to close any business which refuses to or fails to comply with §
130.03 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2010-8, passed - -2010)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   ZONING



      151.   BUILDING CODE; STANDARDS



      152.   HOUSE NUMBERING



      153.   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS



      154.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



      155.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



CHAPTER 150:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Short title



   150.002   Definitions



   150.003   Establishment of districts



   150.004   Zoning map



   150.005   Remedies



   150.006   Conflict



   150.007   Satellite dishes




RS Suburban Residence District




   150.020   Uses permitted



   150.021   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.022   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.023   Minimum area of lot



   150.024   Minimum width of lot



   150.025   Minimum front yard



   150.026   Minimum side yard



   150.027   Minimum rear yard



   150.028   Maximum height of buildings




R-1 Residence District




   150.040   Uses permitted



   150.041   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.042   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.043   Minimum area of lot



   150.044   Minimum width of lot



   150.045   Minimum front yard



   150.046   Minimum side yard



   150.047   Minimum rear yard



   150.048   Maximum height of buildings



   150.049   Minimum building size



   150.050   Maximum lot coverage




R-2 Residence District




   150.065   Uses permitted by right



   150.066   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.067   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.068   Minimum area lot



   150.069   Minimum width of lot



   150.070   Minimum front yard



   150.071   Minimum side yard



   150.072   Minimum rear yard



   150.073   Maximum height of buildings



   150.074   Minimum building size



   150.075   Maximum lot coverage




R-H Homestead District




   150.090   Uses permitted



   150.091   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.092   Minimum area of lot



   150.093   Minimum width of lot



   150.094   Minimum front yard



   150.095   Minimum side yard



   150.096   Minimum rear yard



   150.097   Maximum height of buildings



   150.098   Minimum building size



   150.099   Maximum lot coverage




C-1 Local Commercial District




   150.110   Uses permitted



   150.111   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.112   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.113   Minimum area of lot



   150.114   Minimum width of lot



   150.115   Minimum front yard



   150.116   Minimum side yard



   150.117   Minimum rear yard



   150.118   Maximum height of buildings



   150.119   Noise




C-2 General Commercial District




   150.130   Uses permitted



   150.131   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.132   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.133   Minimum area of lot



   150.134   Minimum width of lot



   150.135   Minimum front yard



   150.136   Minimum side yard



   150.137   Minimum rear yard



   150.138   Maximum height of buildings



   150.139   Noise




C-3 Roadside Commercial District




   150.150   Uses permitted



   150.151   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.152   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.153   Minimum area of lot



   150.154   Minimum width of lot



   150.155   Minimum front yard



   150.156   Minimum side yard



   150.157   Minimum rear yard



   150.158   Maximum height of buildings



   150.159   Noise




I-1 Industrial District




   150.170   Provisions



   150.171   Uses permitted and uses permitted by special exception



   150.172   Minimum area of lot



   150.173   Minimum width of lot



   150.174   Minimum front yard



   150.175   Minimum side yard



   150.176   Minimum rear yard



   150.177   Maximum height of buildings



   150.178   Standards




I-2 Industrial Expansion District




   150.190   Provisions



   150.191   Uses permitted and uses permitted by special exception



   150.192   Minimum area of lot



   150.193   Minimum width of lot



   150.194   Minimum front yard



   150.195   Minimum side yard



   150.196   Minimum rear yard



   150.197   Maximum height of buildings



   150.198   Standards




A - Agricultural District




   150.210   Uses permitted



   150.211   Uses permitted by special exception



   150.212   Contingent uses permitted by special exception



   150.213   Minimum area of lot



   150.214   Minimum width of lot



   150.215   Minimum front yard



   150.216   Minimum side yard



   150.217   Minimum rear yard



   150.218   Maximum height of buildings




PUD - Planned Unit Development




   150.230   Purpose



   150.231   Uses permitted



   150.232   Standards for approval



   150.233   Procedures and requirements



   150.234   Sketch plan submittal



   150.235   Action by Plan Commission



   150.236   Preliminary development plan; application



   150.237   Preliminary development plan; maps



   150.238   Preliminary development plan; written statement



   150.239   Preliminary development plan; report by Plan Commission



   150.240   Preliminary development plan; action by the Common Council



   150.241   Zone map notation



   150.242   Preliminary development plan; no improvement location
permit



   150.243   Failure to apply for final development plan; reversion



   150.244   Final development plan; application



   150.245   Final development plan; information to be submitted



   150.246   Final development plan; action by Plan Commission



   150.247   Special procedure for development by stages



   150.248   Conformance with subdivision control ordinance



   150.249   Consistency with the comprehensive plan




Special Exception; Procedure and Requirements




   150.260   Special exceptions



   150.261   Review procedure



   150.262   Shopping center plan, requirements and procedures



   150.263   Special exception requirements



   150.264   Requirements for mobile home parks




Contingent Use Requirements




   150.275   Where permitted



   150.276   “Contingent use” defined



   150.277   Parking spaces required by use



   150.278   Home occupation; requirements



   150.279   Conformity of existing contingent use




Non-Conforming Use Specifications




   150.290   Non-conforming uses




General Provisions and Supplementary Regulations




   150.315   Interpretation



   150.316   Determination and interpretation of district boundaries



   150.317   Procedure relating to vacated areas



   150.318   Use



   150.319   Yard, lot area and size of building



   150.320   Height



   150.321   Lots



   150.322   Parking space, loading and unloading berths



   150.323   Supplemental regulations; residential uses



   150.324   Supplemental regulations; commercial uses



   150.325   Supplemental regulations; industrial uses



   150.326   Specifications for surfacing parking areas



   150.327   Off-street parking requirements



   150.328   Loading berth requirements



   150.329   Contingent uses; off-street parking requirements



   150.330   Procedure for site plan review



   150.331   Signs



   150.332   Street tree and landscaping requirements applicable to new
construction



   150.333   Zero lot line development




Administration




   150.345   Enforcement



   150.346   Improvement location permit



   150.347   Improvement location permit; industrial use; certificate
of compliance



   150.348   Plans permanent record



   150.349   Improvement location permit; special exceptions



   150.350   Certificate of occupancy



   150.351   No change of use



   150.352   Certificate of occupancy; application



   150.353   Records



   150.354   Filing of application for certificate of occupancy



   150.355   Health standards



   150.356   Commencement of work



   150.357   Building permit fees



   150.358   Zoning fees




Board of Zoning Appeals




   150.370   Creation and appointment



   150.371   Officers and rules



   150.372   Appeal procedure



   150.373   Duties and powers of the Board



   150.374   Findings and action



   150.375   Hearing request



   150.376   Appeal of Board’s decision




Amendments




   150.390   Amendments



 



   150.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter, and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto, shall
be known and cited as the “Zoning Code” or “this chapter”.



(Prior Code, § 150.01)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING. Bordering.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE. A building or use subordinate to another
structure or use located on the same lot, and which does not change or alter
the character of the premises, and which is not used for human occupancy,
such as: private garages, utility sheds, public utility installations,
electric distribution and secondary power lines, gas, water and sewer lines,
their supports and poles, guy wires, small transformers, wire or cable and
incidental equipment, and public telephone booths.



   AGRICULTURE. The art or science of cultivating the ground, and raising
and harvesting crops, also often including feeding, breeding and management
of livestock tillage, husbandry and farming; in a broader sense, the science
and art of the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including
to a variable extent the preparation of these products for humans’ use and
their disposal by marketing or otherwise. In this broad use, it includes
farming, horticulture, forestry, dairying, sugar making.



   AIRPORT. A use devoted to the takeoff, landing and storing of aircraft.



   ALLEY. A permanent public service way providing a secondary means of
access to abutting lands.



   ALLEY LINE. A lot line bordering on an alley.



   APARTMENT. A building or portion thereof designed for or occupied by
more than two families; a multi-family dwelling.



   AUTOMOBILE OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street,
used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers,
and where no repair work is done, except minor incidental repair of
automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.



   BASEMENT. A story, wholly or partly underground, which, unless
subdivided into rooms and used for tenant purposes, shall not be included as
a story for the purposes of height measurement.



   BLOCK. A unit of property bounded by streets, or by streets and/or
railroad rights-of-way, waterways or other barriers.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE. Property having frontage on one side of a street and
lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or
nearest intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way,
waterway or other barrier.



   BOARD. The City Board of Zoning Appeals.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A building where meals are regularly served for
compensation, for three or more persons, but not exceeding 12 persons, not
open to transients, in contradistinction to hotels and restaurants open to
transients.



   BUILDING. Includes STRUCTURE. A structure having a roof supported by
columns or walls, for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals, chattels or other property. When separated by party walls,
without opening through such walls, each portion of such a building shall be
considered a separate structure. At no time shall the definition of a
BUILDING be construed to include mobile homes.



   BUILDING AREA. The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal
and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches
not exceeding one story in height, or architectural appurtenances projecting
not more than two feet.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The designated and appointed Building Inspector for
the city, appointed by the Mayor.



   BUILDING LINE or BUILDING SETBACK LINE. The line nearest the front of
and across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between
the front line of a building or structure and the front lot line.



   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building having no structural connection with
another building.



   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF. The line of the face of the building nearest
the front lot line.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the lot ground
level to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof, to the deck line of a
mansard roof and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for gable, hip
and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated. Where a
substantial part of an accessory building is attached to the principal
building in a substantial manner, as by a roof, the accessory building shall
be counted as a part of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   BUSINESS. The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter or exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or services, the maintenance or operation of
offices, recreational, and amusement enterprises for profit.



   CAMP, PUBLIC. Any area or tract of land used or designated to
accommodate two or more camping parties, including cabins, tents or other
camping outfits.



   CAMPING OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified as CAMPING OR TRAVEL TRAILER by the
manufacturer of the trailer; and, when factory equipped for the road, it
shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not
exceeding 32 feet.



   CEMETERY. Land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such
cemetery.



   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate issued by the Building
Inspector stating that the codes and ordinances of the city have been met and
that the subject structure may be occupied.



   CLUB. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a person or
organization for a social, educational or recreational purpose, but not
primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on
as a commercial operation.



   COMMERCIAL FARM ENTERPRISE. An operation or use inherent in or closely
associated with a farm or agriculture, such as the buying, selling or
distribution of livestock, or farm or agricultural products, or products
essential to farm operation; but not including industrial grain elevators,
industrial mills, abattoirs, commercial hatcheries and poultry processing
plants, the manufacture of commercial fertilizers and similar enterprises
which are of an industrial nature.



   COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission.



   CONFORMING USE. An existing or proposed use of land or building which
is in compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable
to the district in which such use is or is proposed to be located.



   CONTINGENT USES. A use which is not inappropriate to the principal uses
of the district in which it may be located. CONTINGENT USES shall be allowed
only after the review procedure for a special exception has been met by the
applicant.



   COVENANTS. A written agreement or promise under seal between two or
more parties for the performance of some action pertaining to real property,
which qualifies for recordation in the County Recorder’s office.



   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity of loudness of sound.
Sound level meters are used to measure such intensities and are called
calibrated in DECIBELS.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A drawing, including a legal or site description, of
the real estate involved, which shows the location and size of the following,
both existing and proposed: all buildings, structures and yards; location and
dimension of building lines and easements; widths and lengths of all
entrances and exits to and from the real estate; location of all adjacent or
adjoining streets; service facilities; and other improvements such as
planting areas.



   DEVELOPMENT PLAN, RESIDENTIAL. A plan proposed to use a tract of land
for residential development in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, even though the use of the land, the location of the buildings to be
erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces provided in the plan do
not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district or
districts in which the residential development is proposed to be located.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof, used primarily as a place of
abode for one or more human beings, but not including hotels or motels,
lodging or boarding houses or tourist homes.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a residential building or
residential portion of a building, which are arranged, designed, used or
intended for use by one or more persons living together and maintaining a
common household, and which include lawful cooking space and lawful sanitary
facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.



      (1)   DUPLEX. A building designed as two separate
single-family residences, having a party wall in common separating or
dividing the two residences.



      (2)   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building on a lot designed
and used exclusively as a residence for three or more families living
independently of one another.



      (3)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for one family.



      (4)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Public or parochial pre-primary, primary,
grade, junior high, high, preparatory school or academy, junior college,
college or university, if public or founded or conducted by or under the
sponsorship of a religious or charitable organization.



   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a building and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club,
nursing home, fraternity or sorority house.



   FARM. A tract of land comprising an area which is devoted to
agricultural operations such as forestry, and growing of crops, pasturage,
the production of livestock and poultry, the growing of trees, shrubs and
plants, the other recognized agricultural pursuits, and including accessory
buildings essential to the operation of the FARM. Accessory buildings may
include barns, equipment and animal sheds, farm residences for the owner,
operator or farm assistants, roadside sales structures for the sale of
products of the FARM, and signs displaying subject matter directly related to
the name or the products of the particular FARM, but not including industrial
or commercial operations or structures.



   FENCE. A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to make a
boundary. This barrier may be constructed of posts, wire, boards, concrete or
stone.



   FILLING STATION. Any building, structure, premises or enclosure, or
other place used for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale at retail, of
fuels or oils for motor vehicles. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage.



   FLASH POINT. The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid under
prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will burn
momentarily, using the closed cup method.



   FLOOD or FLOODWATER. The water of any watercourse which is above the
banks and/or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any floodway or floodway fringe district or any
combination thereof as shown on the zoning map; provided, the area for the
purpose of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program under the
Federal Insurance Administration includes any area designated as such on the
flood boundary floodway maps and flood insurance rate maps dated 7-2-1981,
and any revision thereto as prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE. The elevation of the lowest floor of a building
or structure. If a basement is included, the basement floor is considered the
lowest floor. However, if a commercial or industrial building is floodproofed
as hereinafter defined, the term FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE applies to the water
surface elevation for which the building is protected.



   FLOODPROOF BUILDING. A commercial or industrial building so designed
and constructed as to exclude floodwaters from the interior of the building.
All floodproofing shall be adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
regulatory flood.



   FLOOR AREA, GROUND. The square-foot area of a residential building
within its largest outside dimensions, computed on a horizontal plane at the
ground floor level exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages
and exterior stairways.



   FLOOR AREA, NET. The total area, computed on a horizontal plane, used
for a particular commercial category exclusive of entrances, hallways, stairs
and other accessory areas used for ingress and egress.



   FREE-BURNING. A rate of combustion described by a material which burns
actively and easily supports combustion.



   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the
street; or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building with capacity for not more than
three motor vehicles per family, not more than one of which may be a
commercial vehicle of not more than three-ton capacity. A garage designed to
house one or two motor vehicles for each family housed in a multi- family
dwelling shall be classed as a PRIVATE GARAGE.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building, except those defined herein as a private
garage, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles, or where such
vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.



   GRADE. (Also, LOT GROUND LEVEL.)



      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only,
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.



      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one
street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all
walls adjoining the streets.



      (3)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the
average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street
line is to be considered as adjoining the street.



   GROUND FLOOD AREA. The square foot area of a residential building
within its largest outside dimensions, computed on a horizontal plane at the
ground floor level exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages
and exterior stairways.



   GROUP HOUSE. A group of dwellings constructed in a row, with the
dwelling units separated by vertical party walls without openings. Also a
multi- family dwelling.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use which:



      (1)   Is clearly incidental to or secondary to the residential
use of a dwelling unit or rooming unit;



      (2)   Is carried on within a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
accessory building by one or more occupants of such dwelling unit or rooming
unit; except that, in connection with the practice of a profession, one
person not residing in such dwelling unit or rooming unit may be employed; and



      (3)   Occupies not more than 25% of the total floor area of
such dwelling unit, rooming unit or accessory building and, in no event, more
than 500 square feet of floor area.



   HOSPITAL. An institution licensed by the State Department of Health and
providing health services primarily for inpatient medical or surgical care of
the sick or injured, and including related facilities such as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and
staff offices, which are an integral part of the facility; provided, such
institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct supervision
of, a licensed physician. Types of HOSPITALS include general, mental, chronic
disease and allied special hospitals such as cardiac, contagious disease,
maternity, orthopedic, cancer and the like.



   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation and which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding or lodging house.



   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit which must be issued by the
Superintendent of Zoning of the city prior to the alteration, change,
placement, erection or location on any platted or unplatted lands of a
structure, improvement or use of land.



   INDUSTRIAL PARK. A single structure or group of structures for
industrial operations, forming a comprehensive arrangement of buildings,
grounds and access ways planned in accordance with harmonious principles of
architectural and landscape architectural design and industrial management.



   INDUSTRIAL USE, ENCLOSED. The manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment,
raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, conducted entirely within the
enclosed buildings, in a district permitting an enclosed industrial use, and
in compliance with the standards and specifications of such district.



   INDUSTRIAL USE, OPEN. The manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment,
raw materials, manufactured products or wastes, conducted in both buildings
and open area, or open area only, in a district permitting open industrial
use and in compliance with the standards and specifications of such district.



   INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-14, any part of a
building or other structure that is in whole or in substantial part
fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly
at the building site as part of a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure, or
another building or structure. However, the does not include a mobile
structure or a system that is capable of inspection at the building site.



   INTENSE BURNING. A rate of combustion described by a material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



   JUNKYARD. Any place at which personal property is or may be salvaged
for reuse, resale or reduction or similar disposition, and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted; including, but not
limited to, used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber,
lumber, millwork, brick and similar property, except animal matter; also,
used motor vehicles, machinery or equipment which is used, owned or possessed
for the purpose of wrecking or salvaging parts therefrom.



   KENNEL. Any lot on which four or more dogs or small animals at least
four months of age are kept.



   LOADING OR UNLOADING BERTHS. The off-street area required for the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, which, in
this chapter, is held to be a 12-foot by 45-foot loading space with a 14-foot
height clearance; except that, if more than one berth is provided, the
12-foot dimension shall be ten feet.



   LODGING HOUSE. A building where lodging only is provided, for
compensation, to three or more, but not exceeding 12, persons, not open to
transients, in contradistinction to a hotel, which is open to transients.



   LOT. A parcel, tract, or area of land. It may be a single parcel
separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the office of the
County Recorder; it may be a part of a single parcel described in a deed or
plat which is recorded in the office of the County Recorder; provided, the
part to be used is adequate in size to meet all yard requirements of this
chapter; or it may include parts of a combination of such parcels when
adjacent to one another and used as one. In determining lot area and boundary
lines, no part thereof within the limits of the street or any private access
serving more than one main building shall be included.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets.



   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building
area.



   LOT, DEPTH OF. The main horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the rear lot line of a lot, measured in the general direction of the side
lot line.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the
lot from the street or place. In the case of a corner lot, a line separating
the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street, except in cases where deed
restrictions in effect specify another street right-of-way as the FRONT LOT
LINE.  A corner lot requires two front setbacks.



   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular-shaped lot, a
line ten feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.



   LOT, REVERSED INTERIOR. An interior lot, the front lot line of which is
formed by a street, which street also forms the side lot line of an abutting
corner lot. The corner lot is considered abutting even though separated from
the interior lot line by an alley.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets. A through lot requires a front setback on each street.



   LOT, WIDTH. The dimension of a lot measured between side lot lines on
the building line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-16 as set forth in 42
U.S.C. 5402 as it existed on January 1, 2003, a structure, transportable in
one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or
more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is
320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein; except that such
term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this
definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of
Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established
under this 42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq. and except that such term shall not include
any self-propelled recreational vehicle.



   MOBILE HOME. A one-family structure designed for transportation, after
fabrication, on the streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or
trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling,
complete and ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking
and assembly operations, location on jacks or permanent foundations,
connecting to utilities and the like.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land upon which two or more mobile homes
are harbored for the purpose of being occupied either free of charge or in
consideration of the payment of rental for the mobile home or the site upon
which it rests and, within which area, a mobile home may be supported either
by its wheels or by a foundation of any sort.



   MOBILE HOME TIE-DOWNS: SCHEDULE A. Sufficient anchorage to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of any mobile home. At a minimum, the
anchorage shall consist of the following.



      (1)   Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations. Mobile homes less than 50 feet long shall require only one
additional tie per side.



      (2)   Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home
with five additional ties per side at intermediate points. Mobile homes less
than 50 feet long shall require four additional points and four additional
ties per side.



      (3)   All components of the anchoring system shall be capable
of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.



      (4)   Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly
anchored.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE.  Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-17:



      (1)   Any part of a fabricated unit that is designed to be:



         (a)   Towed on its own chassis; and



         (b)   Connected to utilities for year- round occupancy
or use as a Class 1 structure, a Class 2 structure or another structure.



      (2)   Includes the following:



         (a)   Two or more components that can be retracted for
towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity; or



         (b)   Two or more units that are separately towable but
designed to be joined into one integral unit.



      (3)   Does not include RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MODERATE-BURNING. A rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



   MODULAR HOME. A one-family structure designed in standardized units for
transportation, after fabrication, to its destined site. A MODULAR HOME
usually involves two or more standardized units which are built to meet all
minimum Building Code requirements and which are designed to be permanently
affixed to a foundation on the site. This definition also includes a
double-wide mobile home so affixed to a foundation with undercarriage and
hitch removed.  See also INDUSTRIALIZED BUILDING.



   MOTEL. A building or a detached building used as dwelling units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space; and each unit having
convenient access to a parking space for the use of the unit’s occupants.
The units, with the exception of the apartment of the manager or caretaker,
are devoted to the use of automobile transients.



   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.



   NATURAL RESOURCES. The State Natural Resources Commission.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. An existing use of land or building which fails to
comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter applicable to the
district in which such use is located.



   NURSING HOME. A facility licensed by the State Board of Health, which
provides the services listed below. Such facilities may also provide other
and similar medical or health services; provided that, no occupant requires
physical restraint within the facility. Examples of NURSING HOME FACILITIES
that provide health services may include, if they comply with all the
criteria above and below, nursing homes, convalescent homes, maternity homes,
rest homes, homes for the aged and the like:



      (1)   Provides nursing services on a continuing basis;



      (2)   Admits the majority of the occupants upon the advice of
physicians as ill or infirm persons requiring nursing services;



      (3)   Provides for licensed physicians’ services or
supervision; and



      (4)   Maintains medical records.



   NURSING HOME CONVERSIONS. A dwelling which is converted for the use of
a nursing home and licensed by the State Board of Health.



   OCTAVE BAND. A narrow range of sound frequencies which classify sounds
according to pitch. In the octave band analyzer, the audible sound spectrum
is divided into eight OCTAVE BANDS.



   OCTAVE BAND ANALYZER. An electrical device used with the sound level
meter that sorts a complex noise or sound into the various octave bands.



   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open area, other than a street or alley,
designed for use or used for the temporary parking of more than four motor
vehicles, when available for public use, whether free or for compensation, or
as an accommodation for clients or customers.



   PARKING SPACE. A space other than on a street or alley, designed for
use or used for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle and, unless
otherwise designated herein, being not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet
long, exclusive of passageways.



   PARTICULATE MATTER. Finely divided liquid or solid material which is
discharged and carried along in the air. This shall not include water
droplets, commonly called steam.



   PERMIT. A written warrant or license granted by the Building Inspector,
Superintendent of Zoning, Board of Zoning Appeals, City Plan Commission, the
Common Council or other authorized official of the city.



   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, cooperative
organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.



   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup
truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses.



   PLACE. An open, unoccupied, officially designated space other than a
street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of
access to abutting property.



   PLAT. A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land intended to be filed for record.



   PREMISES. A lot or plot, including buildings thereon, if any.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL. Private primary, grade, high or preparatory school or
academy.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. Office of a member or members of a recognized
profession, as defined by the United States Bureau of the Census.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE CENTER. An architectural and functional grouping of
professional offices and appropriate associated and accessory uses which is
the central feature of a site plan composed of building area, parking area,
landscaped reservation and plantation, and other land features appropriate
for its use as a professional office enterprise, designed to serve
residential neighborhoods, and shall conform to the standards and
requirements of this chapter.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE IN RESIDENCE. An office in the dwelling of a member
of a recognized profession, as defined by the United States Bureau of the
Census; provided that, the professional service is performed by a member or
members of a family occupying such dwelling and no more than one additional
person is employed in rendering such service; provided, further, that, not
more than 25% of the gross floor area is devoted to such use; and, provided
also that, no sign, other than a nameplate attached to the building, not
exceeding two square feet in area, is displayed.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. An annoying, unpleasant, obnoxious or unsafe thing or
practice, further clarified and defined in Ch. 92 of this code of ordinances.
For the purpose of this chapter, PUBLIC NUISANCES shall be those described in
Ch. 92 of this code of ordinances.



   PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATIONS. The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, municipal departments, commissions or common
carriers of underground, surface or overhead gas, oil, electrical, steam,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police-call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, towers and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
service by public utility or municipal departments, commissions or common
carriers, for the public health or safety or general welfare.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. As used in this chapter, camping or travel
trailers, pickup coaches or motorized homes.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a peak discharge which can be
expected to be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year
period, as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and
approved by the State Natural Resources Commission. This flood is equivalent
to a flood having a probability of occurrence of 1% in any given year.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROFILE. A longitudinal profile along the thread of a
stream, showing the maximum water surface attained by the regulatory flood.



   RESTRICTIVE COVENANT. A written agreement or promise under seal,
restricting present or future property owners to certain uses or practices on
a tract of land. Usually, RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS set minimums and maximums
that may or may not be more strict than the district requirements set forth
in this chapter.



   RINGELMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
most nearly matches the light-obscuring capacity of smoke. The Ringelmann
Chart is described in the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular
6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in estimating
smoke density. Smoke below the density of Ringelmann No. 1 shall be
considered no smoke, or Ringelmann No. 0.



   SHOPPING CENTER. An architectural and functional grouping of retail
stores, generally oriented around a supermarket or department store and
appropriate associated and accessory uses, which is the central feature of a
site plan or development plan composed of building areas, parking areas,
access streets and circulatory ways for vehicles and pedestrians, landscape
reservations and plantations and other land features appropriate for its
operation as a commercial enterprise, designed to serve residential
neighborhoods or communities, and which conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.



   SIGN. Any advertising sign, billboard, board, device, structure or part
thereof, or device attached thereto or painted or represented thereon, for
advertising, display or publicity purposes. SIGNS placed or erected by
governmental agencies for the purpose of showing street names, or traffic
directions or regulations for other governmental purposes, shall not be
included herein.



   SLOW-BURNING or INCOMBUSTIBLE. Materials which do not in themselves
constitute an active fuel for the spread of combustion. A material which will
not ignite, nor actively support combustion, during an exposure for five
minutes to a temperature of 1,200°F.



   SMOKE. A suspension of fine particles, excluding water droplets, in a
gaseous plume, which more or less obscure the transmission of light.



   SMOKE UNIT. The number obtained when the smoke density in Ringelmann
number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of
this calculation, a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a
minute during the period of observation. Each reading is then multiplied by
the time in minutes during which it is observed. The various products are
then added together to give the total number of smoke units observed during
the entire observation period.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION. Uses publicly operated and those uses traditionally
affected with a public interest, and those uses entirely private in
character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give rise
to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property and
public facilities.



   SPECIAL SCHOOL. Any school which has as its primary purpose the
instruction, care and rehabilitation of atypical or exceptional children or
adults, such that the usual statutory educational requirements expressly or
implicitly do not apply.



   STORY. The portion of a building, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above
it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it shall be
the STORY.



   STORY, HALF. The portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip or
gambrel roof, the wall plates on at least two opposite exterior walls of
which are not more than three feet above the floor level of such HALF-STORY.



   STREET. A right-of-way or thoroughfare, other than an alley or place,
dedicated or otherwise legally established to the pubic use, affording the
principal means of access to the abutting property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof, substantial change in
the electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning or ventilation system or
service, serving a building.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT. The increase of the exterior size, bulk or
dimensions of a building. Such a SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT is considered to
occur when the first significant alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural element of that building commences.



   SUPERINTENDENT OF ZONING. The superintendent is responsible for
enforcement of this chapter on a day-to-day basis. The SUPER- INTENDENT may
or may not be the same person as the Building Inspector. The SUPERINTENDENT
shall be appointed by the Mayor.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE. A swimming pool used only by the owner of the
pool and friends as an accessory use at a private residence.



   TOURIST HOME. A building in which one but not more than five rooms are
used to offer private or overnight accommodations to transient guests for
compensation.



   TRADE OR BUSINESS SCHOOL. Secretarial or business school or college
when not publicly owned or conducted by or under the sponsorship of a
religious, charitable or non-profit organization; or a school conducted as a
commercial enterprise for teaching instrumental music, dancing, barbering or
hair dressing, drafting or for teaching industrial or technical arts.



   USE. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for
a person’s service, benefit or enjoyment.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the specific requirements of this chapter
granted by the Board in accordance with the terms of this chapter for the
purpose of assuring that no property, because of special circumstances
applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and district.



   VIBRATION. Oscillatory motion transmitted through the ground.



   VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS. A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between
the heights of three and 12 feet above the established street grade. The
street grade is measured at the intersection of the centerlines of the
intersecting street pavements; and the triangular space is determined by a
diagonal line connecting two points measured 25 feet along each of the street
property lines equidistant from the intersection of the property lines or the
property lines extended, at the corner of the lot.



   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by structure, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot,
unoccupied other than by steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and
similar structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the
front lot line and the building line.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between
the rear of the principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied other
than by accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of the required
space, and steps, walks, terraces, driveways, lampposts and similar
structures, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot
line and the rear of such principal building.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the principal building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard or from the front lot line where no front
yard is required, to the rear yard. The width of the required SIDE YARD is
measured horizontally at 90 with the side lot line, from the nearest part of
the principal building, except in cases where irregular or pie-shaped lots
are located, then the width of the required side yard shall be an average of
the width of the area between the side lot line and the principal building,
measured horizontally at 90 with the side lot line.



(Prior Code, § 150.02)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1981-5, passed
6-16-1981)



§ 150.003  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The territory within the jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission is
classified and divided into 12 districts designated as follows:



   (A)   RS, Suburban Residence District;



   (B)   R-1, Residence (Low Density) District;



   (C)   R-2, Residence (Medium Density) District;



   (D)   R-H, Homestead Residence District;



   (E)   C-1, Local Commercial District;



   (F)   C-2, General Commercial District;



   (G)   C-3, Roadside Commercial District;



   (H)   I-1, Industrial District;



   (I)   I-2, Industrial Expansion District;



   (J)   A, Agricultural District;



   (K)   FH, Flood Hazard Districts;



   (L)   FW, Floodway District;



   (M)   FF, Floodway Fringe District; and



   (N)   PUD, Planned Unit Development District.



(Prior Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1981-5, passed
6-16-1981)



§ 150.004  ZONING MAP.



   The zoning map, which accompanies and is declared to be a part of this
chapter, shows the boundaries of and the area covered by the districts.
Notations, references, indications and other matters shown on the zoning map
are as much a part of this chapter as if they were otherwise fully described
herein.



(Prior Code, § 150.04)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.005  REMEDIES.



   The Commission, the Board, the Building Inspector or any designated
enforcement official, or any person or persons, firm or corporation, jointly
or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit
Court of the county to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from
violating the provisions of this chapter. The Commission or the Board may
also institute a suit for mandatory injunction directing an individual, a
corporation or a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in violation
of the provisions of this chapter. Any building erected, raised or converted,
or land or premises used in violation of any provisions of this chapter of
the requirements thereof, is declared to be a common nuisance and as such may
be abated in such manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated
under existing law.



(Prior Code, § 150.05)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.006  CONFLICT.



   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; nor any
ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, previously adopted or issued, or
which shall be adopted or issued, and which are not in conflict with any of
the provisions of this chapter; except that, where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, or requires larger
open spaces or greater lot area per family, than are required or imposed by
such easements, covenants or agreements between parties, or by such
ordinance, rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.



(Prior Code, § 150.06)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.007  SATELLITE DISHES.



   Satellite dishes, which receive television and radio signals, shall not
be located in the front yard of any property zoned RS, R-1, R-2 or R-H.



(Prior Code, § 150.07)  (Ord. 2000-4, passed 3-21-2000)




RS SUBURBAN RESIDENCE DISTRICT




§ 150.020  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings;



   (B)   Accessory buildings; except that, they may not be erected
prior to the erection of the principal building;



   (C)   Accessory uses, as defined in § 150.323(E) of this chapter;



   (D)   Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal recreation
uses, libraries and museums; and



   (E)   Agricultural operations.



(Prior Code, § 150.10)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.021  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Airport or heliport;



   (B)   Artificial lake of three or more acres;



   (C)   Cemetery;



   (D)   Church or temple;



   (E)   Commercial farm enterprise;



   (F)   Country club or golf course;



   (G)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (H)   Hospital;



   (I)   Mobile home park;



   (J)   Nursing home;



   (K)   Outdoor theater;



   (L)   Private recreational development;



   (M)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (N)   Public camp;



   (O)   Public park or public recreational facility;



   (P)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (Q)   Residential development plan;



   (R)   Residential unit, cottage, hunting or fishing lodge;



   (S)   Special school; and



   (T)   Stadium or coliseum.



(Prior Code, § 150.11)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.022  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Except as may be otherwise provided herein, the following contingent
uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance with the procedure
and requirements of §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through 150.279 of this chapter,
respectively:



   (A)   College or university;



   (B)   Home occupation;



   (C)   Municipal or governmental building use;



   (D)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (E)   Professional office;



   (F)   Educational institution;



   (G)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (H)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (I)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.12)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.023  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet.



   (B)   All other permitted uses: 20,000 square feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot area for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.13)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.024  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 65 feet.



   (B)   All other permitted uses: 100 feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.14)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.025  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 40 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 65 feet.



   (C)   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.15)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.026  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: ten feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: ten feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.16)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.027  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 30 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: ten feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.17)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.028  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 25 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 18 feet.



   (C)   Maximum heights of buildings for uses by special exception are
defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.18)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



R-1 RESIDENCE DISTRICT



§ 150.040  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   One-family dwellings;



   (B)   Two-family dwellings;



   (C)   Accessory buildings; except that, they may not be erected
prior to the erection of the principal building;



   (D)   Accessory uses, as defined in § 150.323(E) of this chapter;
and



   (E)   Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal uses,
libraries and museums.



(Prior Code, § 150.20)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.041  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure and requirements of §§ 150.261 and 150.263,
respectively, of this chapter:



   (A)   Church or temple;



   (B)   Country club or golf course;



   (C)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (D)   Hospital;



   (E)   Private recreational development;



   (F)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (G)   Public park or public recreational facility;



   (H)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (I)   Residential development plan; and



   (J)   Special school.



(Prior Code, § 150.21)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.042  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Except as may be otherwise provided herein, the following contingent
uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance with the procedure
and requirements of §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through 150.279, respectively,
of this chapter:



   (A)   College or university;



   (B)   Home occupation;



   (C)   Municipal or governmental building or use;



   (D)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (E)   Professional office;



   (F)   Educational institution;



   (G)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (H)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (I)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.22)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.043  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 8,400 square feet.



   (B)   Two-family dwellings: 15,000 square feet.



   (C)   All other permitted uses: 20,000 square feet.



   (D)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.23)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.044  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 70 feet.



   (B)   Two-family dwellings: 85 feet.



   (C)   All other permitted uses: 100 feet.



   (D)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.24)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.045  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings. The front yard building line shall be
determined by utilizing the following formula or requirement.



      (1)   The building setback line shall be 25 feet from the
front lot line or 55 feet from the centerline of the street or road,
whichever is greater.



      (2)   Building lines or building setback lines established in
a recorded subdivision shall establish the dimension of front yards in such
subdivisions, except when such building setback lines may be less restrictive
as provided in § 150.319 of this chapter.



      (3)   On through lots, a front yard is required on each street.



      (4)   Open, unenclosed or screen porch (not a glass enclosed
porch or sun parlor) may project into front yard a maximum of ten feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings. The established building setback line,
plus an additional 25 feet.



   (C)   Front yards. Minimum front yards for uses by special exception
are defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.25)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.046  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Principal and accessory buildings shall have a side yard of no
less than ten feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yards for use by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.26)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.047  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings shall have a rear yard of no less than 20
feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of ten feet.



   (C)   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.27)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2005-5, passed
4-5-2005)



§ 150.048  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 35 feet or two and one- half stories.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 18 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.28)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.049  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.



   Principal buildings shall have a minimum ground floor area of 800
square feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.29)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.050  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   All buildings including accessory buildings shall not cover more than
35% of the area of a lot.



(Prior Code, § 150.30)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



R-2 RESIDENCE DISTRICT



§ 150.065  USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings;



   (B)   Two-family dwellings;



   (C)   Multi-family dwellings;



   (D)   Public parks and playgrounds and other municipal recreation
uses, libraries and museums;



   (E)   Accessory buildings; except that, they may not be erected
prior to the erection of the principal buildings; and



   (F)   Accessory uses, as defined in § 150.323(E) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.40)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.066  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Church or temple;



   (B)   Country club or golf course;



   (C)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (D)   Hospital;



   (E)   Nursing home;



   (F)   Private recreational development;



   (G)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (H)   Professional office;



   (I)   Public or employee parking areas;



   (J)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (K)   Residential development plan;



   (L)   Special school;



   (M)   Stadium or coliseum; and



   (N)   Tourist home.



(Prior Code, § 150.41)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.067  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the following contingent
uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance with the procedure
defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through 150.279 of this chapter:



   (A)   Boarding or lodging house;



   (B)   College or university;



   (C)   Home occupation;



   (D)   Lodge or private club (which is of a non- commercial
character);



   (E)   Mortuary;



   (F)   Municipal or governmental building or use;



   (G)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (H)   Professional office;



   (I)   Educational institution;



   (J)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (K)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (L)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.42)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.068  MINIMUM AREA LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 6,500 square feet.



   (B)   Two-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet.



   (C)   Multi-family dwellings: 13,000 square feet for first three
units, plus 3,000 square feet for each unit thereafter.



   (D)   All other permitted uses: 3,000 square feet.



   (E)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.43)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.069  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 60 feet.



   (B)   Two-family dwellings: 70 feet.



   (C)   Multi-family dwellings: 100 feet.



   (D)   All other permitted uses: 100 feet.



   (E)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exceptions are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.44)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.070  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings. The front yard building line shall be
determined by utilizing the following formula or requirement.



      (1)   The building setback line shall be 25 feet from the
front lot line or 55 feet from the centerline of the street or road,
whichever is greater.



      (2)   Building lines or building setback lines established in
a recorded subdivision shall establish the dimension of front yards in such
subdivisions, except when such building setback lines may be less restrictive
as provided in § 150.319 of this chapter.



      (3)   On through lots, a front yard is required on each street.



      (4)   Open, unenclosed or screened porch (not a glass enclosed
porch or sun parlor) may project into front yard a maximum of ten feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings. The established building setback line
plus an additional 25 feet.



   (C)   Front yards. Minimum front yards for uses by special exception
are defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.45)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.071  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Principal and accessory buildings shall have a side yard of no
less than eight feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.46)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2005-5, passed
4-5-2005)



§ 150.072  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings shall have a rear yard of at least 20% of
the lot depth, but such yard need not exceed 40 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings shall have a minimum rear yard of ten feet.



   (C)   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.47)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.073  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 35 feet or two and one- half stories.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 18 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.48)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.074  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.



   Principal buildings shall have a minimum ground floor area of 800 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.49)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.075  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   All buildings including accessory buildings shall not cover more than
35% of the area of a lot.



(Prior Code, § 150.50)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




R-H HOMESTEAD DISTRICT




§ 150.090  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings;



   (B)   Public park and public recreational facility;



   (C)   Accessory buildings; except that, they may not be erected
prior to the erection of the principal buildings; and



   (D)   Accessory uses, as defined in § 150.323(E) of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.60)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.091  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following contingent uses may be permitted by special exception in
accordance with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through
150.279 of this chapter:



   (A)   Home occupation;



   (B)   Professional office; and



   (C)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.61)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.092  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 40,000 square feet.



   (B)   All other permitted uses: 40,000 square feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.62)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.093  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   All permitted uses: 100 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.63)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.094  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   All permitted uses: 40 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.64)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.095  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   All permitted uses: ten feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.65)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.096  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   All permitted uses: 30 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.66)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.097  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 35 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 18 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.67)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.098  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.



   Principal buildings shall have a minimum ground floor area of 800 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.68)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.099  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE.



   All buildings including accessory buildings shall not cover more than
35% of the area of a lot.



(Prior Code, § 150.69)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.110  USES PERMITTED.



   A local commercial is one which is primarily of a retail or service
nature and is specifically stated by not limited to the following categories
of use:



   (A)   Automobile service, including:



      (1)   Filling station;



      (2)   Public garage, but not including major repair or body
work; and



      (3)   Public parking area.



   (B)   Commercial service, including:



      (1)   Bank;



      (2)   Office building; and



      (3)   Postal station.



   (C)   Clothing service, including:



      (1)   Laundry agency;



      (2)   Self-service laundry;



      (3)   Dry-cleaning establishment using not more than two
clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rate capacity of more
than 60 pounds, using cleaning fluid which is non-explosive and non-
flammable;



      (4)   Dressmaking;



      (5)   Millinery;



      (6)   Tailor and pressing shop; and



      (7)   Shoe repair shop.



   (D)   Equipment service, including:



      (1)   Radio or television repair shop; and



      (2)   Electric appliance repair shop.



   (E)   Food service, including:



      (1)   Grocery;



      (2)   Meat market;



      (3)   Restaurant;



      (4)   Delicatessen;



      (5)   Cold storage lockers; and



      (6)   Bakery; provided, floor area used for production shall
not exceed 750 square feet.



   (F)   Personal service, including:



      (1)   Barber shop;



      (2)   Beauty shop;



      (3)   Reducing salon; and



      (4)   Photographic studio.



   (G)   Retail service, retail stores generally, including:



      (1)   Drugstore;



      (2)   Hardware or paint store; and



      (3)   News dealer.



   (H)   Commercial recreational uses, including:



      (1)   Tavern or nightclub, only in conformity with
requirements of laws or ordinances governing such use; and



      (2)   Sporting activities, including such uses as bowling
alleys, gymnasiums, ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools and other
similar uses.



   (I)   Private club or lodge; and



   (J)   Accessory building or use customarily incident to the above
uses which may not have more than 40% of its floor area devoted to storage
purposes; and, provided that, not more than five persons are employed at one
time or on any one shift in connection with such incidental use.



(Prior Code, § 150.80)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.111  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Church or temple;



   (B)   Commercial farm enterprise;



   (C)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (D)   Hospital;



   (E)   Nursing home;



   (F)   Nursing home conversion;



   (G)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (H)   Employee parking area;



   (I)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (J)   Residential development plan;



   (K)   Special school;



   (L)   Stadium or coliseum; and



   (M)   Tourist home.



(Prior Code, § 150.81)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.112  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following contingent uses may be permitted by special exception in
accordance with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through
150.279 of this chapter:



   (A)   Boarding or lodging house;



   (B)   College or university;



   (C)   Home occupation;



   (D)   Mortuary;



   (E)   Municipal or governmental building or use;



   (F)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (G)   Professional office;



   (H)   Educational institution;



   (I)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (J)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (K)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.82)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.113  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot area for permitted or contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.83)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.114  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot width for permitted for contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.84)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.115  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   All permitted and contingent uses: 25 feet from front lot line
or 55 feet from center of street, whichever is greater.



   (B)   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.85)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.116  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a commercial district: ten feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a residential district: 15 feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.86)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.117  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Minimum rear yard for all permitted or contingent uses: 20
feet.



   (B)   Minimum rear yards for uses by specific exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.87)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.118  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All permitted or contingent uses: 35 feet or two and one-half
stories.



   (B)   Maximum heights of buildings for uses by special exception are
defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.88)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.119  NOISE.



   Local commercial uses, § 150.110(B) through (J) of this chapter, shall
be conducted within buildings so constructed that no noise of any kind
produced therein shall be audible beyond the confines of the building.



(Prior Code, § 150.89)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.130  USES PERMITTED.



   A general commercial use including accessory buildings and uses
includes the uses, specifically stated but not limited to the following
categories of use:



   (A)   Automobile service, including:



      (1)   Filling station;



      (2)   Public garage, but not including major repair or body
work;



      (3)   Public parking area;



      (4)   Sales room;



      (5)   Open sales lot;



      (6)   Automobile, truck or trailer rental and sales area; and



      (7)   Automobile and truck repair, entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   (B)   Commercial service, including:



      (1)   Bank;



      (2)   Office building;



      (3)   Postal station;



      (4)   Telegraph office; and



      (5)   Utility company commercial office.



   (C)   Clothing service, including:



      (1)   Laundry agency;



      (2)   Self-service laundry;



      (3)   Dry-cleaning establishment using not more than two
clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rated capacity of more
than 60 pounds, using cleaning fluid which is non-explosive and non-
flammable;



      (4)   Dressmaking;



      (5)   Millinery;



      (6)   Tailor and pressing shop; and



      (7)   Shoe repair shop.



   (D)   Equipment service, including:



      (1)   Radio or television repair shop;



      (2)   Electric appliance repair shop; and



      (3)   Record shop.



   (E)   Food service, including:



      (1)   Grocery;



      (2)   Meat market;



      (3)   Supermarket;



      (4)   Restaurant;



      (5)   Delicatessen;



      (6)   Cold storage lockers;



      (7)   Bakery; provided, floor area used for production shall
not exceed 750 square feet; and



      (8)   Roadside sales stand.



   (F)   Personal service, including:



      (1)   Barber shop;



      (2)   Beauty shop;



      (3)   Reducing salon; and



      (4)   Photographic studio.



   (G)   Retail service, retail stores generally, including:



      (1)   Drugstore;



      (2)   Hardware or paint store;



      (3)   Stationer;



      (4)   News dealer;



      (5)   Show room and sales area for articles to be sold at
retail;



      (6)   Commercial greenhouse not exceeding 1,000 square feet in
area;



      (7)   Apparel shop;



      (8)   Flower shop;



      (9)   Antique shop;



      (10)   Shoe store;



      (11)   Variety store;



      (12)   Toy store;



      (13)   Jewelry store;



      (14)   Sporting goods store; and



      (15)   Department store.



   (H)   Commercial recreational uses, including:



      (1)   Billiard room;



      (2)   Dancing academy;



      (3)   Tavern or nightclub, only in conformity with
requirements of laws or ordinances governing such use;



      (4)   Sporting activities;



      (5)   Indoor theater; and



      (6)   Bowling alley or roller rink, entirely with enclosed
buildings.



   (I)   Private club or lodge;



   (J)   Motel/hotel;



   (K)   Other:



      (1)   Veterinary hospital for small animals;



      (2)   Kennel;



      (3)   Radio and television studios;



      (4)   Newspaper publishing;



      (5)   Motor bus or railroad passenger station;



      (6)   Storage warehouse;



      (7)   Wholesale establishment; and



      (8)   Any commercial use not specifically stated or implied
elsewhere in the chapter.



   (L)   Accessory building or use customarily incident to the above
uses which may not have more than 40% of its floor area devoted to storage
purposes; and, provided that, not more than five persons are employed at one
time or on any shift in connection with such incidental use.



(Prior Code, § 150.90)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.131  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Church or temple;



   (B)   Commercial farm enterprise;



   (C)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (D)   Heliport;



   (E)   Hospital;



   (F)   Nursing home;



   (G)   Nursing home conversion;



   (H)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (I)   Employee parking area;



   (J)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (K)   Residential development plan;



   (L)   Shopping center plan;



   (M)   Special school; and



   (N)   Stadium or coliseum.



(Prior Code, § 150.91)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.132  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the following contingent
uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance with the procedure
defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through 150.278 of this chapter:



   (A)   Boarding or lodging house;



   (B)   College or university;



   (C)   Mortuary;



   (D)   Municipal or governmental buildings or use;



   (E)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (F)   Professional office in residence;



   (G)   Educational institution;



   (H)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (I)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (J)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.92)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.133  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot area for permitted or contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.93)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.134  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot width for permitted or contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.94)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.135  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   All permitted and contingent uses: 25 feet from front lot line
or 55 feet from center of street whichever is greater.



   (B)   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.95)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.136  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a commercial district: ten feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a residential district: 15 feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.96)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.137  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Minimum rear yard for all permitted and contingent uses: 20
feet.



   (B)   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.97)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8, passed
11-2-1993)



§ 150.138  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All permitted or contingent uses: 100 feet.



   (B)   Maximum heights of buildings for uses by special exception are
defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.98)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.139  NOISE.



   General commercial uses, § 150.130(B) through (I), (K) and (L) of this
chapter, shall be conducted within buildings so constructed that no noise of
any kind produced therein shall be audible beyond the confines of the
building.



(Prior Code, § 150.99)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



C-3 ROADSIDE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.150  USES PERMITTED.



   A roadside commercial use is one which normally requires drive-in
facilities related to a street or highway, and is primarily of a retail or
service nature specifically stated but not limited to the following
categories of use:



   (A)   Automobile service, including:



      (1)   Filling station;



      (2)   Public garage, but not including major repair or body
work;



      (3)   Public parking area;



      (4)   Sales room;



      (5)   Open sales lot;



      (6)   Automobile, truck or trailer rental and sales area; and



      (7)   Automobile and truck repair, entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   (B)   Commercial service, including:



      (1)   Bank;



      (2)   Office building; and



      (3)   Postal station.



   (C)   Clothing service, including:



      (1)   Laundry agency;



      (2)   Self-service laundry; and



      (3)   Dry-cleaning establishment using not more than two
clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall have a rated capacity of more
than 60 pounds, using cleaning fluid which is non-explosive and non-
flammable.



   (D)   Equipment service, including:



      (1)   Radio or television repair shop;



      (2)   Electric appliance repair shop; and



      (3)   Record shop.



   (E)   Food service, including:



      (1)   Grocery;



      (2)   Meat market;



      (3)   Supermarket;



      (4)   Restaurant;



      (5)   Delicatessen;



      (6)   Cold storage lockers;



      (7)   Bakery; provided, floor area used for production shall
not exceed 750 square feet; and



      (8)   Roadside sales stand.



   (F)   Personal service, including:



      (1)   Barber shop;



      (2)   Beauty shop;



      (3)   Reducing salon; and



      (4)   Photographic studio.



   (G)   Retail service, retail stores generally, including:



      (1)   Drugstore;



      (2)   Hardware or paint store;



      (3)   Stationer;



      (4)   News dealer;



      (5)   Showroom and sales area for articles to be sold at
retail;



      (6)   Commercial greenhouse not exceeding 1,000 square feet in
area;



      (7)   Apparel shop;



      (8)   Flower shop;



      (9)   Antique shop;



      (10)   Shoe store;



      (11)   Variety store;



      (12)   Toy store;



      (13)   Jewelry store;



      (14)   Sporting goods store; and



      (15)   Department store.



   (H)   Commercial recreational uses, including:



      (1)   Billiard room;



      (2)   Dancing academy;



      (3)   Tavern or nightclub, only in conformity with
requirements of laws or ordinances governing the use;



      (4)   Sporting activities;



      (5)   Indoor theater; and



      (6)   Bowling alley or roller rink, entirely within enclosed
buildings.



   (I)   Private club or lodge;



   (J)   Motel/hotel;



   (K)   Other:



      (1)   Veterinary hospital for small animals;



      (2)   Kennel;



      (3)   Radio and television studios;



      (4)   Newspaper publishing; and



      (5)   Motor bus or railroad passenger station.



   (L)   Accessory building or use customarily incident to the above
uses which may not have more than 40% of its floor area devoted to storage
purposes; and, provided that, not more than five persons are employed at one
time or on any one shift in connection with the incidental use.



(Prior Code, § 150.100)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.151  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Church or temple;



   (B)   Commercial farm enterprise;



   (C)   Greenhouse, commercial;



   (D)   Hospital;



   (E)   Nursing home;



   (F)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery;



   (G)   Public sanitary landfill;



   (H)   Employee parking area;



   (I)   Radio or television transmission tower;



   (J)   Residential development plan;



   (K)   Shopping-center plan;



   (L)   Special school;



   (M)   Stadium or coliseum; and



   (N)   Tourist home.



(Prior Code, § 150.101)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.152  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the following contingent
uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance with the procedure
defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through 150.278 of this chapter:



   (A)   College or university;



   (B)   Mortuary;



   (C)   Municipal or governmental building or use;



   (D)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (E)   Professional office in residence;



   (F)   Educational institution;



   (G)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant;



   (H)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (I)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.102)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.153  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot area for permitted or contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.103)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.154  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   No minimum lot width for permitted or contingent uses.



   (B)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.104)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.155  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   All permitted and contingent uses: 25 feet from front lot
line, or 55 feet from center of street whichever is greater.



   (B)   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.105)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8,
passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.156  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a commercial district: ten feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yard for all permitted and contingent uses when
adjacent to a residential district: 15 feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.106)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8,
passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.157  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Minimum rear yard for all permitted or contingent uses: 20
feet.



   (B)   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.107)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8,
passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.158  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   All permitted or contingent uses: 35 feet.



   (B)   Maximum heights of buildings for uses by special exception are
defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.108)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.159  NOISE.



   Roadside commercial uses, § 150.150(B) through (I), (K) and (L) of
this chapter, shall be conducted within or about buildings so constructed
that no noise of any kind produced therein or thereabout shall be audible
beyond the confines of the premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.109)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 150.170  PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No activity involving the storage, utilization or manufacture
of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted
unless specifically approved by the City Council, and then only in the I-1 or
I-2 Districts. The activity shall be conducted in accordance with the rules
promulgated by the State Fire Marshal. The materials shall include, but are
not limited to, all primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates and tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and
picric acid; propellants and components thereof, such as nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and
fireworks such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate;
blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerin, unstable organic
compounds such as acetylides, tetraxoles and ozonides; strong oxidizing
agents such as liquid oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates and
hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%; and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products; and reactor elements such as uranium 235
and Plutonium 239.



   (B)   The restrictions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   The activities of site preparation or construction,
maintenance, repair, alteration, modification or improvement of buildings,
equipment or other improvements on or within the lot line;



      (2)   The operation of motor vehicles or other facilities for
the transportation of personnel, materials or products;



      (3)   Conditions beyond the control of the user such as fire,
explosion, accidents, failure or breakdown of equipment or facilities or
emergencies; and



      (4)   Safety or emergency warning signals or alarms necessary
for the protection of life, limb or property.



(Prior Code, § 150.120)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.171  USES PERMITTED AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Ch. 111 of the code of
ordinances, are uses which are permitted in an I-1 Industrial District. All
other uses within the I-1 Industrial District shall be allowed by special
exception only, which includes enclosed industrial uses and open industrial
uses, and such other uses as the Board shall deem acceptable.



(Prior Code, § 150.121) (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2012-2, passed
4-3-2012)



§ 150.172  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   There shall not be a minimum lot area for uses by special exception.



(Prior Code, § 150.122)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.173  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   There shall not be a minimum lot width for uses by special exception.



(Prior Code, § 150.123)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.174  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception shall be 25 feet from
the front lot line or 55 feet from center of street, whichever is greater.



(Prior Code, § 150.124)  (Ord. 1993-8, passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.175  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Minimum side yard for all uses by special exception when
adjacent to commercial district: ten feet.



   (B)   Minimum side yard for all uses by special exception when
adjacent to residential district:15 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.125)  (Ord. 1993-8, passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.176  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   Minimum rear yard for all uses by special exception shall be 20 feet.



(Prior Code, § 150.126)  (Ord. 1993-8, passed 11-2-1993)



§ 150.177  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   Maximum height of buildings for uses by special exception shall be 80
feet for both enclosed and open industrial uses.



(Prior Code, § 150.127)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.178  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Smoke.



      (1)   For enclosed industrial use, the emission of more than
70 smoke units per hour per stack and emissions in excess of Ringelmann No. 2
are prohibited; except that, for one hour during any 24-hour period, this
rate may be increased to 80 smoke units per hour per stack up to and
including Ringelmann No. 3, for the purposes of process purging, soot blowing
and fire cleaning.



      (2)   For open industrial use, the emission of more than 90
smoke units per hour per stack and emission in excess of Ringelmann No. 3 are
prohibited; except that, for a one-hour period during any 24-hour period,
this rate may be increased to 120 smoke units per hour per stack, still at
Ringelmann No. 3, for purposes of process purging, soot blowing and fire
cleaning.



   (B)   Particulate matter. The rate of emission of particulate matter
from an individual process within the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed
a figure of 0.06 pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for enclosed
industrial use, nor 0.2 pounds per 1,000 pounds of effluent gas for open
industrial use. For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use not more
than 50% by weight of particles larger than 44 microns (325 mesh) shall be
allowed.



   (C)   Odor. Any enclosed or open industrial activity or operation
which releases odors to the atmosphere shall be so controlled as to ensure
that it will produce no public nuisance or hazard at or beyond the nearest
residence or commercial district boundary line.



   (D)   Poisonous and injurious fumes and gases. The emission of toxic
or injurious fumes and gases shall be controlled so as to comply with the
following.



      (1)   The emission from any source shall not cause, at or
beyond any lot line, concentrations of toxic and injurious fumes and gases in
excess of 10% for an enclosed industrial use, and 25% for an open industrial
use, of the threshold limit as set for the fume or gas in question in the
Threshold Limit Values for Toxic Materials in Industry issued by the State
Department of Health, from the American Conference of Governmental
Hygienists, latest issue.



      (2)   The emission of any gas or fumes across lot lines in
such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger public health,
safety, comfort and welfare, or cause injury or damage to property or
commercial use, is prohibited.



   (E)   Glare and heat. No enclosed or open industrial operation,
activity or structure shall cause heat or glare in such a manner as to be a
public nuisance at or beyond any residence or commercial district boundary.



   (F)   Vibration.



      (1)   Any enclosed or open industrial use creating intense
earthshaking vibrations such as are created by a heavy drop forge shall be
set back from a residence district boundary at least 250 feet, or at least
150 feet from a commercial district boundary.



      (2)   Earthshaking vibrations at the industrial property line
shall not be in violation of this chapter as long as the vibration is not
perceptible without the aid of instruments.



   (G)   Noise. At no point 125 feet from the boundary of an I-1 or I-2
District, or any district which permits enclosed industrial use, shall the
sound pressure level of any operation or plant (other than background noises
produced by sources not under the control of this chapter) exceed the decibel
limits in the octave bands designated below:



 


Maximum Permitted Sound Level* (in Decibels) 125 Feet from Octave Band
Frequency* (Cycles per Second)

 

Maximum Permitted Sound Level* (In Decibels) 125 Feet From




District Adjoining Residence District Boundaries

 

District Adjoining Commercial District Boundaries




Enclosed Use

 

Open Use

 

Enclosed Use

 

Open Use






0 to 75

 

75

 

75

 

80

 

81




75 to 150

 

70

 

70

 

75

 

76




150 to 300

 

65

 

66

 

70

 

72




300 to 600

 

59

 

62

 

64

 

68




600 to 1,200

 

53

 

57

 

58

 

63




1,200 to 2,400

 

48

 

53

 

53

 

59




2,400 to 4,800

 

48

 

49

 

49

 

55




Above 4,800

 

41

 

45

 

46

 

51



NOTES TO TABLE:

*Sound levels shall be measured with a sound-level meter and associated
octave band analyzer or filter, manufactured in compliance with standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association.




 



   (H)   Fire hazards. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid
materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted. The storage, utilization or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted;
provided, the following conditions are met.



      (1)   For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use, the
materials shall be stored, utilized or manufactured in such a manner and
protected by such means as approved by the State Fire Marshal.



      (2)   For enclosed industrial use and open industrial use, the
storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable liquids or gases which
produce flammable or explosive vapors shall be permitted in accordance with
the following table (exclusive of storage of finished products in original
sealed containers). Distances shown are to nearest adjoining property lines
which may be built upon:



 


Flammable Liquid Storage




Capacity of Tank (Gallons)

 

Class of Flammable Liquid*

 

Distance (Feet)






0 to 275

 

III

 

0




276 to 750

 

III

 

5




0 to 750

 

I, II

 

10




751 to 12,000

 

III

 

10




751 to 12,000

 

I, II

 

15




12,001 to 24,000

 

I, II, III

 

15




24,001 to 30,000

 

I, II, III

 

20




30,001 to 50,000

 

I, II, III

 

25



NOTES TO TABLE:

Tanks in excess of 50,000 gallons, and those for storage of crude petroleum,
shall be at a distance of 3 times the greatest dimension of the diameter or
height of tank; except that, distance shall not be less than 20 feet and need
not exceed 350 feet.

* When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet (at STP) permitted shall not exceed
300 times the quantities listed in the table below:

*NFPA Classes of flammable liquids


Class I flash point below 20°F



Class II flash point below 70°F



Class III flash point above 70°F





 



   (I)   Water and stream pollution. The disposal of washes discharged
into public streams and sewage systems shall meet the requirements of the
Stream and Pollution Control Law of the state (Ch. 214, Acts of 1943, as
amended).



(Prior Code, § 150.128)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)  Penalty, see §
150.999



I-2 INDUSTRIAL EXPANSION DISTRICT



§ 150.190  PROVISIONS.



   The provision requirements described in § 150.170 of this chapter
shall apply to this zone district.



(Prior Code, § 150.130)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.191 USES PERMITTED AND USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Ch. 111 of this code of
ordinances, are uses which are permitted in an I-2 Industrial Expansion
District. All other uses within an I-2 Industrial Expansion District shall be
allowed by special exception only, which includes enclosed industrial uses
and open industrial uses, and such other uses as the Board shall deem
acceptable.



(Prior Code, § 150.131)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2012-2,
passed 4-3-2012)



§ 150.192  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   Minimum lot area for users by special exception shall be approved by
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.132)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.193  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   Minimum lot width for uses by special exception shall be approved by
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.133)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.194  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception shall be approved by
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.134)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.195  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception shall be approved by
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.135)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.196  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception shall be approved by
the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.136)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.197  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   Maximum height of buildings for uses by special exception shall be
approved by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.130)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.198  STANDARDS.



   The standards required of enclosed industrial uses in this zone
district shall be the same as those described in § 150.178 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.138)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




A - AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT




§ 150.210  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings;



   (B)   Dwellings for tenants employed on the farm;



   (C)   Public parks and playgrounds and other community recreation
uses, libraries and museums;



   (D)   Accessory buildings;



   (E)   Accessory uses, as defined in § 150.178(E) of this chapter;



   (F)   Stands for the retail sale of agricultural products or
commodities raised on the premises;



   (G)   Normal farm operations, including all operations necessary to
the planting and harvesting of crops and the conduct of agriculture, as
defined in this chapter;



   (H)   (1)   Minor livestock operations on tracts of five acres or
more with no more than the following numbers of livestock per acre:



         (a)   Twenty finishing hogs;



         (b)   Five sows;



         (c)   Three cows;



         (d)   Forty-five nursery pigs;



         (e)   Five feeder cattle;



         (f)   Six heifers;



         (g)   Three hundred turkeys;



         (h)   Four hundred fifty laying hens; or



         (i)   Seven hundred broilers.



      (2)   Minor livestock operations, hobbies or enterprises on
tracts of less than five acres shall not exceed the limits per acre as
hereinabove set forth.



   (I)   Intensive livestock operation.



      (1)   An intensive livestock operation shall be defined for
purposes of this chapter as a livestock operation or an extension of an
existing livestock operation exceeding the per acre limits as set forth in
division (H) above, or anyone operation or location regardless of acreage on
which are livestock unit numbers exceeding 400 hogs, 200 cattle or 20,000
poultry. If there are more than one kind or species of animals, the number of
animals in the operation shall be divided by 400 in the case of hogs, 200 in
the case of cattle and 20,000 in the case of poultry, and if the resulting
percentages equal or exceed 100, then the operation is an intensive livestock
operation as defined herein and, as such, shall be prohibited. No intensive
livestock operation shall be permitted, in this or any other district.



      (2)   All facilities located at one site are to be considered
as components of one intensive livestock operation.



(Prior Code, § 150.140)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.211  USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following uses may be permitted by special exception in accordance
with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.263 of this chapter:



   (A)   Airport or heliport;



   (B)   Artificial lake of three or more acres;



   (C)   Cemetery;



   (D)   Church or temple;



   (E)   Greenhouse, commercial; and



   (F)   Public sanitary landfill.



(Prior Code, § 150.141)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.212  CONTINGENT USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following contingent uses may be permitted by special exception in
accordance with the procedure defined in §§ 150.261 and 150.275 through
150.278 of this chapter:



   (A)   Home occupations;



   (B)   Power substation or telephone exchange;



   (C)   Educational institution;



   (D)   Sewage treatment or disposal plants;



   (E)   Water treatment or distribution plant; and



   (F)   Temporary sign, pertaining to lease, hire or sale of a
building or premises.



(Prior Code, § 150.142)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.213  MINIMUM AREA OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet.



   (B)   All other permitted uses: 20,000 square feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot areas for uses by special exception are defined in
§ 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.143)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.214  MINIMUM WIDTH OF LOT.



   (A)   Single-family dwellings: 70 feet.



   (B)   All other permitted uses: 120 feet.



   (C)   Minimum lot widths for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.144)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.215  MINIMUM FRONT YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 70 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 70 feet.



   (C)   Minimum front yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.145)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.216  MINIMUM SIDE YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: ten feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: ten feet.



   (C)   Minimum side yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.146)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.217  MINIMUM REAR YARD.



   (A)   Principal buildings: not less than 25% of the depth of the lot.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: not less than 25% of the depth of the lot.



   (C)   Minimum rear yards for uses by special exception are defined
in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.147)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.218  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Principal buildings: 35 feet.



   (B)   Accessory buildings: 70 feet.



   (C)   Maximum heights of buildings for uses by special exception are
defined in § 150.263 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.148)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




PUD - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT




§ 150.230  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the planned unit development option is to
encourage flexibility in the development of land in order to promote its most
appropriate use, improve design, character and quality, facilitate the
adequate and economical provision of streets, roads and utilities, and
preserve the natural and scenic features of open areas.



   (B)   If the tract or parcel of land proposed for development is for
single-family residential use, then the planned unit development shall not be
used as a substitute for or to circumvent Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 150.160)



§ 150.231  USES PERMITTED.



   (A)   Uses permitted by right, contingent uses, and uses by special
exception in the zoning district in which the proposed PUD is located.



   (B)   Uses permitted by right, contingent uses and uses by special
exception in the RS, R-1, R-2, B-1, B-2, B-3 and I-2 Districts subject to the
approval of the Plan Commission and the City Common Council, and the
standards contained in this section.



(Prior Code, § 150.161)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.232  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.



   A planned unit development may include variations in lot area, lot
width, yard and building height requirements, and off-street parking
provisions; provided, the following features exist:



   (A)   The tract or parcel of land involved is either in one
ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all
property included;



   (B)   The development includes open space for the mutual benefit of
the entire tract;



   (C)   The project is designed to provide a variety and diversity of
uses, or the tract or parcel of land is of a unique character either in size
or location;



   (D)   The project is in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood;
and



   (E)   The total density of the planned unit development does not
exceed by more than 33% the normal requirements of the zoning district
allowing similar uses.



(Prior Code, § 150.162)  (Ord. 2001-12, passed 3-20-2001)



§ 150.233  PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.



   A proposal for a planned unit development shall be submitted consistent
with the procedures and requirements of §§ 150.234 and 150.245 of this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.163)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.234  SKETCH PLAN SUBMITTAL.



   An applicant shall make application for the approval of a planned unit
development first by submitting a sketch plan for the planned unit
development to the City Plan Commission. The sketch plan shall include both
maps and a written statement and shall show enough of the area surrounding
the proposed planned unit development to indicate the relationship of the
planned unit development to adjacent uses, both existing and proposed.



(Prior Code, § 150.164)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.235  ACTION BY PLAN COMMISSION.



   The Plan Commission shall review the sketch plan, and inform the
applicant of any special and additional information which will be required
under the preliminary development plan stage. The presentation of the sketch
plan should be considered a preapplication conference with the Plan
Commission. The Commission shall take formal action on any recommendations to
the applicant.



(Prior Code, § 150.165)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.236  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPLICATION.



   The applicant, after submitting the sketch plan to the Plan Commission
and receiving the Commission’s recommendations, shall submit to the Plan
Commission the required information for a preliminary development plan. The
maps and written documents shall include all information as provided in this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.166)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.237  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; MAPS.



   The maps which shall be a part of the preliminary development plan may
be in a general schematic form, but should contain the following minimum
information:



   (A)   The existing topographic character of the land;



   (B)   Existing land uses and zoning districts;



   (C)   Proposed land uses and the approximate location of buildings
and other structures;



   (D)   The density and type of dwellings to be included in the
planned unit development project;



   (E)   An approximate indication of the circulation and parking
systems; and



   (F)   Probable locations for common open space, parks and
playgrounds.



(Prior Code, § 150.167)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.238  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; WRITTEN STATEMENT.



   The written statement to accompany the preliminary development plan
should contain the following information:



   (A)   An explanation of the proposed character of the planned unit
development and of the manner in which it has been designed;



   (B)   A statement of the present ownership of all the land included
within the planned unit development;



   (C)   The expected schedule of completion; and



   (D)   Utility information, especially concerning water supply and
distribution and sewage collection and treatment.



(Prior Code, § 150.168)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.239  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; REPORT BY PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall prepare a written report
recommending that the plan be approved, disapproved or approved with
modifications.



   (B)   In its report, the Plan Commission shall give the reasons for
its recommendations and shall indicate the extent to which the planned unit
development complies with each of the standards governing the approval of
planned unit development.



(Prior Code, § 150.169)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.240  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; ACTION BY THE COMMON COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall forward a summary of the proposed
plan, with copies of its report to the City Common Council.



   (B)   After providing notice in accordance with §§ 63, 64 and 37
to 42, inclusive, of Ch. 174 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 1947, the
Common Council shall hold a public hearing and shall review the plan and
report, and shall either approve or disapprove the plan as presented, or
approve the preliminary development plan with modifications.



(Prior Code, § 150.170)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.241  ZONE MAP NOTATION.



   If the preliminary development is approved, the Common Council shall
authorize a notation on the appropriate zone map to indicate that a
preliminary development plan has been approved for the area included in the
planned unit development. If the preliminary development plan is approved
with modification, the Common Council shall not authorize a notation on the
zone map until the applicant has filed with the Council a written consent to
the plan as modified.



(Prior Code, § 150.171)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.242  PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN; NO IMPROVEMENT LOCATION  PERMIT.



   No improvement location permit may be issued by the Building Inspector
on land within the proposed planned unit development until final plans for
the development have been approved by the Plan Commission under the
procedures provided in the following sections.



(Prior Code, § 150.172)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.243  FAILURE TO APPLY FOR FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; REVERSION.



   If the applicant fails to apply for final development plan approval for
any reason, the preliminary development plan approval shall be deemed to be
revoked, and all that portion of the area in the development plan for which
final approval has not been given shall be subject to the zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable thereto.



(Prior Code, § 150.173)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.244  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPLICATION.



   The applicant shall submit a final development plan to the Plan
Commission within 24 months following the approval of the preliminary
development plan for the Common Council. Failure to submit the final
development plan within this time, or to arrange an extension through the
Plan Commission, shall be grounds for reversion as described in § 150.243 of
this chapter. If the final development plan includes the filing of a plat,
the information required for a final plat, as described in Ch. 154 of this
code of ordinances, must be followed.



(Prior Code, § 150.174)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.245  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED.



   The final development plan shall include all of the following
information:



   (A)   A map showing the circulation system, off-street parking area,
loading areas and major points of access;



   (B)   A comprehensive plan for all utility services, including storm
drainage;



   (C)   Areas, if any, which are proposed to be conveyed, dedicated or
reserved for common open space, parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites,
public buildings and similar public and semipublic uses;



   (D)   A site plan showing the location of all buildings, structures
and improvements, and indicating the parking, loading and open areas around
buildings and structures. The site plan shall be in sufficient detail to
enable the Plan Commission to evaluate the architectural, landscaping and
design features of the planned unit development. At its discretion, the Plan
Commission may require preliminary elevation and perspective drawings of
proposed structures and improvements;



   (E)   A development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction of the total project or stages of the project can be expected to
begin and to be completed. This shall include a written statement of how the
project improvements shall be financed by the applicant;



   (F)   Agreements, provision or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development and any
of its common open spaces, including an agreement binding successors who may
take over completion of a project to conditions of the final development plan
as approved by the Plan Commission;



   (G)   An economic feasibility report or market analysis; and



   (H)   Any other information which the Plan Commission determines to
be needed because of any topographic, circulation, traffic, design, siting or
other special problem of the proposed planned unit development.



(Prior Code, § 150.175)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.246  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; ACTION BY PLAN COMMISSION.



   After submittal by the applicant of the final development plan, the
Plan Commission shall approve the final development plan if it is in
substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan, and if it
conforms to all other standards applicable to planned unit developments,
whether or not considered when the preliminary development plan was approved.



(Prior Code, § 150.176)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.247  SPECIAL PROCEDURE FOR DEVELOPMENT BY STAGES.



   The Common Council and the Plan Commission may approve the development
of the PUD in stages, under the following special procedure.



   (A)   Approval of preliminary development plan. Prior to issuance of
an improvement location permit, the applicant shall obtain approval by the
Plan Commission and the Common Council of a preliminary development plan,
subject to the provisions of §§ 150.236 through 150.243 of this chapter.



   (B)   Approval of staged development plans.



      (1)   In addition, prior to issuance of any improvement
location permit in any area of the PUD, the applicant shall obtain approval
by the Plan Commission and Common Council of a staged development plan for
that area of the PUD.



      (2)   Each staged development plan shall be inclusive of the
whole area scheduled for development in that stage and shall meet the
specifications of §§ 150.245 and 150.246 of this chapter for a final
development plan for that area.



(Prior Code, § 150.177)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.248  CONFORMANCE WITH SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever there shall be in effect a city subdivision control
ordinance, the area proposed as a PUD shall be subject to the requirements
for review and approval under that ordinance.



   (B)   The subdivision review procedures may be carried out
concurrently with preliminary and final staged review of the PUD as outlined
in this section.



(Prior Code, § 150.178)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.249  CONSISTENCY WITH THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   No planned unit development shall be approved unless the final
development plan is found to be consistent with current goals and objectives
and the long-range objectives of the city’s master plan and environs.



(Prior Code, § 150.179)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




SPECIAL EXCEPTION; PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS




§ 150.260  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Special exceptions are uses publicly operated, those uses
traditionally affected with a public interest and those uses entirely private
in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may give
rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring
property and public facilities. A special exception may be authorized by the
Board of Zoning Appeals for certain uses, as defined in this chapter, in
conformance with requirements and procedures set forth herein. A special
exception is required for uses of such an unusual nature that their operation
may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property and public facilities.



   (B)   Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this
chapter, the special exceptions listed in each district, and their accessory
buildings and uses, may be permitted by the Board in that district in
accordance with the procedure and the requirements set forth in this section.



(Prior Code, § 150.190)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.261  REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an improvement location
permit for a special exception by the Building Inspector, it shall be
referred to the Board. A copy of each application shall be referred
concurrently to the Commission. The application shall be prepared in the same
manner and form as all other applications for improvement location permits.
The application shall be accompanied by a written statement showing that the
conditions and requirements of Ch. 153 of this code of ordinances have been
or will be met, and providing such other information showing that the
proposed special exception will be in compliance with all applicable
conditions and requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board shall then proceed with a hearing which shall be
held within 45 days from the date of filing of the application for a special
exception. The Board shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the
date set for the hearing, setting forth the time and place of the hearing and
giving due notice to the interested parties in accordance with the rules of
the Board.



   (C)   Upon the hearing, if the Board finds that the conditions
listed below exist, the Board shall direct the Building Inspector to issue
the improvement location permit for the special exception, otherwise the
Board shall direct the Building Inspector to reject the application. The
findings of the Board and its order to the Building Inspector shall be in
writing.



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
special exception will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals or general welfare.



      (2)   The special exception will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property value
within the neighborhood.



      (3)   The establishment of the special exception will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district.



      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided.



      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide
ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the
public streets.



      (6)   The special exception will be located in a district
where such use is permitted and where all other requirements set forth in §
150.263 of this chapter applicable to the special exception will be met.



   (D)   An existing use which is listed herein as a special exception,
and which is located in a district in which the special exception may be
permitted, is a conforming use. Any expansion of the special exception
involving the enlargement of buildings, structures and land area devoted to
the use shall be subject to the requirements and procedure described in this
section.



   (E)   Any person to whom is issued an improvement location permit
for a special exception who fails to commence construction within 12 months
after the permit is issued, who fails, after commencing construction within
such period, to carry to completion the total development plan thereof within
three years after the construction is begun, or who fails to conform to the
provisions of the development plan and supporting data finally approved by
the Board and upon the basis of which such improvement location permit was
issued, may be required by the Board upon its own motion, and shall be
required by the Board upon written petition of any person deeming himself or
herself aggrieved, to show cause why the approval should not be withdrawn and
the improvement location permit revoked.



   (F)   The holder of an improvement location permit for a special
exception may apply to the Board at any time for an alteration, change,
amendment, extension of the application or development plan upon which the
permit was based.



      (1)   Upon receipt of the application, the Board shall proceed
as in the case of original applications for an improvement location permit
for a special exception.



      (2)   In the event the Board shall approve and order the
application or development plan changed, altered, amended or extended, it
shall so notify the Building Inspector, who shall issue an amended
improvement location permit.



   (G)   A residential development plan may be permitted by the Board
as a special exception, and subject to compliance with the following
requirements and procedure in accordance with this section.



      (1)   The buildings proposed shall be used primarily for
single-family or two-family dwellings, apartments or group houses, and the
usual accessory uses such as garages, storage spaces and community
activities, and only a small commercial area, composed of service stores, may
be included.



      (2)   The area of the tract, excluding street area, but
including the area to be devoted to parks, parkways and other open spaces,
will provide the minimum lot area per family, counting all families to be
housed under the residential development plan which is required for the
district in which the development is to be located.



(Prior Code, § 150.191)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.262  SHOPPING CENTER PLAN, REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.



   A shopping center plan may be permitted by the Board as a special
exception, and subject to compliance with the following requirements and
procedure in accordance with §§ 150.260 through 150.264 of this chapter.



   (A)   The local commercial uses in §§ 150.110 through 150.119 of
this chapter, and also bowling alleys or roller rinks, and department stores,
are permitted on the tract of land proposed for a shopping center; provided
that, the proposed plan includes at least four separate types of commercial
uses as are specifically classified or implied in the local commercial use
categories in §§ 150.110 through 150.119 of this chapter; and, provided
further that, not more than one of these shall be an automobile service,
other than a public parking area, as set forth in §§ 150.110 through
150.119 of this chapter.



   (B)   The tract of land proposed for a shopping center plan shall be
of an area of not less than five acres, and the average length of the tract
shall be not greater than one and one-half times the average width.



   (C)   The Board may order a permit issued for a shopping center plan
in accordance with the procedure and provisions of this chapter and upon an
affirmative finding by the Board that the following requirements have been
met by the owners or developers of the tract of land proposed for a shopping
center plan.



      (1)   Traffic study.



         (a)   To include a comparative analysis of present
capacity of streets adjacent to the proposed center and potential capacity
volumes, taking into consideration the effect the proposed center will have
upon engendering additional traffic; and



         (b)   To include a circulation plan for all streets
(existing and proposed) which show recommendations for controlling,
signalizing, channelizing, storing and warning traffic.



      (2)   Development plan. To include the following additional
requirements:



         (a)   A plan of landscape development which shall
include, among other considerations, an area of at least ten feet in width
along all streets, with the exception of approved entrances, which border the
proposed center, to be planted and maintained with trees and shrubbery to
serve as a screen for the parking area;



         (b)   A planting screen, consisting of suitable
shrubbery, maintained at a six-foot height by six-foot width, to be planted
wherever the proposed center would abut residential use;



         (c)   Provision for one off-street parking space (at
least 270 square feet in area) per 60 square feet of sales area in the center;



         (d)   In order to create a greenbelt, no buildings or
paved areas (other than access drives) may be located closer than 50 feet to
any area used or zoned for residential purposes; and such greenbelt shall be
maintained as lawn together with appropriate landscape development and screen
planting hereinbefore specified; and



         (e)   An adequate number and proper arrangement of
loading and unloading berths shall be shown in the development plan and
provided by the developer.



      (3)   Other authority approval. Any other authority approval
required when applicable, such as the State Department of Health or State
Highway Department, shall accompany the application.



      (4)   Outdoor signs and lighting. The location, effect and
arrangement of all outdoor advertising signs proposed to be erected shall be
subject to the approval of the Board.



      (5)   Architectural control. Architectural plans of the
building and structures proposed to be constructed shall be subject to the
approval of the Board. The Board’s approval shall be based on the
architectural plans creating a unified design which will be in character and
in proper relationship to the surrounding areas.



(Prior Code, § 150.192)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.263  SPECIAL EXCEPTION REQUIREMENTS.



   All uses listed in this section shall be subject to the minimum
requirements in the district in which they are allowed; except that, any
requirement listed for each use in this section shall be a minimum
requirement for that use.



   (A)   Airport.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 80 acres.



      (2)   Minimum number of parking spaces: one per employee, plus
one per three seats in waiting room.



      (3)   A development plan shall be submitted with the
application.



      (4)   Minimum building height as required by appropriate
federal agency, but not to exceed 70 feet.



   (B)   Heliport.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: one acre.



      (2)   Use to be not closer than 200 feet to a residential use.



      (3)   A fence of four-foot wire mesh shall be erected abutting
any residential use.



      (4)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
employee, plus one per three seats in waiting room.



      (5)   A development plan shall be submitted with the
application.



      (6)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (C)   Artificial lake of three or more acres.



      (1)   A six-foot wire mesh fence shall be erected where
accessible to the public.



      (2)   A development plan shall be submitted with the
application.



   (D)   Cemetery.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 40 acres.



      (2)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with
application.



      (3)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (4)   A development plan is to be submitted with the
application.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (E)   Church or temple.



      (1)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as
determined by the Board. The determination shall be based upon the expected
number of parking spaces the particular type of use would require to satisfy
estimated peak parking load requirements.



      (2)   A development plan is to be submitted with the
application.



   (F)   Commercial farm enterprise.



      (1)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: as
determined by the Board. The determination shall be based upon the expected
number of parking spaces the particular type of use would require to satisfy
estimated peak parking load requirements.



      (2)   A development plan is to be submitted with the
application.



   (G)   Country club or golf course.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 80 acres.



      (2)   A four-foot wire mesh fence must abut any residential
use.



      (3)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: 30.



      (4)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (H)   Greenhouse, commercial.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum front yard: 60 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard: 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (5)   Building setback from a centerline of interior road: 40
feet.



      (6)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
three employees, plus one per 125 square feet of sales area.



   (I)   Hospital.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: five acres.



      (2)   Minimum front yard: 60 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard: 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (5)   A plan of landscape development is to be submitted with
the application.



      (6)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (7)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
four beds, plus one per doctor, plus one per three employees, plus one per
hospital vehicle.



      (8)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (9)   Maximum height of building: 70 feet.



   (J)   Mobile home park.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: two acres including 2,500 square feet
per mobile home stand.



      (2)   Minimum front yard: 60 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard: 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (5)   A plan of landscape development is to be submitted with
the application.



      (6)   A screen planting at least six feet in height and six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (7)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per two
employees, plus one per mobile home stand.



      (8)   A development plan must be submitted.



      (9)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (K)   Nursing home.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet, but not less than
1,500 square feet per person cared for.



      (2)   Minimum side yard: ten feet.



      (3)   Building setback from centerline of interior road: 40
feet.



      (4)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with the
application.



      (5)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (6)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
five patients, plus one per each staff member or supervisor doctor, plus one
per each three employees.



      (7)   A development plan to be submitted with the application.



   (L)   Nursing home conversion. Requirements are the same as for
nursing homes (division (K) above), except: minimum lot area: 2,500 square
feet, but not less than 750 square feet per person cared for.



   (M)   Outdoor commercial enterprise, recrea- tional.



      (1)   Minimum side yards: 40 feet.



      (2)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (3)   Building setback from centerline of interior road: 40
feet.



      (4)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with the
application.



      (5)   A six-foot wire mesh fence must be erected where use is
accessible to the public.



      (6)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (7)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
three employees, plus one per 500 square feet of use area.



      (8)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (9)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (N)   Outdoor theater.



      (1)   Minimum front yard, abutting residential: 100 feet;
abutting other use: 100 feet.



      (2)   Minimum side yard, abutting residential: 75 feet;
abutting other use: 30 feet.



      (3)   Minimum rear yard, abutting residential: 40 feet;
abutting other use: 20 feet.



      (4)   A four-foot wire mesh must abut any residential use.



      (5)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (6)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (O)   Private recreational development.



      (1)   Minimum side yard: 40 feet.



      (2)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (3)   A plan of landscape development is to be submitted with
the application.



      (4)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (P)   Private school, including kindergarten or day nursery.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum side yard: ten feet.



      (3)   A four-foot wire mesh fence around the play area.



      (4)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per two
employees, plus one per five children to be accommodated.



      (5)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (6)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (Q)   Produce terminal wholesale or truck freight terminal.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: six acres.



      (2)   Minimum front yard, abutting residential: 100 feet;
abutting other use: 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard, abutting residential: 75 feet;
abutting other use: 40 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard, abutting residential: 40 feet;
abutting other use: 20 feet.



      (5)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with the
application.



      (6)   A six-foot wire mesh fence will be required where there
is public accessibility.



      (7)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (8)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per two
employees on largest shift.



      (9)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (10)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (R)   Professional office.



      (1)   Minimum side yard: ten feet.



      (2)   Building setback from the centerline of any interior
road: 40 feet.



      (3)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with the
application.



      (4)   A screen planting at least six feet in height by six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (5)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



      (6)   Maximum height of structure: 45 feet.



   (S)   Public camp.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: five acres.



      (2)   Minimum front yard, abutting residential: 100 feet;
abutting other use: 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard, abutting residential: 75 feet;
abutting other use: 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard, abutting residential: 40 feet;
abutting other use: 20 feet.



      (5)   Uses permitted not closer than 200 feet to a residential
use.



      (6)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (7)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (T)   Public sanitary fill. A four-foot wire mesh fence will be
required abutting any residential use.



   (U)   Employee parking area.



      (1)   A four-foot wire mesh fence around the parking area.



      (2)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



      (4)   No sales, dead storage, repair work or dismantling on
the lot.



   (V)   Public park or public recreational facility.



      (1)   A plan of landscape development must be submitted with
the application.



      (2)   A development plan to be submitted with the application.



      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (W)   Radio or television transmission tower.



      (1)   Use permitted not closer than 200 feet to a residential
use.



      (2)   A development plan to be submitted with the application.



      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



      (4)   Maximum height of buildings as required by the
appropriate federal or state agency.



   (X)   Residential development plan.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet.



      (2)   A plan of landscape development to be submitted with
application.



      (3)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



   (Y)   Residential unit, cottage, hunting or fishing lodge. A
development plan must be submitted with the application.



   (Z)   Special school.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum side yard: ten feet.



      (3)   Erection of a four-foot wire mesh fence around the play
area.



      (4)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
three employees, plus one per six students.



   (AA)   Stadium or coliseum.



      (1)   Minimum lot area: five acres.



      (2)   Minimum front yard: 60 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard: 30 feet.



      (4)   Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.



      (5)   A plan of landscape development is to be submitted with
application.



      (6)   A screen planting at least six feet in height and six
feet in width where abutting residential use, which must be tight screen,
effective at all times.



      (7)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: three per
four employees, plus one per four seats.



      (8)   A development plan must be submitted with the
application.



      (9)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



   (BB)   Tourist home.



      (1)   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces: one per
employee, plus one per sleeping accommodation.



      (2)   Outdoor advertising signs and outdoor artificial
lighting shall be approved by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.193)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.264  REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   In the district in which mobile home parks are permitted, the following
minimum requirements shall apply.



   (A)   The minimum area of a mobile home park shall be five acres.



   (B)   No mobile home site shall be rented in any park, except for
periods of 30 days or longer.



   (C)   No mobile home shall be nearer than 50 feet to the
right-of-way line of any thoroughfare.



   (D)   A dense green belt of evergreen trees and shrubs, not less
than six feet high after one full growing season, and which at maturity is
not less than 12 feet high, shall be located and effectively maintained at
all times along all park boundary lines, except at established entrances and
exits serving the park.



   (E)   Each park shall provide a recreational area or areas equal in
size to at least 8% of the area of the park. Streets, parking areas and park
service facility areas shall not be included in the required recreational
area.



   (F)   Coin-operated laundries, laundry and dry cleaning pick up
stations and other commercial convenience establishments may be permitted in
mobile home parks; provided:



      (1)   They are subordinate to the residential character of the
park;



      (2)   They are located, designed and intended to serve only
the needs of persons living in the park;



      (3)   The establishments and the parking areas related to
their use shall not occupy more than 10% of the total area of the park; and



      (4)   The establishments shall present no visible evidence of
their commercial nature to areas outside the park.



   (G)   Each park shall provide either one central waterproof
structure available to all mobile home sites or a single waterproof structure
for each mobile home site, suitable for storage of goods and the usual
effects of persons occupying the park.



   (H)   All exterior park lights shall be so located and shielded as
to prevent direct illumination of any areas outside the park.



   (I)   Mobile home sites shall be a minimum of 4,500 square feet in
area.



   (J)   Each mobile home site shall have a minimum width of 45 feet
and a minimum depth of 100 feet.



   (K)   The minimum distance between a mobile home and another mobile
home or structure shall be ten feet. Each mobile home shall be located at
least ten feet from the green belt.



   (L)   Each mobile home site shall be provided with a stand
consisting of either a solid concrete slab or two concrete ribbons of a
thickness and size adequate to support the maximum anticipated loads during
all seasons. When concrete ribbons are used, the area between the ribbons
shall be filled with a layer of crushed rock. An anchor system shall be
provided in connection with the placement of each mobile home. The minimum
thickness of the concrete slab or ribbon shall be six inches.



   (M)   All improvements within the mobile home park shall conform to
the standards delineated in Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 150.194)




CONTINGENT USE REQUIREMENTS




§ 150.275  WHERE PERMITTED.



   Contingent uses defined herein, including accessory buildings and uses,
are permitted as indicated in district requirements.



(Prior Code, § 150.200)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.276  “CONTINGENT USE” DEFINED.



   A CONTINGENT USE is one which is likely or liable, but not certain, to
occur and which is not inappropriate to the principal uses of the district in
which it may be located. When so located, it shall conform to the
requirements of the district in which the contingent use is permitted; except
that, the number of parking spaces to be provided shall conform to the
requirements of § 150.277 of this chapter. The required number of parking
spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the use, or as a special
exception within 300 feet thereof. Contingent uses are permissible only after
approval of the Board and shall be allowed only after the review procedure
for a special exception has been pursued and completed.



(Prior Code, § 150.201)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.277  PARKING SPACES REQUIRED BY USE.



   (A)   Boarding or lodging house: one for each three occupants.



   (B)   College or university: one for each three students and staff.



   (C)   Home occupation: one additional.



   (D)   Lodge or private club (which is of a non- commercial
character): one for each 125 square feet floor area of building.



   (E)   Mortuary: one for each six seats.



   (F)   Municipal or governmental building or use: one for each 125
square feet floor area of building.



   (G)   Power substation or telephone exchange: one per two employees
or combined employment of the two largest successive shifts.



   (H)   Public utility installation terminal facility: one per two
employees or combined employment of the two largest successive shifts.



   (I)   Professional office in residence: two additional.



   (J)   Educational institution: one for each three members of staff,
plus one for each eight seating capacity in auditoriums or gymnasiums.



   (K)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant: one per two employees or
combined employment of the two largest successive shifts.



   (L)   Water treatment or distribution plant: one per two employees
or combined employment of the two largest successive shifts.



   (M)   Temporary sign: not applicable.



(Prior Code, § 150.202)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.278  HOME OCCUPATION; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The home occupation shall be carried on entirely in the
dwelling or within an accessory building on the lot.



   (B)   Not more than one person, other than occupants of the
dwelling, shall be employed in the home occupation use.



   (C)   Not more than 500 square feet of total floor area shall be
devoted to home occupation in any dwelling or building accessory thereto.



   (D)   Articles sold or offered for sale shall be limited to those
produced in the dwelling or with in the accessory building.



   (E)   There shall be no exterior display, no exterior sign (except
as permitted by the applicable district regulations), no exterior storage of
materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or
variation of the residential character of the principal building.



   (F)   No offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate
matter, odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effects
shall be produced.



   (G)   A home occupation includes, but is not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Artist’s studio;



      (2)   Dressmaking;



      (3)   Professional office of a medical or osteopathic
physician, dentist, podiatrist, chiropodist, lawyer, engineer, architect or
accountant;



      (4)   Teaching, with musical instruction limited to a single
pupil at a time; and



      (5)   Barbering or hairdressing.



(Prior Code, § 150.203)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.279  CONFORMITY OF EXISTING CONTINGENT USE.



   An existing use which is included herein as a contingent use, and which
is located in a district in which the contingent use is permitted, is a
conforming use. Any expansion of the contingent use involving the enlargement
of the buildings, structures and land area devoted to the use shall be
subject to the requirements of this section.



(Prior Code, § 150.204)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




NON-CONFORMING USE SPECIFICATIONS




§ 150.290  NON-CONFORMING USES.



   The lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time of
passage of this chapter may be continued although the use does not conform to
all the provisions of this chapter, subject to the following conditions.



   (A)   A non-conforming use may be extended throughout a building;
provided, the size of the structure is not increased; except that, the non-
conforming use may be enlarged or altered by a special exception by the Board
as provided in §§ 150.260 through 150.264 of this chapter.



   (B)   A non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming
use of the same or greater restrictions, but not to a use of lesser
restrictions; except that, the size of the structure shall not be increased.



   (C)   No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a
non-conforming use, except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   The Board may authorize, by written permit, in a district
permitting residential use for a period of not more than one year from the
date of the permit, a temporary building for commercial or industrial use
incidental to the residential construction and development of the district.



   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
plans, construction or designated use of a building for which an improvement
location permit has been heretofore issued, and the construction of which has
been diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of the permit, and
which entire building shall be completed according to such plans filed within
three years from the date of passage of this chapter.



   (F)   In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or
premises is discontinued for a period of two years, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it is
located.



   (G)   Any non-conforming open use of land such as a junkyard or
automobile wrecking or salvage yard shall be discontinued within five years
from the date of 10-18-1949, which was the date of passage of the city’s
general Ord. 1-1949.



   (H)   These provisions apply in the same manner to a use which may
become a non-conforming use as a result of an amendment to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.210)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




GENERAL PROVISIONS AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS




§ 150.315  INTERPRETATION.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare.



(Prior Code, § 150.220)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.316  DETERMINATION AND INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing
the provisions applicable to each district, due and careful consideration has
been given to existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in each
district, the most desirable use for which the land in each district may be
adapted, and the conservation of property values throughout the county.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of any
district as shown on the zone map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   In unsubdivided areas, or where a district boundary
subdivides a lot, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by
use of the scale of the zone map.



      (2)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board shall
interpret the intent of the zone map as to the location of the boundary in
question.



(Prior Code, § 150.221)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.317  PROCEDURE RELATING TO VACATED AREAS.



   Whenever any street, place, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way,
waterway or other similar area is vacated by proper authority, the districts
adjoining each side of the street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way
or similar area shall be extended automatically to the center of the
vacation, and all area included in the vacation shall then and thence forth
be subject to all appropriate provisions of the extended districts. In the
event of a partial vacation, the adjoining district or district nearest the
portion vacated shall be extended automatically to include all of the vacated
area.



(Prior Code, § 150.222)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.318  USE.



   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
reconstructed or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in a district in which the building or land is located.



(Prior Code, § 150.223)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.319  YARD, LOT AREA AND SIZE OF BUILDING.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered in
any manner which will encroach upon or reduce in any manner the yards, lot
area per family, ground floor area of dwellings or lot coverage provisions
established and specified for the use and the district in which the building
is located.



(Prior Code, § 150.224)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.320  HEIGHT.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limits established and specified for the district in
which the building is located.



(Prior Code, § 150.225)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.321  LOTS.



   (A)   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot.



   (B)   In no case shall there be more than one principal building
used for residential purposes, and its accessory buildings, located on one
lot.



(Prior Code, § 150.226)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.322  PARKING SPACE, LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.



   For each building hereafter erected and for certain other uses of land,
parking spaces for motor vehicles and loading and unloading berths as
specified for the use to which the building or land is to be devoted shall be
provided; except that, parking spaces may not be required for commercial or
industrial uses to be established in blocks where 50% or more of the area was
occupied by such uses at the time of passage of this chapter; but it is the
intent of this chapter to encourage the establishment of adequate parking
spaces wherever normally required by this chapter. All entrances, exists and
accesses to driveways or parking areas within the city’s right-of-way must
be concrete.



(Prior Code, § 150.227)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.323  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS; RESIDENTIAL USES.



   (A)   Use of existing lots deficient in area or width; front, side
and rear yard requirements; exception.



      (1)   A single-family dwelling may be located on any lot in
any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, if the lot was a
single parcel separately described or a single parcel included in a deed or
plat which was of record in the County Office of the Recorder at the time of
passage of this chapter, even though the lot does not have the minimum lot
width or the minimum lot area specified for the district.



      (2)   (a)   The requirements of this chapter with regard to
front, side and rear yard requirements shall be applicable in all instances;
except, such requirements shall not be applicable with regard to any lots
located in a subdivision for which a plat of the subdivision has been given,
prior to passage of this chapter, tentative or final approval by the Plan
Commission under the Subdivision Control Ordinance, being general Ord.
1968-46, passed by the City Common Council on 3-18-1969. With regard to lots
in the subdivisions, the front, side and rear yard requirements shall be as
established on the plat thereof.



         (b)   The term PLAT shall include restrictive covenants
which pursuant to that ordinance comprised a part of the plat.



         (c)   In the event that the plat of the subdivision does
not establish front, side or rear yard requirements, the requirements shall
be as established and set forth in this chapter in effect at the time of the
preliminary or final approval of the plat of the subdivision by the Plan
Commission, which requirements, for purposes hereof, are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part of this chapter for such purpose only.



   (B)   Height. In districts limiting height to 25 feet or two
stories, a dwelling may be increased in height not to exceed 35 feet if
building is set back from required side and rear yard line one foot for each
two feet of height above 25.



   (C)   Partial use of alley for yard. One-half of an alley abutting
the rear of the side of a lot may be included in the required rear yard
dimension or side yard dimension, respectively.



   (D)   Tapered yard.



      (1)   Where a reversed interior lot abuts a corner lot or an
alley separating such lots, an accessory building located on the rear lot
line of a corner lot shall set back from the side street as far as the
dwelling on the reversed interior lot.



      (2)   For each foot that the accessory building is placed from
the rear lot line toward the front lot line of the corner lot, the accessory
building may be set four inches closer to the side street line, but in no
case closer than five feet.



   (E)   Accessory uses allowed without permit.



      (1)   Accessory uses, as public utility installations, walks,
driveways, curbs, retaining walls, mail boxes, name plates, lamp-posts, bird
baths and structures of a like nature are permitted in any required front,
side or rear yard without permit. Trees, shrubs, flowers or plants shall also
be permitted in any required front, side or rear yard; except that, vision
clearance on corner lots shall be provided.



      (2)   Latticework screens, hedges or walls, not more than six
feet in height, may be located in the required side or rear yard, and any of
the above maintained so as not to exceed three feet in height may be located
in any front yard. Hedges or any other line plantings must be planted so that
they may be trimmed and maintained at the property line.



   (F)   Accessory uses allowed by permit only.



      (1)   Fences not more than six feet in height may be located
in the required side or rear yard, not to exceed three feet in height located
in any front yard.



      (2)   Private swimming pools must comply with the safety
features set forth in current code regulations.



      (3)   All accessory buildings detached from the principal
building may not occupy more than 30% of the area devoted to the rear yard
or, in the case where the accessory building is located in a side yard, it
shall not occupy more than 6% of the entire lot area.



(Prior Code, § 150.228)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1993-8,
passed 11-2-1993)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.324  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS; COMMERCIAL USES.



   (A)   Parking spaces shall be provided on the lot or, as a special
exception, within 300 feet thereof, as indicated in § 150.263 of this
chapter.



   (B)   Groups of uses requiring parking space may join in
establishing a private parking area with capacity aggregating that required
for each participating use.



   (C)   Loading and unloading berths shall be provided on the lot as
indicated in § 150.328 of this chapter; except that, loading and unloading
berths shall not be required for commercial uses which demonstrably do not
receive or transmit goods or wares by truck delivery.



   (D)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be
included in the rear yard, but the alley space shall not be included for
loading and unloading.



   (E)   Where 25% or more of the lots in a block frontage are occupied
by buildings, the setback of the buildings shall determine the location of
the building line; except that, this requirement shall not apply to
commercial or uses in the C-3 District.



   (F)   Parking spaces and accessory uses are permitted in the
required front yard in the C-1 and C-3 Districts, on lots where commercial is
located.



   (G)   Dwellings which are located in buildings used for commercial
uses are incidental to the commercial uses.



(Prior Code, § 150.229)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.325  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS; INDUSTRIAL USES.



   (A)   Each use shall provide one parking space for each two
employees or combined employment of the two largest successive shifts,
located on the same lot as the use or, as a special exception, within 300
feet thereof.



   (B)   Groups of uses requiring parking space may join in
establishing a private parking area with capacity aggregating that required
for each participating use.



   (C)   Each use shall provide loading and unloading berths, located
on the same lot as the use, as specified in § 150.328 of this chapter.



   (D)   One-half of an alley abutting the rear of a lot may be
included in the rear yard, but the alley space shall not be included for
loading and unloading berths.



   (E)   The maximum height requirements may be increased if the
portion of the building above the specified maximum height requirement is set
back from the front lot line one foot for each two feet of additional height.



   (F)   In all districts permitting enclosed industrial use or open
industrial use, it is permissible to erect more than one principal building
devoted to enclosed industrial use or open industrial use on a lot.



   (G)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be subject to licensing,
setbacks and regulations as set forth in Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 150.230)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2012-2,
passed 4-3-2012)



§ 150.326  SPECIFICATIONS FOR SURFACING PARKING AREAS.



   All public parking area and all parking spaces required for commercial
enterprise, or enclosed industrial or open industrial uses, and loading and
unloading berths, shall be surfaced in accordance with the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, (latest issue) of the State
Highway Commission.



   (A)   For passenger cars. The pavement shall be constructed with a
minimum of two-inch hot mixture asphalt surface on a three-inch thick base
course of crushed stone or equivalent, subject to approval of the City
Engineer.



   (B)   Trucks and heavy machinery. The pavement shall be constructed
with a minimum of three-inch hot mixture asphalt surface on a four-inch thick
base course of crushed stone or equivalent, subject to approval of the City
Engineer.



   (C)   Modification. Under severe loading conditions, or improper
drainage conditions, the pavement structure design may be modified by the
City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 150.231)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.327  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Requirement. The number of off-street parking spaces provided
shall be in accordance with this section, as supplemented, and shall apply to
all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established after
Ord. 1978-4, passed 3/21/78.



   (B)   Determination.



      (1)   In the event that this section does not specify the
number of parking spaces for a specific use, the Zoning Administrator or
Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine the number of spaces required. In
making this determination, the Zoning Administrator or Board of Zoning
Appeals shall consider the following criteria:



         (a)   The number of parking spaces required for the use
listed that is most similar to the proposed use in terms of the parked
vehicles that are anticipated to be generated;



         (b)   The square footage to be occupied by the proposed
use; and



         (c)   The number of employees and patrons that are
anticipated for the proposed use.



      (2)   Parking space requirements based on the number of
employees and users shall be based on the maximum number of employees or
users on the premises at any one time.



   (C)   Exemptions. Nonresidential uses in buildings less than 1,000
square feet and located on a lot in the commercial districts or the downtown
districts shall be exempt from the requirements of providing off-street
parking. The exemption shall be applied to the least generating use on the
lot. Only one exemption shall be allowed per lot.



   (D)   Residential.



      (1)   Single-family dwelling: two off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for each dwelling unit.



      (2)   Two-family dwellings: two off-street parking spaces for
each dwelling unit.



      (3)   Home occupation: one additional off-street parking space.



      (4)   Bed and breakfast establishment: one parking space per
room.



      (5)   Congregate care facility: one parking space for each
living unit.



      (6)   Group home: one parking space per home, and one parking
space for each support staff present during the busiest shift.



      (7)   Hotel or motel: one parking space for each separate room.



      (8)   Multiple family dwellings:



         (a)   Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit
containing two or more bedrooms.



         (b)   One parking space for one-bedroom and efficiency
dwellings.



         (c)   One parking space for every single room occupancy
dwelling.



      (9)   Rooming house: one parking space for each two persons
for whom rooming accommodations are provided.



      (10)   Transitional treatment home/halfway house: one parking
space for each four residents, and one parking space for each support staff
present during the busiest shift.



      (11)   Homeless shelter: one parking space for each employee.



   (E)   Institutional.



      (1)   Assisted living facility:



         (a)   One parking space for each four employees, plus



         (b)   One parking space for each six infirmary or
nursing home beds, plus



         (c)   One parking space for each four rooming units, plus



         (d)   One parking space for each three dwelling units.



      (2)   Auditorium, accessory to a church, school, university,
or other institution: One parking space for each five seats in the main
auditorium or assembly hall.



      (3)   Daycare, child and adult: Two parking spaces per 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.



      (4)   Funeral services:



         (a)   One parking space per four seats in parlor, plus



         (b)   One parking space per two employees, plus



         (c)   One parking space per vehicle used in connection
with the business.



      (5)   Hospital: Two parking spaces per one hospital bed.



      (6)   Places of worship: One parking space per five seats in
the main auditorium or assembly hall.



      (7)   Nursing care facility:



         (a)   One parking space for each six beds for which
accommodations are offered, plus



         (b)   One parking space for each four employees other
than doctors, plus



         (c)   One parking space for each three dwelling units.



   (F)   Schools.



      (1)   K - 8th grades: One parking space for each faculty
member and other full-time employees.



      (2)   Senior high school:



         (a)   One parking space for each faculty member, plus



         (b)   One parking space for each full-time employee, plus



         (c)   One parking space for each four students.



      (3)   College/university:



         (a)   One parking space for each faculty member, plus



         (b)   One parking space for each full-time employee, plus



         (c)   One parking space for each four students.



      (4)   Vocational/trade school:



         (a)   One parking space per one employee, plus



         (b)   One parking space for each three students based on
the maximum number of students attending classes on the premises at any time.



   (G)   Recreation, cultural, entertainment.



      (1)   Art gallery, museum, house museum: One parking space per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



      (2)   Bowling alley: Two parking spaces per lane.



      (3)   Club/lodge: Six parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.



      (4)   Dance/music studio: One parking space for every one
employee, plus one space for each three students, based on the maximum number
of students attending classes on the premises at any time.



      (5)   Library: One parking space per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.



      (6)   Sports arena/stadium: One parking space per ten seats.



      (7)   Swimming pool, skating rink: One parking space per five
seats, plus three spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



      (8)   Tennis court: Two parking spaces per court.



      (9)   Theater, movie and live: One parking space per four
seats.



   (H)   Commercial/manufacturing.



      (1)   Durable goods, furniture, appliances, etc: One parking
space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.



      (2)   General manufacturing: One parking space per three
employees, plus one space per company vehicle.



      (3)   Radio/TV station: Three parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet.



      (4)   Warehouse:



         (a)   Two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area for the first 10,000, plus



         (b)   One space per 4,000 square feet for the remaining
space.



         (c)   Office area parking requirements shall be
calculated separately based on office parking rates.



      (5)   Wholesale distribution.



         (a)   One space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area for the first 10,000 square feet, plus



         (b)   One parking space per 4,000 square feet floor area
for the remaining space.



         (c)   Office area parking requirements shall be
calculated separately based on office parking rates.



   (I)   Retail goods and services.



      (1)   Auto repair: One parking space per service bay, plus
three stalls per 1,000 square feet for office and retail areas.



      (2)   Car wash: Three stacked spaces per bay or stall, plus
five stacking spaces for automated facility.



      (3)   Drive-through facility: Five stacking spaces on site per
cashier, teller or similar employee transacting business directly with drive
through customers at any given time, in addition to the parking required for
that specific land use.



      (4)   Outdoor display of live plant materials: One parking
space per 1,000 square feet of display area.



      (5)   Outdoor display of merchandise for sale (other than live
plant materials): Two parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of display area.



      (6)   Restaurants, taverns, private clubs: Six parking spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



      (7)   Retail goods establishment: Three parking spaces per
1,000 square feet gross floor area.



      (8)   Retail service establishment: Two parking spaces per
1,000 square feet gross floor area.



      (9)   Retail shopping center over 5,000 square feet gross
floor area: Two parking spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area.



   (J)   Office and related uses.



      (1)   Financial establishments: Two parking spaces per 1,000
square feet.



      (2)   General office, including government, public utility:



         (a)   Three parking spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
floor area for the main floor, plus



         (b)   Five parking spaces per 4,000 square feet gross
floor area for each additional level, including the basement.



      (3)   Medical/dental offices: Five parking spaces per 1,000
square feet gross floor area.



      (4)   Offices, research related: Three parking spaces per
1,000 square feet gross floor area.



   (K)   Miscellaneous.



      (1)   Public kennels or stables: One parking space per two
employees, plus one space for each three animals to be confined.



      (2)   Bus facility: One parking space per two employees, plus
one space per bus.



      (3)   All other uses: Three parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet gross floor area.



(Prior Code, §150.232)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2018-14,
passed 6-19-2018)



§ 150.328  LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Commercial uses - loading and unloading berths required.



 

Type of Use
 

Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)

 

Loading and Unloading Berths Required



Office buildings
 

100,000 or less

 

1




100,001 or 336,000

 

2




Each 200,000 additional

 

1 additional



Retail stores, department stores, wholesale establishments, storage uses and
other commercial uses
 

3,000 to 15,000

 

1




15,001 to 40,000

 

2




Each 25,000 additional

 

1 additional




 



   (B)   Industrial uses - loading and unloading berths required.



 

Gross Floor Area of Industrial Use in Square Feet Required
 
Number of Berths Required



15,000 or less

 

1




15,001 to 40,000

 

2




40,001 to 100,000

 

3




Each 40,000 additional

 

1 additional




 



(Prior Code, § 150.233)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.329  CONTINGENT USES; OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Boarding or lodging house: one for each three occupants.



   (B)   College or university: one for each three students and staff.



   (C)   Home occupation: one additional.



   (D)   Lodge or private club: one for each 125 square feet floor area
of building.



   (E)   Mortuary: one for each six seats in main auditorium.



   (F)   Municipal or governmental building: one for each 125 square
feet floor area of building.



   (G)   Power substation or telephone exchange and public utility
installation terminal facility: one per two employees or combined employment
of two largest shifts.



   (H)   Professional office in residence: two additional.



   (I)   Educational institution: one for each three members of staff,
plus one for each eight seats in auditorium.



   (J)   Sewage treatment or disposal plant, and water treatment and
distribution plant: one per two employees or combined employment of the two
largest successive shifts.



(Prior Code, § 150.234)



§ 150.330  PROCEDURE FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   Site plan review shall be required for all multiple-family and
non-residential projects prior to the issuance of a building permit.  This
review will be carried out depending upon the zoning classification and
procedure as follows.



   (A)   Multi-family projects and those projects within C-1 and C-2
District.



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a preliminary plan to the
City Building Inspector.



      (2)   The City Building Inspector will review the plan with
appropriate department heads and local agencies, who shall suggest any
changes in the proposal deemed necessary in order to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the subdivision regulations or city planning
documents.  Comments shall be returned to the applicant in a written format
within ten working days of the submission.



      (3)   Once the City Building Inspector is satisfied that the
application has substantially addressed the preliminary comments provided and
is informed of any apparent deficiency in the proposed plan, the plan will be
eligible for development plan review.



      (4)   The applicant shall then prepare and submit proper
development plans to the City Building Inspector.  Development plans shall
be drawn to scale and shall show at minimum:



         (a)   Location and size of main and accessory buildings;



         (b)   Property boundary lines, setbacks and offsets;



         (c)   Location and size of yards, driveways, walks,
parking areas, recreational areas and other site improvements;



         (d)   Location and size of proposed storm drainage
facilities in accordance with the Decatur Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual;



         (e)   Location and dimensions of surrounding streets and
nearby buildings;



         (f)   Location and dimensions of all relevant utility
service connections;



         (g)   Erosion control plans and specification in
accordance with Ch. 53 and state requirements;



         (h)   Proposed building plans including no less than
floor plans, elevations and sections;



         (i)   Location and size of all proposed landscaping in
accordance with the city landscape ordinance;



         (j)   Location and size of all proposed monument or
building signage; and



         (k)   Location, size and type of site lighting and or
photometric plans.



      (5)   Three copies of the development plan should be submitted
to the office of the City Building Inspector.



      (6)   If the project is compliant with the land use ordinance
and no variances are requested from the applicant the City Building Inspector
and City Engineer may approve the plan as an administrative approval.



      (7)   After reviewing the development plan, the City Building
Inspector and City Engineer may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove
the development plan.



      (8)   After approval of the site plan by the Building
Inspector and City Engineer, a copy of the approved drawings, shall be signed
by the Building Inspector and City Engineer and filed with the Office of the
City Building Inspector for future reference.



      (9)   After conditional approval of the site plan by the
Building Inspector and City Engineer, the applicant shall submit evidence of
compliance with all conditions set forth during administrative review to the
City Building Inspector.  The City Building Inspector shall review
information with the City Engineer.  If all conditions set forth have been
met the City Building Inspector and City Engineer shall sign the approved
drawings along with all required conditions.  A complete set of the site
plan shall be filed with the Office of the City Building Inspector for future
reference.



      (10)   No occupancy permit shall be issued by the City
Building Inspector without compliance with the approved plans and receipt of
any required as-built drawings.



   (B)   Multi-family projects and those projects within C-3, I-1 or
I-2 Districts.



      (1)   The applicant shall submit a preliminary plan to the
City Building Inspector.



      (2)   The City Building Inspector will review the plan with
appropriate department heads and local agencies, who shall suggest any
changes in the proposal deemed necessary in order to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the subdivision regulations, or city planning
documents.  Comments shall be returned to the applicant in a written format
within ten working days of the submission.



      (3)   Once the City Building Inspector is satisfied that the
application has substantially addressed the comments provided and is informed
of any apparent deficiency in the proposed plan, the plan will be eligible
for Plan Commission review.



      (4)   The applicant shall then prepare and submit proper
development plans to the plan commission.  Development plans shall be drawn
to scale and shall show:



         (a)   Location and size of main and accessory buildings;



         (b)   Property boundary lines, setbacks and offsets;



         (c)   Location and size of yards, driveways, walks,
parking areas, recreational areas and other site improvements;



         (d)   Location and size of proposed storm drainage
facilities in accordance with the Decatur Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual;



         (e)   Location and dimensions of surrounding streets and
nearby buildings;



         (f)   Location and dimensions of all relevant utility
service connections;



         (g)   Erosion control plans and specification in
accordance with Ch. 53 and state requirements;



         (h)   Proposed building plans including no less than
floor plans, elevations and sections.



         (i)   Location and size of all proposed landscaping in
accordance with the city landscape ordinance;



         (j)   Location and size of all proposed monument or
building signage;



         (k)   Location, size and type of site lighting and or
photometric plans.



         (l)   Three copies of the development plan should be
submitted to the Plan Commission no less than ten days before the next
Commission meeting.



         (m)   The City Building Inspector and/or Zoning
Administrator may make recommendations or comments to the Plan Commission in
advance of the applicant presentation based upon the initial review of the
plan and the application.  The recommendation and information provided to
the Plan Commission may include comments from city department head(s).



      (7)   After reviewing the development plan, the Commission may
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the development plan.



      (8)   After approval of the site plan by the Plan Commission,
a copy of the approved drawings, shall be signed by the officers of the
Commission and filed with the office of the City Building Inspector for
future reference.



      (9)   After conditional approval of the site plan by the Plan
Commission, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance with all
conditions set forth by the Commission to the City Building Inspector.  The
City Building Inspector shall present information to the officers of the
Commission who shall sign the approved drawings along with all required
conditions.  A complete set of the site plan shall be filed with the Office
of the City Building Inspector for future reference.



      (10)   The Plan Commission shall review with the City Building
Inspector to see that the specifications of the site plan are carried out.



      (11)   No occupancy permit shall be issued by the City
Building Inspector without compliance with the approved plans and receipt of
any required as-built drawings.



(Prior Code, § 150.235)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.331  SIGNS.



   Any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or
non-illuminated which is visible from any public place or is located on
private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or
solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise or
any emblem, painting banner, pennant, or placard designed to advertise,
identify, or convey information, with the exception of window displays and
national flags. For the purpose of removal, signs shall also include all sign
structures. Not included are decorative devices or emblems as may be
displayed on a residential mailbox. For the purposes of this section, this
definition shall include those signs painted directly upon a building or
other structure. A visual device or structure used for advertising, display,
or publicity purposes.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ABANDONED SIGN. A sign which no longer correctly directs or
exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, project,
or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is
displayed.



      ANIMATED SIGNS. Any sign which includes action or motion. For
purposes of this section, this term does not refer to flashing or changing,
all of which are separately defined.



      AWNING. A cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that
projects from a wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window. An
awning is either permanently attached to a building or can be raised or
retracted to a position against the building when not in use.



      BANNER. A sign made of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light
pliable material, not enclosed in a rigid frame and characteristically
suspended along or across a public street. Banners are temporary in nature
and do not include flags.



      BUILDING FACE OF WALL. All window and wall areas of a building in
one plane or elevation.



      CANOPY. Any structure attached to a building at the inner end and
supported on the other end, or a free-standing structure, with one or more
supports, meant to provide shelter from weather elements, onto which signs
may be affixed or incorporated.



      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN (MANUAL). A sign on which copy is changed
manually in the field, such as reader boards with changeable letters or
changeable pictorial panels.



      CHANGING SIGNS (AUTOMATIC). A sign such as an electronically or
electrically controlled public service time, temperature, and date sign,
message center or reader board, where different copy changes are shown on the
same lamp bank.



      CHURCH BULLETIN BOARD. A sign attached to the exterior of a
church or located elsewhere on church premises and used to indicate the
services and/or other activities of the church, and including the church
name, if desired.



      CLEAR VISION TRIANGLE. On a corner lot in any district,
development shall conform to the requirements of the sight triangle in which
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to materially impede vision between a height of three feet and ten
feet above the grades, 25 feet from the intersection right-of-way of those
two streets, within the triangular area formed.



      COPY. The wording or graphics on a sign surface.



      EASEMENT. An easement is a non-possessory right to use and/or
enter onto the real property of another without possessing it.



      ERECT. To build, construct, reconstruct, attach, hang, re-hang,
alter, place, affix, enlarge, move, or relocate and includes the painting of
existing sign structures.



      FACADE. The front or main part of a building facing a street.



      FACE OF SIGN. The entire area of a sign on which copy could be
placed. The area of a sign which is visible from one direction as projected
on a place.



      FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or
flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or
flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent
light source. Automatic, changing signs such as public service time,
temperature, and date signs or electronically controlled message centers are
not classed as FLASHING SIGNS.



      GASOLINE AND OIL SERVICE STATIONS. Any business which dispenses,
or is designed to dispense gasoline and/or oil for use in motor vehicles or
boats.



      ILLEGAL SIGNS. A sign which contravenes this section, or a
nonconforming sign for which a permit is required under a previous ordinance
was not obtained.



      ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign with electrical equipment installed for
illumination, either internally illuminated through its sign face by a light
source contained inside the sign or externally illuminated by a light source
aimed at its surface.



      LOGO. A letter, character, or symbol used to represent a person,
corporation, or business enterprise.



      MARQUEE. Any permanent, roof-life structure attached to and
projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting along the wall
of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from
the weather.



      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. An outdoor sign whose message directs
attention to a specific business, product, service, event or activity, or
other commercial or noncommercial activity, or contains a noncommercial
message about something that is not sold, produced, manufactured, furnished,
or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located.



      PREMISES. An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings
which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest
conveyable unit of real estate.



      READER BOARD. Any sign that has changeable or removable lettering.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). Shall be the actual road right-of-way or the
proposed right-of-way as indicated on the city comprehensive plan and/or as
set forth in the city subdivision ordinance. A right-of-way is:



         (a)   A right to make a way over a piece of land,
usually to and from another piece of land.



         (b)   A right-of-way is a type of easement granted or
reserved over the land for transportation purposes, this can be for a
highway, public footpath, rail transport, canal, as well as electrical
transmission lines, oil and gas pipelines.



         (c)   A right-of-way is reserved for the purposes of
maintenance or expansion of existing services with the right-of-way.



      ROOF LINE. The highest point of the coping on a flat roof, false
mansard, or parapet wall; the deck line of a true mansard roof; the ridge
line between the upper and lower slopes of a gambrel roof; or the mean height
level between the eaves and ridge for a gable or hip roof.



      SEASONAL OR SPECIAL OCCASION TEMPORARY SIGNS. A sign which is not
permanent and is limited to a specific activity or in the celebration of
holidays or other special events.



      SHOPPING CENTER. A building containing four or more shops,
stores, and other places of business, and providing off-street parking
facilities in common for all of the businesses and their customers.



      SHOW WINDOW SIGN. Any temporary sign advertising sales or
specials attached to or within three feet of the glass surface of any fixed
window (glazing) visible from a public right-of-way.



      SIGN AREA. The area of the sign face. The SIGN AREA of a
multi-faced signs the sum of the sign areas of each face, including
structural trim which can be seen from a single location on an adjacent
street. If a sign is attached to a building or suspended in any manner
whereby there is no apparent trim or confining border, the sign area shall be
computed by drawing an imaginary straight line around a generally rectangular
margin and measuring the area so encompassed upon a building or other
structure.



      SIGN, ATTACHED. A sign erected or placed upon the wall of any
building with the plane of the face parallel to the plane of the wall below
the roof line.



      SIGN, COMMERCIAL DIRECTORY. A permanent pole sign designating the
name of a commercial center and listing the various tenants of the center.



      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign used during construction of
new buildings or reconstruction of or additions to existing buildings, such
as those identifying the project and denoting the owner, architect, engineer,
contractor, and/or financing institutions of the project.



      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign which indicates a direction for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or other movement.



      SIGN, FLUTTERING. A sign which flutters and includes banners,
flags, pennants, or other flexible material which moves with the wind or by
some artificial means.



      SIGN, GROUND. Any detached sign on the same lot or parcel as the
use it advertises which has its bottom portion erected upon or supported by
the ground, a ground planter box, or other supports.



      SIGN, HANGING. Any sign hanging entirely beneath a canopy,
portico, or marquee.



      SIGN, ILLUMINATED. Any sign which is illuminated by light sources
mounted on or in the sign or at some other location.



      SIGN, MEMORIAL OR TABLETS. The permanent part of a building which
denotes the name of the building, date of erection, historical significance,
dedication, or other similar information.



      SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign legally erected under the previously
existing ordinances of the city, but which does not conform to the provisions
of this section.



      SIGN, OCCUPATIONAL AND/OR IDENTIFICATION. An attached wall sign
not larger than one square foot in area identifying the name of a person
occupying a building.



      SIGN PERMIT. A location improvement permit as discussed in the
legal provision.



      SIGN, POLITICAL. A temporary sign advocating or opposing any
political proposition or candidate for public office.



      SIGN, POLE. Any detached sign located on the same lot or parcel
as the use it advertises which is supported by one or more stationary poles
no taller than 30 feet above the mean grade line of the ground at its base
provided that this shall not include a permitted ground sign as set forth.



      SIGN, PROJECT IDENTIFICATION. A permanent ground sign identifying
an apartment complex, condominium project, or mobile home development entry,
name and/or street names within the project.



      SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which projects more than 12 inches
beyond the plane of the wall on which the sign is erected or attached.



      SIGN, PROPERTY REAL ESTATE. A sign pertaining only to the
prospective rental, lease, or sale of the property upon which it is located.
Real estate signs shall be excluded from the definition of POLE SIGNS.



      SIGN, RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION PROJECT. Any temporary sign that
provides direction to any residential development under construction, or
promotes the residential development on the project site.



      SIGN, STRUCTURE. The sign and all parts associated with its
construction.



      SIGN, SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION. A permanent ground sign
identifying a subdivision entry, subdivision name, and/or street names within
the subdivision.



      SIGN, SUPPORTS. All structures by which a sign is held up,
including, for example, poles, braces, guys, and anchors.



      SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign intended for a limited or intermittent
period of display.



      SIGN, WINDOW TEMPORARY. A temporary sign affixed to the inside of
an exterior window or glass door.



      SPECIAL DISPLAYS. Signs not exceeding 12 square feet, used for
holidays, public demonstration, or promotion of civil welfare or charitable
purposes.



      STANDARD OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE AND/OR BILLBOARD. Any sign
intended to attract general public interest concerning a commercial
enterprise, product, service, industry, or other activity not conducted,
sold, or offered on the premises upon which the sign is erected. This
includes billboards, detached pole signs on separate parcels, wall signs and
signs otherwise attached to buildings and/or supported by uprights or braces
on the ground. Real estate signs and political signs are excluded from this
definition.



      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign which is not permanent and is allowed for
a specific time period.



      TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN. Any sign which aids the flow of traffic.



   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate and
control the location, erection, number, and maintenance of signs and matters
relating thereto within the city in order to promote public safety, health,
and general welfare of the community. These regulations are specifically
designed to:



      (1)   Provide for uniform regulation and orderly development
of signs consistent with established policies and ordinances of the city.



      (2)   Prohibit hazardous and dangerous signs.



      (3)   Provide a desirable and attractive living environment
through harmonious and uniform signage.



   (C)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the
erection, alteration, and maintenance of all signs and outdoor display
structures, together with their appurtenant and auxiliary devices, with
respect to location, size, content, construction, structure, and fire safety.



      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



         (a)   Flags of any nation, state, county, city, or other
governmental unit and any not-for-profit organization.



         (b)   Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the
occasion of traditionally patriotic, religious, or local holidays or events.



         (c)   The action, construction, and maintenance of
official traffic, fire and police signs, signals, and devices and markings of
the state, county, or city.



         (d)   Non-illuminated directional or informational signs
of a public nature.



         (e)   Political signs or signs announcing political
candidates or issues, provided that such signs must be removed within six
days after the election.



         (f)   Residential garage, patio, or yard sale signs not
to exceed six square feet and located upon the premises where the sale is
taking place.



         (g)   Property real estate signs not exceeding six
square feet in area on each street frontage of a lot, which advertise the
sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are located
only. Real estate signs shall not exceed three feet in height, and shall not
be illuminated in any way.



         (h)   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and
date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of
bronze or other incombustible materials.



         (i)   Professional name plates, or occupational signs,
and home occupation signs not exceeding two square foot in area, wall-mounted
and unlit, adjacent to the main entrance of the building.



   (D)   Administration and enforcement.  Except where herein
otherwise stated, the provisions of this section shall be administered by
the  Building/Zoning Department, or by its designee. The Department (or its
authorized representative) is hereby empowered in performance of Departmental
functions to enter upon any land in the city for the purpose of making
inspections, examinations, and surveys, or to place and maintain thereon
markers, notices, or signs required to effect provisions of this section. The
above authorized person shall be required to present proper credentials upon
demand when entering upon any land or structure for the purpose of this
section.



      (1)   Duties.



         (a)   The Building Department shall have the power to
grant sign permits, and to make inspections of buildings or premises
necessary to carry out the Department’s duties in the enforcement of this
section.



         (b)   It shall be improper for the Department to approve
plans or issue any permits or certificates for any sign until such plans have
been inspected in detail and found to be in conformance with this section,
nor shall the Department vary or change any terms of this section.



         (c)   If the Department shall find that any of the
provisions of this section are being violated, the Department shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation. The Department shall order discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal signage; discontinuance of
any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by
this section to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.



      (2)   Permit required.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful to commence or to proceed
with the erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration,
enlargement, extension, or moving of any sign or sign structure or any
portion thereof without first having applied in writing to the Department for
a sign permit to do so and a sign permit has been granted therefore. Primary
responsibility for securing the necessary permits shall be the property
owner's. However, if the property owner should contract part or all of the
proposed work, it shall become the responsibility of the person or firm hired
to ensure that all required permits and approvals have been secured prior to
any work being initiated.



         (b)   Blank forms shall be provided by the Department
for the use of those applying for permits as provided in this section. Any
permits issued by the Department shall be on standard forms for such purpose.
There shall be a separate permit for each project site, for which sign(s) are
to be constructed, altered, or erected.



         (c)   Any sign permit under which no construction work
has been commenced within six months after the date of issuance of said
permit or under which proposed construction has not been completed within one
year of the time of issuance shall expire by limitation.



      (3)   Voiding of sign permit. A permit may be revoked by the
Department at any time prior to the completion of the sign for which the same
was issued, when it shall appear to him or her that there is any departure
from the plans, specifications, or conditions, as required under terms of the
permit, that the same was procured by false representation, or that any
provisions of this section are being violated. Written notice of such
revocation shall be served upon the owner, his or her agent, or contractor,
or upon any person employed in the building or structure for which such
permit was issued, via a stop work order, which shall be posted in a
prominent location, and thereafter no such construction shall proceed.



      (4)   Compliance with sign permits. Sign permits issued on the
basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement,
and construction set forth in the approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this section as provided herein.



      (5)   Violations. If it is found that a sign is in violation
of this section, the Department, or its designee, shall give notice to the
owner of the sign, or if the owner cannot be located, to the owner or
property management agent of the premises on which the sign is located, or,
if the sign erection is not complete, to where sign is located or, either
personally, by United States mail, or by posting such a notice on the
premises, such notice stating:



         (a)   The violation found;



         (b)   That the violations must be brought into
compliance within the requirements of this and all other city ordinances
within ten days from the date of such notice;



         (c)   The requirements which must be met; and



         (d)   That any person found to be in violation of any
provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties established in
this section.



   (E)   Prohibited signs. The following signs and advertising devices
are hereby declaimed to be unlawful:



      (1)   Any sign erected in a location prohibited by this
section.



      (2)   Any sign erected in a public easement or right-of-way.



      (3)   Any sign erected so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door or window, or any other exit way required by the
building or fire codes of the city.



      (4)   Any sign attached to any public utility pole, tree, fire
hydrant, curb, sidewalk, or other surface located on public property.



      (5)   Signs, mounted letters, painted letters or other types
of signs shall be prohibited from placement on a roof or roof deck.



      (6)   Any sign erected in any location where, by reason of its
location, it will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal,
or other traffic- control device. Nor may any sign, by reason of its shape,
position, or color interfere with or be confused with any authorized traffic
signal sign or device. Further, no sign shall be erected in a location where
it will obstruct vision of the public right-of-way to a vehicle operator
during ingress to, egress from, or while traveling on the public right-of-way.



      (7)   Any on-premises sign advertising an article or product
not manufactured, assembled, processed, repaired, or sold, or a service not
rendered upon the premises upon which the sign is located, and not located or
constructed such as to quality as a standard outdoor advertising structure or
billboard.



      (8)   Any sign or advertising device such as banners and
pennants affixed on poles, wires, ropes, or streamers, wind-operated devices,
fluttering signs, pinwheels, streamers, banners, street banners, and A frames
or other portable signs of like nature, and other similar contraptions or
techniques except as allowed through the provisions of special displays and
other temporary signs.



      (9)   Off-site or off-premises signs except as provided in
this section.



      (10)   Signs that display flashing, intermittent, or animated
lighting or illumination, or any illumination which simulates or displays
motion, except those permitted electronic message centers.



      (11)   Signs which contain characters, or cartoons, or contain
statements, words, or pictures of any obscene, indecent, prurient, or immoral
character.



      (12)   Public area. No sign shall be permitted which is placed
on any post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on public
property except as otherwise expressly authorized by this section.



   (F)   Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally existing prior to
enactment of this section but which shall violate any provision of this
section, may continue to be maintained and used after passage of this section
subject to the following provisions:



      (1)   Enlargement. No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged,
expanded, or extended to occupy a greater square footage of height than was
occupied on the date of adoption or amendment of this section.



      (2)   Relocation. No nonconforming sign shall be moved in
whole or in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, or building not so
occupied on the



date of adoption of this section, except that any such sign which is
hereafter required to be moved by a governmental body for the purpose of
construction, relocation, widening, or improvement of a street, highway, or
other public purpose, may be relocated once and allowed to be maintained and
used as before.



      (3)   Discontinuance. If the business or service advertised or
identified by a nonconforming sign ceases to be conducted for a period
exceeding 30 calendar days, the nonconforming sign shall be classified as an
abandoned sign and removed.



      (4)   Destruction. Should any nonconforming sign be destroyed
by any means to an extent of up to 50% of its surface area or structure, it
shall not be reconstructed, except in conformance with the requirements of
this section.



      (5)   Violations not made valid. Any sign which is prohibited
by this section, and was erected in violation of the requirements of the
previous sign ordinance shall not be considered to be granted nonconforming
status by the passage of this section.



      (6)   In any instance, in cases of doubt or a specific
question raised, whether a nonconforming sign exists, it shall be a question
of fact, and shall be determined on appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (G)   Appeals. Any aggrieved person, firm, corporation, or any
governmental officer, department, board, or bureau may appeal a decision of
the Department before the Board of Zoning Appeals as established and in
conformance with the requirements of this section, subject to the further
requirements of this section.



      (1)   Grounds for granting a variance. The Board of Zoning
Appeals may grant variances from this section for any permitted form of
signage where it is found that because of the limitations on character, size,
or dimensions of a sign, or the regulations controlling the erection or
installation of a sign, the applicant would be subject to undue hardship.
Undue hardship is not considered the loss of possible advantage, economic
loss or gain, or mere inconvenience to the applicant.



      (2)   Appeals from decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall be to the circuit court in conformance with the requirements of this
section.



   (H)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.



   (I)   General sign requirements.



      (1)   Structural requirements. All signs shall comply with the
pertinent requirements of the city Building Code and the adopted building
codes.



      (2)   Every sign shall be constructed of durable materials,
using noncorrosive fastenings; shall be structurally safe; and shall be
maintained in safe condition and good repair at all times so that all sign
information is clearly legible.



      (3)   Safety. Any existing sign which is or becomes an
immediate danger or hazard to persons or property because of being in an
unsafe condition, or which obstructs any fire escape, window, or door, is
subject to immediate removal without notice and at the expense of the
property and/or sign owner.



      (4)   Maintenance. Each sign shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable, and good condition.



      (5)   Abandoned signs. Any sign or sign structure which
advertises a business no longer conducted or service no longer rendered, or a
product no longer sold on the premises or lot shall be classified an
abandoned sign and shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having
beneficial use of the premises or lot upon which the sign is located within
30 days following the effective date of vacancy.



      (6)   Illumination. Neither the direct nor reflected light
from primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard to operators of
motor vehicles on public thoroughfares.



      (7)   State right-of-way requirements. All signs erected
within the jurisdiction of state right-of-way requirements shall meet both
state and city requirements. Signs shall not project over any city or state
public right-of-way.



      (8)   Lot lines. Signs shall not project over lot lines except
as provided within this section.



   (J)   Residential signage. One-, two-, and multi-family residential
signs must comply with the general sign provisions of this section. The
allowable signage includes all permitted uses in of this section.



      (1)   Sign types prohibited:



         (a)   Wall signs, unless approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals for a home occupation and not to exceed 18 inches by 24 inches.



         (b)   Canopy or awning signs.



         (c)   Projecting signs.



         (d)   Window signs.



         (e)   Marquee signs.



         (f)   Portable signs.



         (g)   Banner signs.



         (h)   Digital or electronic variable message signs.



      (2)   Allowable signs:



         (a)   Identification signs. One identification sign may
be erected on each perimeter street frontage of a multi-family development,
manufactured/mobile home park, single-family subdivision, or permitted
nonresidential uses, including special exceptions. The sign shall not be
permitted to exceed 32 square feet of display surface area. The sign shall
not exceed seven feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by a
constant light. Additional or multiple signs may be permitted if one or more
entrances.



         (b)   Church, public or semi-public buildings, or public
park identification sign. Not more than one sign per street frontage not
exceeding 32 square feet in size per face. The sign shall be located not less
than five-feet from the front lot line and shall not exceed seven feet in
height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (c)   Construction sign. During the period of
construction, a temporary sign advertising the construction or improvements
on the premises, may be erected on each perimeter street of frontage of the
development. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area, nor
seven feet in height, and illumination, if any, shall be by constant light.



         (d)   Directional signs. Two signs per entry/exit not
exceeding six square feet in size per face.



         (e)   Memorial or tablet sign. One sign not exceeding
six square feet in size per face unless such signs are installed by the
federal, state, county, or city government or agencies thereof.



         (f)   Property real estate signs. One sign per lot
frontage not exceeding six square feet in size per face.



         (g)   Informational signs not exceeding two square feet
in size per side nor a height of four feet from the ground which identify the
occupants, occupation, address, and/or information. Examples of permitted
informational signs generally include: privacy sign, trespassing sign, seed
sign, etc.



         (h)   In R-1, R-2, R-H, R-S Districts, a sign
advertising a home occupation shall not exceed 18-inches by 24-inches and
shall not be illuminated and shall be located not less than five feet from
the front lot line. There shall be not more than one sign for each dwelling.



      (3)   Location and height:



         (a)   No sign placed upon the ground shall be located
closer than five feet to the front property line and shall meet the sight
triangle requirements of this section.



         (b)   No sign attached to the wall of a building or
other structure shall extend above the roof line of that building or
structure.



         (c)   For residential signs without a specific height
standard, the sign(s) shall not exceed seven feet in height from the
surrounding grade to the highest point of the sign.



         (d)   Direction signs. No sign shall exceed three feet
above the elevation of the adjacent driveway at the point where it meets the
street right-of-way.



         (e)   Memorial or tablet signs. No sign shall exceed
seven feet in height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the
sign.



         (f)   Property real estate signs. No sign shall exceed
three feet in height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the
sign.



      (4)   Other requirements:



         (a)   Mobile construction signs. Signs identifying
mechanics, painters, architects, engineers, and similar artisans and workmen
which are attached to or on trailers on the site of construction shall be
permitted provided that upon completion of the project the trailer must be
removed within one week. These trailers shall not be located closer than ten
feet to the property line if such signs are visible from the street.



         (b)   Residential construction project signs shall be
removed either at such time as the permanent subdivision entrance sign is
erected, or when 80% of the lots and/or dwelling units have been sold,
whichever circumstance occurs first.



         (c)   Directional sign. May contain the street address
and/or name of the business center or the name of the use of the building,
trademark, logo, or similar matter, provided that not more than 50% of the
sign area is used for this purpose.



   (K)   Business and industrial. Commercial signs must comply with the
general sign provisions of this section. The allowable signage includes all
permitted uses in of this section. Maximum allowable signage shall not exceed
three square feet per one lineal foot of frontage of the lot; and for lots
fronting on more than one street, only the established front lot lines shall
be considered as frontage of the lot.



      (1)   Allowable signs:



         (a)   Pole signs. One pole sign per lot not to exceed
300 square feet.



         (b)   Ground-mounted signs. One ground mounted sign per
lot may be substituted for the allowable pole sign. Same surface area
requirements as for pole signs.



         (c)   Attached signs. Attached signs for each side of
the building, not to exceed 25% of the total square footage of the building
face upon which it is placed. In no instance shall such signage exceed 100
square feet for a single business.



         (d)   Window/door signs. Shall not cover more than 50%
of the total window area or door to which they are applied.



         (e)   Under canopy sign. One sign not to exceed two
square feet in size displaying the name, occupation, address, and/or service
located upon the premises and shall maintain a head clearance of eight feet.



         (f)   Illuminated signs shall shine only upon the sign
and upon the property within the premises; no more than 0.2 foot candle of
light shall be detectable at the boundary of the abutting property.



         (g)   Signs within 300 feet of a residential area or
mixed use area with residential may be illuminated from 5:00 a.m. until 11:00
p.m., or 1/2-hour past the close of business of the facility being identified
or advertised, whichever is later.



         (h)   Limit of one free-standing sign is permitted for
each business parcel. Such ground sign may be illuminated and is not to
exceed seven feet in height.



         (i)   In a unified shopping center, under single
ownership or control, one additional sign may be erected; the sign shall not
exceed 150 square feet in area. The leading edge of the sign shall not be
less than five feet from the front lot line; its bottom edge shall be a
minimum of ten feet above the level of the ground; and its overall height
shall not exceed 30 feet above the curb level.



         (j)   Where a shopping center, strip center, or
developed parcel has in excess of 200 feet of street frontage, one additional
free-standing pole sign may be approved. Where more than one freestanding
pole sign is authorized, the distance between each sign shall not be less
than 100 feet.



      (2)   Location and height.



         (a)   No sign shall be placed in such a position as to
endanger pedestrians, bicyclists, or traffic on a street by obscuring the
view or by interfering with official street signs or signals by virtue of
position or color.



         (b)   Signs and their supporting structure shall
maintain clearance and noninterference with all surface and underground
utility and communications lines or equipment. No sign shall be placed on
utility easements or drainage easements as defined on recorded plats or site
plans.



         (c)   Pole signs. Such signs shall not exceed 30 feet in
height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign. The
leading edge of the sign shall not be less than five feet from the front lot
line. Its bottom edge shall be at least ten feet above the level of the
ground. It shall meet the sight triangle requirements.



         (d)   Ground-mounted sign shall not exceed seven feet in
height from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign. The
leading edge of the sign shall not be less than five feet from the front lot
line and shall be located no closer than ten feet to any side property line.
Such signs shall meet the sight triangle requirements.



         (e)   Attached signs. Shall be face mounted on the
building wall, projecting not more than 12 inches from the face of the
building. Such signs shall not project above the parapet wall, mansard, or
other roof line, shall maintain a clearance of ten feet above the ground or
pavement, and shall be recessed where involving a pitched roof location.



         (f)   Window/door signs. Such signs may be attached to
either the interior or exterior of a window or glass door and shall be
maintained in good repair.



         (g)   Under canopy signs. Such signs may be attached to
the building or canopy and shall maintain a head clearance of eight feet.



   (L)    Main street. Due to the unique character within the Main
Street project area, namely local businesses located on First Street to Third
Street, from Jackson south to Adams, and including businesses that face the
intersection of Second, Adams, Winchester, and Mercer Avenue, certain
buildings possess zero-lot lines, as such practice was typical of the time of
historic construction. In order to accommodate these businesses with their
unique challenges, the following regulations apply exclusively within the
Main Street area:



      (1)   Lighted portable message centers are not permitted.



      (2)   Permanent, non-removable wood frame awnings, canopies,
or overhangs are not permitted.



      (3)   Sidewalk feather signs are prohibited.



      (4)   Temporary signs must comply with regulations as set
forth in division (N).



      (5)   Canopy or awning signs:



         (a)   The lowest edge of the canopy or awning shall be
at least eight feet above the finished grade.



         (b)   Awnings may be of a fixed-type (not retractable)
provided they do not project more than four feet from the face of the
building.



      (6)   The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least
ten feet above the finished grade and project not more than seven feet from
the face of the building.



      (7)    No sign shall extend above the eave line.



      (8)   Pole sign:



         (a)   Shall have a minimum height of ten feet from grade
level to the bottom of the sign and a maximum height of 25 feet from grade
level to the top of the sign.



         (b)   Pole signs must be placed on private property and
may project seven feet into the city's right-of-way but not more than five
feet from the curb.



         (c)   The clear vision area must be maintained within
the required three feet to ten feet above finish grade.



      (9)   Wall signs shall be permitted on each building. Total
sign area shall be three square feet for each lineal foot of building
frontage; however, in no instance shall such total signage exceed 100 square
feet for a single business.



      (10)   Attached signs. Attached signs for each side of the
building, not to exceed 25% of the total square footage of the building face
upon which it is placed. In no instance shall such signage exceed 100 square
feet for a single business.



      (11)   Window/door signs. A maximum of 50% of the total window
area of any single business may be covered by a sign.



      (12)   Each freestanding building may have one ground sign or
one pole sign (but not both), such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in
area.



   (M)   Electronic message centers. Electronic message centers shall
be allowed with the following restrictions:



      (1)   No electronic message shall change more rapidly than
once every one and one-half seconds.



      (2)   No message shall require more than ten seconds to
display any message in its entirety.



      (3)   The message shall not display or appear to move toward
or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist or
otherwise portray movement or animation as it comes onto, is displayed on, or
leaves the message center.



      (4)   The message center shall not appear to flash, undulate,
pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of light or blinking or
chasing lights.



      (5)   One electronic message center per lot or parcel is
allowable.



      (6)   The maximum height of an electronic message center shall
not exceed the height allowable in the district.



      (7)   Message center signs and digital displays must not
exceed a maximum illumination of 460 foot-candles during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of 46 foot-candles for the time period between one-half
hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise as measured from the
sign's face at maximum brightness, measured at grade level within ten feet of
the sign face.



      (8)   Electronic message signs within 300 feet of any
residential use must automatically turn off between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. daily.



   (N)   Special displays and other temporary signs.



      (1)   A business, commercial, industrial, or multi-family
property owner may place no more than one temporary sign with a sign face no
larger than four feet tall and three feet wide. Banners and pennants are a
permitted use for up to a 14-day time period. However; the Building
Department can require removal of such banners and pennants if they are not
kept in a safe and orderly fashion.



      (2)   A property owner may place an additional temporary sign
on business, commercial, industrial, and multi-family property during the
period of time the property is for sale or lease provided the sign is removed
within seven days of sale or lease.



      (3)   Portable sidewalk/A-frame board signs.



         (a)   Signage shall be on premises, not less than ten
feet from adjoining lots.



         (b)   One sign shall be permitted per parcel with a
maximum of two signs permitted on corner lots.



         (c)   Signage shall not be illuminated.



         (d)   Signs shall not be displayed on any premises
before 6:00 a.m. and shall be removed each day of business or before 11:00
p.m., whichever is earlier. All portable signs must be taken in during hours
of non-operation of the property on which they are placed.



         (e)   All portable signs must be taken in during
inclement weather. Portable signs shall be weighted, temporarily secured, or
strategically placed so as to avoid being carried away by high winds.



         (f)   If a sign is located on a public sidewalk, a
minimum of five feet of unobstructed sidewalk clearance must be maintained
between the sign and any building or other obstruction, and within 12-feet of
the primary public entrance.



         (g)   Portable signs must comply with all state highway
regulations.



         (h)   No temporary sign shall be placed within the city
right-of-way, except as specifically stated.



      (4)   Banners shall be utilized only as a temporary wall sign
for up to a 14-day time period.



      (5)   Pole banners/feather signs shall be utilized as
temporary signage for up to a 14-day period:



         (a)   Maximum of one per 25 lineal feet of store
frontage, maximum of five.



         (b)   Shall be made of lightweight and durable fabrics
with wind slits.



         (c)   Banners that are frayed, torn, or faded so that
they are no longer legible will be deemed unmaintained and will be required
to be removed.



         (d)   Illumination is prohibited.



         (e)   Shall maintain a minimum of three foot vertical
clearance below any luminaries measured from where the ballasts connect.



         (f)   Must comply with setbacks as required for
permanent signage.



         (g)   Garage sale/yard sale signs. All advertising signs
concerning the garage/yard sale shall be restricted to the yard, garage, and
household at which the sale is being conducted.



      (6)   The following temporary signs may be approved by the
Building Department for up to a 14-day time period. Such signs may be
extended beyond the 14-day time period, but only upon review and approval by
the Board of Zoning Appeals as a special exception.



         (a)   Signs announcing openings.



         (b)   Seasonal or special occasion signs such as special
events and special business hours.



         (c)   Yard signs advertising work under construction.



         (d)   Subdivision directional signs not exceeding three
square feet in size per face.



         (e)   All other temporary signs not specifically
referenced in this section.



         (f)   Portable signs, signs not permanently affixed to
the ground.



      (7)   Social or charitable organizations. Signs indicating the
names and locations of churches, charitable organizations, and community
service organizations are permitted provided that the sign area shall not
exceed 16 square feet, and shall be located off the street right-of-way, and
shall in no way obstruct the view of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Such
signs shall be permitted as off-premises signs; providing however, such signs
have a minimum spacing of 500 feet between any two signs in this category.



      (8)   Vehicle signs. Signs on vehicles are permitted provided
the sign is painted or attached directly to the body of the original
motor-powered vehicle and does not project or extend beyond the original
manufactured body proper of the motor-driven vehicle. Such vehicles shall be
parked a minimum of ten feet from any street right-of-way and shall be
located so as to not create an obstruction or hazard to the traveling public.
Trucks may be used as signs for special events or sales for a maximum period
of 30 days.



   (O)   Off-premises signs. Off-premises sign is a sign which
communicates the availability of goods, services, and ideas not necessarily
available on the premises on which the sign is located.



      (1)   Off-premises signs:



         (a)   Shall not be attached to the external wall or
otherwise affixed to any part of any building.



         (b)   Shall not extend over any public right-of-way.



         (c)   Shall not be located on sewer or drainage
easements or right-of-way, or water, electric, or petroleum pipelines or
easements.



         (d)   Shall not be located on a bridge.



      (2)   Off-premises signs shall be permitted in the following
zoning districts: C-3, I-1, or I-2; nor be located within 300 feet of a
residential district.



      (3)   The maximum size of an off-premises sign shall be 300
square feet per sign per face, and no more than one face per side.



      (4)   Permitted heights. The maximum height of an off-premises
sign above the road grade from which the sign is to be viewed shall not
exceed 30 feet. No off-premises sign shall be less than ten feet from grade
level to bottom of sign.



      (5)   Separation. The distances between lawfully erected
off-premises sign structure shall be a linear measure taken along
right-of-way lines on the side of the street on which the sign is to be
located. Separation of one off-premises to another off-premises sign shall be
1,500 lineal feet; however, this requirement need not be met where a physical
obstruction exists which prevents viewing two off-premises signs at the same
time.



      (6)   Setback. The perpendicular distance from the
right-of-way line to the leading edge of an off-premises sign structure shall
be 25 feet from the front property line or 55 feet from the center of the
street, whichever is greater.



      (7)   Non-conforming use. All permanently attached or affixed
off-premises signs legally existing prior to the date of this section, but no
longer conforming to the provisions of this section, shall be regarded as
legal non-conforming signs and may be continued, subject to being properly
repaired and maintained as well as meeting the conditions set forth in this
section.



   (P)   Murals. A non-commercial message, picture, scene, or diagram
exhibited on the outside wall of a building or structure through application
of paint, canvas, tile, panels or similar materials such that the wall
becomes the background surface or platform for the mural. A mural shall be
considered a wall sign or commercial message if it contains words, logos,
trademarks, or graphic representations of any person, product, or service for
the purpose of advertising or identifying a business. Explanatory working
relative to the artwork may be incorporated into the mural. Signatures shall
be allowed and limited to maximum of two square feet in size. No mural shall
be installed, enlarged, changed or converted unless approval has been
obtained by the owner or his or her agent. All murals are subject to approval
by the Building/Zoning Department and Board of Public Works and Safety. Sign
permits are not required.



      (1)   Design standards.



         (a)   Should have no adverse impact on the safe and
efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



         (b)   Location, scale, and content of the mural should
be in keeping with and enhance the building or structure on which it is
located.



         (c)   Proposed mural by its design, construction, and
location will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or
the permitted use thereof.



         (d)   Is not detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare.



         (e)   Will not have a detrimental effect on the
structural integrity of the wall on which is it applied/affixed.



         (f)   Maintenance schedule is reasonable for the mural
and the building on which it is applied/affixed.



      (2)   Prohibited mural types.



         (a)   Murals with moving parts, including solar, wind or
water driven devices.



         (b)   Murals affixed, applied, or mounted from above,
upon or suspended from any part of the roof or structure.



         (c)   Murals shall not project from the wall surface
other than the minimum necessary protrusion to mount the mural to the wall or
structure.



         (d)   Murals containing any gang affiliation symbols.



         (e)   Murals containing characters, or cartoons, or
containing statements, words, or pictures of any obscene, indecent, prurient,
or immoral character.



   (Q)   Violations. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall build, reconstruct or structurally alter
any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved thereunder shall, for each and every violation or non-compliance, be
fined not less than $10, and not more than $500, and each day that such
violation or non-compliance shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Prior Code, §150.236)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 2000-4, passed
3-21-2000; Ord. 2006-9, passed 11-8-2006; Ord. 2018-13, passed 6-19-2018) 
Penalty, see §150.999



§ 150.332  STREET TREE AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO NEW
CONSTRUCTION.



   The Common Council of the city does hereby deem it desirable to
establish street tree requirements for new residential construction and
landscaping requirements for new commercial and industrial construction.



   (A)   Residential, commercial and industrial tree plantings in city
right-of-way.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish
standards for providing street trees to carry out the following objectives:



         (a)   Provide a picturesque look to the city’s streets;



         (b)   To promote compatibility between different land
uses;



         (c)   Conserve or enhance property values; and



         (d)   Conserve energy and moderate the effects of the
sun and wind.



      (2)   Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted
showing location of any existing trees and new trees to be planted along the
city right-of-way. The Plan Commission or representative will make final
approval of species and location of trees.



      (3)   Street tree requirements.



         (a)   Trees will be selected from the city’s street
tree approval list.



         (b)   Trees spaced approximately 45 feet apart along the
city’s right-of-way with at least one tree in front of each residence.



         (c)   Trees must have a strong central leader (if
applicable) and be free of any trunk wounds and with a trunk at least one and
one-half inches in diameter.



         (d)   Trees will be staked by industry standards for one
year.



         (e)   Trees shall be placed between the sidewalk and
curb.



         (f)   Large shade trees will be used (example, maple and
the like) where space is not restricted by overhead wires or greenway width.
Small trees will be used where these restrictions occur (example, hawthorne,
pear).



         (g)   The property owner or developer will pay for the
trees and installation.



         (h)   Trees must be purchased and installed by a
reputable company.



      (4)   Waiver of street tree requirements. The Planning
Commission or its representative may modify the street tree requirements upon
written request by the applicant. Such a waiver or modification may be
granted; providing that:



         (a)   Waiver is in conformance with the purpose of this
subchapter;



         (b)   Staff determines applicant has submitted adequate
documentation to support the request;



         (c)   The street trees will be unduly detrimental to the
property owner or commercial use; and



         (d)   The street trees will create a safety hazard.



      (5)   Installation and maintenance.



         (a)   All trees will be properly installed in accordance
with current horticultural practices.



         (b)   All maintenance on the street trees will be
performed by the city at the city’s expense.



         (c)   Trees planted by the property owner or commercial
enterprise must survive for two years after planting. If it dies before two
years, the property owner or developer must replace it within a three-month
period. After two years, the developer is relieved of the responsibility for
replacement and may be replaced by the city at its discretion.



      (6)   Fees for residential development. The fee for trees
planted for residential development to comply with this code section shall be
paid for at the time of application for the building permit. The amount of
the fee shall be equal to that as established by the current tree fee
schedule on file with the City Zoning and Building Department. A new fund for
the deposit of the fee is hereby established and titled Street Tree Fund. All
tree fees shall be deposited in this Fund.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial landscaping requirements for parking
areas.



      (1)   Purpose. To provide landscaping for parking areas and
commercial properties to help make the properties blend into the surrounding
areas.



      (2)   Requirements.



         (a)   Seven percent of the parking area will have
landscaping adjacent to the lot or within the lot.



         (b)   Landscaping will be a mix of trees, shrubs, ground
cover and turf.



         (c)   Trees used in landscaping that are on the city’s
easement will be subject to the city’s ordinance on street trees for
residential, commercial and industrial development.



         (d)   For every 60 parking spaces, two spaces will be
made into an island with shade trees and landscaping. Under 60 parking
spaces, lots do not require islands.



         (e)   All undeveloped land in a commercial property in
view from the city right-of- way will be landscaped or screened.



      (3)   Plan approval.



         (a)   The Planning Commission or its representative will
review landscape plans and make changes or approve.



         (b)   Landscape plan will show all species and size of
plant material, location of any islands, number of parking spaces and any
existing plant material.



         (c)   Protection plan for any existing trees is to be
included with the landscape plan.



      (4)   Waiver of landscaping. The Planning Commission or its
representative may waive or modify landscaping requirements as part of the
review and approval process, upon written request by the applicant. Such a
waiver or modification may be granted; provided that:



         (a)   Waiver or modification is in conformance with the
purpose of this section;



         (b)   Staff determines that applicant has submitted
adequate documentation to support request;



         (c)   Staff determines that required landscaping is not
necessary, based on existing site or area conditions or characteristics;



         (d)   The waiver will improve public safety; and



         (e)   The landscaping requirements will be unduly
detrimental to the property owner or commercial use.



      (5)   Maintenance. All landscaped areas in the public view
will be maintained by the owners of the property to current horticulture
standards.



      (6)   Bonding for commercial development. A bond issued for
commercial development to the Building Department will be required at the
time of applying for the building permit valued at the approximate cost of
the landscaping portion of the project. This will be used to complete the
landscaping if the developer fails to do so in a reasonable amount of time.



   (C)   Commercial and industrial buffer and screening.



      (1)   Purpose. Provide screening and buffering of structures
and parking areas of commercial and industrial adjacent to residential
property, or public rights-of-way.



      (2)   Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted to
show conformation with this section: mounds, plant material and fencing are
options. The plan will include:



         (a)   Location of existing trees, shrubs, mounds;



         (b)   Location and size of screen or buffer;



         (c)   Species, size and location of trees and or shrubs
to be planted; and



         (d)   Size, materials and colors of fencing to be used.



      (3)   Requirements of screens or buffers.



         (a)   Existing vegetation is the preferred method if
applicable.



         (b)   Mounds must be at least six feet tall and the
slope no more than 35 degrees. Drainage must not go onto adjacent property.
Mounds must be turf or landscaped to prevent erosion.



         (c)   Trees planted must be of the evergreen variety
(examples, spruce, arborvitae, juniper) and at least five feet tall at
planting time. Plant material must be purchased from a reputable company and
planting must be to current horticulture standards.



         (d)   Fencing must be six feet tall and length is long
enough to screen the area. Fencing must be aesthetically pleasing.
Landscaping is the preferred option. If chain link fence is used, then
screening material shall be applied to the fence.



      (4)   What needs screening or buffering.



         (a)   Commercial or industrial development that is
adjacent to residential property;



         (b)   All dumpsters in view from public right-of-way;



         (c)   Outdoor storage areas in view from public
rights-of-way (examples, heavy machinery, materials and junk);



         (d)   Truck loading and unloading areas in view from
public rights-of-way;



         (e)   Vehicle storage area where more than ten vehicles
are stored overnight; and



         (f)   Any land not landscaped in public view.



      (5)   Waiver of screening and buffering requirements.



         (a)   The Planning Commission or its designated
representative may waive or modify the requirements.



         (b)   Such a waiver or modification may be granted;
provided that:



            1.   Waiver or modification is in conformance with
the purpose of this section;



            2.   The staff determines that the applicant has
submitted adequate documentation to support request;



            3.   Staff determines screening or buffering is
not required because of existing site conditions or characteristics;



            4.   Requested waiver will improve the
relationship between the site design of the proposed development and public
safety issues, such as fire, safety, crime prevention; and



            5.   Screening and buffering will be unduly
detrimental to the property owner or commercial use.



      (6)   Maintenance. All plant material and fencing will be
properly maintained and dead plant material will be replaced within three
months of dying by the property owners.



   (D)   Curb to sidewalk requirements.



      (1)   Purpose. To provide an adequate greenspace to plant
street trees;



      (2)   Requirements of greenspace. There shall be an open area
(greenspace) between the curb and sidewalk;



      (3)   Location. The curb and sidewalk location is to be
included with the site plan; and



      (4)   Waiver of greenspace requirement. The Planning
Commission or its representative may waive the requirement if:



         (a)   The staff has been provided with adequate
documentation to support requests; and/or



         (b)   Requirement would pose a safety hazard.



(Prior Code, § 150.237)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1998-2,
passed 3-3-1998; Ord. 2000-05, passed 4-4-2000; Ord. 2001-11, passed
9-18-2001)



§ 150.333  ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Zero lot line developments shall comply with all requirements
for subdivisions given in this chapter and in Ch. 154 of this code of
ordinances.



   (B)   Applications for zero lot line (ZLL) development shall contain
the following information:



      (1)   A location map indicating existing zoning on the site
and adjacent area;



      (2)   Site plan at no less than one inch equals 100 feet,
including the following information:



         (a)   Lot lines and setbacks;



         (b)   Location, shape, size and height of existing and
proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements, entrance features, storm
water detention areas, sidewalks and sanitary sewer design;



         (c)   Existing and proposed landscaping;



         (d)   Recreation facilities (if applicable);



         (e)   Stage of development, if any;



         (f)   Location of off-street parking;



         (g)   Indication of exterior graphics;



         (h)   Indication of design methods used to conserve
energy; and



         (i)   Landscaped areas both interior as well as the
adjacent perimeter treatment.



      (3)   Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any
other structures such as recreation buildings.  The total amount of lineal
exterior wall area and that portion which has visual and physical access to
outside patio/court areas shall be indicated for each typical unit; and



      (4)   Information indicating the following:



         (a)   Gross and net acreage;



         (b)   Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage);



         (c)   Building heights and stories;



         (d)   Building coverage for each lot;



         (e)   Amount of common open space in square feet (if
applicable);



         (f)   Total trees provided and total trees required;



         (g)   Parking required and provided;



         (h)   Such other architectural and engineering data as
may be required to evaluate the project;



         (i)   Sidewalks and other access paths (required).
Minimum width of sidewalks is four feet; and



         (j)   Where there are no public street lights, front
yard dusk to dawn lights are required on each individual lot.




ADMINISTRATION




§ 150.345  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building Inspector is designated and authorized to enforce this
chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.240)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.346  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person who shall make application for an improvement
location permit shall, at the time of making the application, furnish a site
plan or development plan of the real estate upon which the application for an
improvement location permit is made, at least five days prior to the issuance
of the improvement location permit, which five days may be waived by the
Building Inspector.



   (B)   The site plan shall be drawn to scale, showing the following
items, both existing and proposed:



      (1)   Legal or site description of the real estate involved;



      (2)   Location and size of all buildings and structures;



      (3)   Width and length of all entrances and exits to and from
the real estate; and



      (4)   All adjacent and adjoining roads or highways.



(Prior Code, § 150.241)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.347  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT; INDUSTRIAL USE; CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE.



   An application for an improvement location permit for any industrial
use subject to the provisions of §§ 150.170 through 150.178 of this chapter
shall be accompanied by a certificate of compliance subscribed by a
registered professional engineer or architect, certifying that the use
intended will satisfy the standards of the enclosed industrial use or open
industrial use, as the case may be, and in the district in which it is to be
located. The Building Inspector may take ten days in which to study the
application, during which time he or she may consult with appropriate
technical consultants. If, after the ten-day period, the Building Inspector
has not required any additional information or stated any objections in
writing, the Building Inspector shall issue the improvement location permit.



(Prior Code, § 150.242)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.348  PLANS PERMANENT RECORD.



   Site plans or development plans so furnished shall be filed and shall
become a permanent public record.



(Prior Code, § 150.243)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.349  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   The Building Inspector shall issue an improvement location permit for a
special exception only following receipt of notice from the Board that the
application therefor has been approved by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 150.244)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.350  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used, and no building hereafter
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued, stating that the building and use comply
with all of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or
premises, or the use, in the district in which it is to be located.



   (B)   When the improvement covered by the improvement location
permit has been completed, in substantial conformity with the site plan or
development plan submitted in the application pursuant to § 150.346 of this
chapter, then a certificate of occupancy shall be issued.



(Prior Code, § 150.245)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.351  NO CHANGE OF USE.



   Except as provided in this chapter, no change shall be made in the use
of land, or the use of any building or part thereof, now or hereafter
erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, without a certificate of
occupancy having been issued by the Building Inspector, and no such
certificate shall be issued to make a change unless it is in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.246)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.352  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; APPLICATION.



   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the
application for an improvement location permit, and shall be issued within
ten days after the lawful erection, reconstruction or structural alteration
of the building or other improvement of the land shall have been completed.



(Prior Code, § 150.247)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.353  RECORDS.



   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished upon request
to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or
land affected.



(Prior Code, § 150.248)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.354  FILING OF APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No improvement location permit shall be issued for excavation for, or
the erection, reconstruction or structural alteration of, any building,
before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.



(Prior Code, § 150.249)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.355  HEALTH STANDARDS.



   An application for an improvement location permit for any use shall not
be approved until it has been ascertained by the Building Inspector that the
proposed use meets the minimum standards for a sewage disposal system as
required by the City Health Officer.



(Prior Code, § 150.250)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.356  COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.



   The work or use authorized by any improvement location permit,
certificate of occupancy or permit for a variance, contingent use or other
permit, except a special exception, must be commenced within six months of
the date of issuance of the certificate or permit, otherwise the same shall
lapse and become null and void. All work so authorized shall be completed
within 24 months from the issuance of the certificate or permit therefor,
except for a special exception; and, provided that, for good cause shown, the
Building Inspector may extend the work completion time.



(Prior Code, § 150.251)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.357  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Applications and petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be accompanied by the filing fees hereinafter specified,
which shall be paid to the Building Inspector, who shall forthwith pay them
over to the City Clerk-Treasurer to the credit of the city’s General Fund.



 



 

Fee





   Residential


Improvement location permit (ILP) (includes fences, sheds, accessory
structures of less than 150 square feet)
 
$45


Remodel, addition to existing structure, based on cost of construction
 
$45 (ILP) for first $1,000, plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or portion
thereof (does not include mechanicals)


Mechanicals, electrical, plumbing, heating/ ventilation/air conditioning
(HVAC)
 
$50 each trade


New construction, including detached structures
 
Based on square feet; $45 (ILP) for first 1,000 square feet, plus $3 for each
additional 100 square feet or portion thereof


Residential manufactured home (shall not include double-wide homes or modular
homes)
 
$100, plus $3 per 100 square feet of basement if applicable; does not include
any utility connections


Swimming pools
 
$100 in-ground; $50 above-ground


   Commercial


Improvement location permit (ILP) (includes fences, sheds, accessory
structures of less than 150 square feet)
 
$45


Remodel, addition to existing structure, based on cost of construction
 
$45 (ILP) for first $1,000, plus $7 for each additional $1,000 or portion
thereof (does not include mechanicals)


Mechanicals, electrical, plumbing, heating/ ventilation/air conditioning
(HVAC), sprinkler
 
$100 each trade


New construction, including detached structures
 
Based on square feet; $45 (ILP) for first 1,000 square feet, plus $7 for each
additional 100 square feet or portion thereof




 



   (B)   For each re-inspection for a code violation, a fee of $50
shall be paid.



   (C)   For each application for a demolition permit, a fee of $45 per
lot shall be paid.



   (D)   The following fees shall apply for all signs:



 



 

Fee



Off-premise sign
 
$500


On-premise, free- standing sign
 
$100


Each wall-mounted sign, lighted or unlighted
 
$100 principal sign

$20 each additional


Directional or informational sign upon a lot
 
$20



 



   (E)   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall
be returnable to the applicant, appellant of petitioner.



   (F)   Notwithstanding building permit/improvement location fees
charged pursuant to the foregoing divisions, for a project which has been
approved by the Building Department or for which the Plan Commission has
given site plan approval, if such permit fees charged by the city for
issuance of necessary city permits would otherwise collectively exceed
$25,000, such fees shall be capped at $25,000 and no additional amounts shall
be charged by the Building Department for the issuance of any remaining
building permits/improvement location permits needed to complete the project
as approved.



(Prior Code, §150.252)  (Ord. 1999-11, passed 1-18-2000; Ord. 2015-9,
passed 7-7-2015; Ord. 2018-4, passed 2-6-2018)



§ 150.358  ZONING FEES.



   (A)   For each petition for $300:



      (1)   An appeal from decision of the Building Inspector;



      (2)   An application for the approval by the Board of Zoning
Appeals for special exception; and



      (3)   An application for the approval by the Board of Zoning
Appeals for variance.



   (B)   For each petition for $300:



      (1)   Amendment to this chapter; or



      (2)   Zoning change.



   (C)   For each filing for site development:



      (1)   For multi-family projects and those projects  within
the C-1 or C-2 Districts subject to department head review, $100.



      (2)   For multi-family projects and those projects within C-3,
I-1 or I-2 Districts subject to Plan Commission review, $400.



   (D)   For each filing for a housing subdivision:



      (1)   For the preliminary plat plan for a subdivision, $500.



      (2)   For each filing for secondary plat plan, $500 plus $20
per lot.



      (3)   For each filing for final plat plan, $300.



   (E)   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to this section shall
be returnable to the applicant, appellant or petitioner.



(Prior Code, § 150.253)  (Ord. 1999-11, passed 1-18-2000; Ord. 2015-9,
passed 7-7-2015)




BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS




§ 150.370  CREATION AND APPOINTMENT.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals is established and maintained, and
appointments thereto shall be made, all pursuant to the provisions of I.C.
36-7-4-902. The terms of appointments to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-906, and all other provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-901
through 36-7-4-915 shall govern and control all matters pertaining to the
Board of Zoning Appeals. Reference herein to sections of the state code shall
be construed to refer to any and all amendments thereto.



(Prior Code, § 150.260)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978; Ord. 1987-3,
passed 4-7-1987)



Statutory reference:



   Members, see I.C. 36-7-4-902



   Officers, see I.C. 36-7-4-912



   Restrictions on membership, see I.C. 36-7-4-905



   Terms, see I.C. 36-7-4-906



§ 150.371  OFFICERS AND RULES.



   (A)   At the first meeting of each year, the Board shall elect a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members; and it may appoint
and fix the compensation of a Secretary and those employees as are necessary
for the discharge of its duties, all in conformity to and compliance with
salaries and compensations therefor fixed by the City Common Council.



   (B)   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in
conflict with this chapter nor with the state statutes in such case made and
provided.



   (C)   All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as such Board may determine. The Chairperson
or, in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open
to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or if absent of failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations,
hearings and other official actions. Findings of fact shall be included in
the minutes of each case of a requested variation, and the reasons for
recommending or denying the variation shall be specified. Every rule or
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall be filed immediately in the
office of the Board and shall be a public record.



(Prior Code, § 150.261)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Minutes, see I.C. 36-7-4-915



   Secretary and employees, see I.C. 36-7-4-913



§ 150.372  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   (1)   An appeal may be taken to the Board by any person,
firm or corporation aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau
of the city or county affected by any decision of the Building Inspector. The
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as shall be prescribed by the
Board by general rule, by filing with the Building Inspector and with the
Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof.



      (2)   The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.



   (B)   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal and file notice thereof in the manner provided by §
150.358 of this chapter. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
Following the conclusion of the hearing, a decision on the appeal shall be
rendered within 20 days. Any person may appear and testify at any hearing,
either in person or by counsel.



(Prior Code, § 150.262)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Appeals, see I.C. 36-7-4-919 and 36-7-4-920



§ 150.373  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   The Board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building
Inspector in the enforcement of this chapter;



   (B)   To hear and decide by granting or denying an exception to the
provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the following
instances:



      (1)   A request for the extension of a district, where the
boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership
at the time of passage of this chapter;



      (2)   Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way
as to carry out the intent and purpose of the zoning plan, as shown on the
zoning map, where the street layout actually existing on the ground varies
from the street layout as shown on the map;



      (3)   Permit the reconstruction of a non- conforming building
which has been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 80%
of its actual value, where the Board finds that the public interest will be
best served by permitting a continuance of the non-conforming use; and



      (4)   Waive or reduce the parking and loading and unloading
berth requirements in any of the districts, whenever the character or use of
the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or
loading and unloading berth facilities, or whenever the regulations would
impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the premises as distinguished
from merely granting an advantage or a convenience.



   (C)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board is required to pass under this chapter; and



   (D)   Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this
chapter, the Board shall have authority to authorize, upon appeal in specific
cases, variances from the terms of this chapter, when the following is made
to appear by the property owners:



      (1)   A strict compliance with the terms of this chapter
relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures,
or the use of land, will impose upon the owner unusual and practical
difficulties or particular hardships;



      (2)   The variance would be in harmony with the general
purpose, intent and spirit of this chapter; and



      (3)   By granting the request for a variance substantial
justice will be done and the granting of the requested variance will not
serve merely as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate a
demonstrable hardship, and at the same time surrounding property will be
reasonably protected.



(Prior Code, § 150.263)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties, see I.C. 36-7-4-918.1 through 36-7-4-918.8



§ 150.374  FINDINGS AND ACTION.



   In its consideration of a specific case, the Board must determine that
the granting of a variance from the terms of this chapter will not be
contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, fully
demonstrated on the basis of the facts presented, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and that
the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done.



   (A)   In considering all appeals and any proposed exception or
variance to this chapter the Board, before making any exception or variance
in a specific case, shall first determine that:



      (1)   The granting of exception will not permit any use in any
district which would be in conflict with the permitted uses of the district
under the terms of this chapter;



      (2)   It will not impair an adequate supply of light and air
to adjacent property;



      (3)   It will not unreasonably increase the congestion in
public streets;



      (4)   It will not increase the danger of fire or of the public
safety;



      (5)   If will not unreasonably diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area; and



      (6)   It will not in any other respect impair the public
health, comfort, safety, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city.



   (B)   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which the Board is authorized by this chapter to render a decision.



   (C)   In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and
make the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made
and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Building Inspector from
whom the appeal is taken.



   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant
to the Board the power or authority to alter or change the zoning ordinance
or the zone map, the power and authority being reserved to the Common Council
in the manner hereinafter provided in § 150.390 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 150.264)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.375  HEARING REQUEST.



   The Board shall make no finding, except in a specific case and after a
public hearing conducted by the Board. A reasonable time and place for the
hearing shall be selected by the Board, and prior to the determination of an
appeal or a decision on a permit for a special exception, or a request for a
variance, or an exception, the Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing. Public notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set
for the hearing by publishing a notice thereof as required under I.C. 5-3-1-2
and 5-3-1-4.



(Prior Code, § 150.265)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



Statutory reference.



   Public hearing; notice, see I.C. 36-7-4-920



§ 150.376  APPEAL OF BOARD’S DECISION.



   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by certiorari
procedure.



(Prior Code, § 150.266)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)




AMENDMENTS




§ 150.390  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with I.C.
36-7-4-503 through 36-7-4-509 and I.C. 36-7-4-607 through 36-7-4-611.



(Prior Code, § 150.270)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, or who shall build, reconstruct or structurally alter any building
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved
thereunder shall, for each and every violation or non-compliance, be fined
not less than $10, and not more than $500, and each day that such violation
or non-compliance shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Prior Code, § 150.999)  (Ord. 1978-4, passed 3-21-1978)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING CODE; STANDARDS



Section




Building Code




   151.01   Building Code adopted



   151.02   Office of Building Inspector established



   151.03   Permits




Standards; Enforcement




   151.15   Adoption



   151.16   Administration



   151.17   Maximum amount of performance bonds



 



   151.99   Penalty




BUILDING CODE




§ 151.01  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   (A) The building, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical,
plumbing and sanitation standards as now or hereafter approved by the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the state, as set out in the
following articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code and as the
same are now or hereafter applicable to dwellings, buildings, or structures
in the city, and all amendments thereto, shall hereafter be the building,
heating, ventilating, air conditioning, electrical, plumbing and sanitation
codes and standards in and for the city.



   (B)   A listing of the current codes adopted and in use can be
viewed at the city’s website at www.decaturin.org.



   (C)   Copies of the foregoing rules and regulations are on file for
reference in the office of the Building Inspector of the city in the city
hall or at www.decaturin.org.



   (D)   All new construction including residential, commercial and
industrial shall be required to meet the following minimum building standards.



      (1)   The ground floor level of new construction shall be
built on a grade level not less than 15 inches above the crown of the street
on which the new construction is located.



      (2)   The sanitary sewer outlet from new construction shall
not be located more than four feet below the ground floor grade level. The
only exception to this requirement is if the new construction contains a
walk-out basement and then the depth of the sanitary sewer outlet if greater
than four feet must be approved by the Building Inspector and City Engineer.



   (D)   Manufactured housing located on any city lot or within any
subdivision within the city shall meet the following requirements.



      (1)   Each manufactured home shall have a minimum width of 23
feet.



      (2)   The front entrance to and the longest portion of a
manufactured home shall face the street upon which it is located.



   (E)   All new construction including residential, commercial and
industrial, shall include sidewalks as a part of the development plan.



   (F)   All new construction, including residential, commercial and
industrial, shall have property lines and proposed building identified by
licensed surveyor, with copy of final survey to be provided to the office of
the Building Department.



   (G)   Current codes per Indiana Department of Homeland
Security/codes, standards and other rules. The 2014 Indiana Building,
Mechanical, Fire and Fuel Gas codes went into effect on December 1, 2014. The
final rules are available below. For information on codes and standards in
effect prior to current editions, contact Code Services at (317) 232-1402.



      (1)   General Administrative Rules: (675 I.A.C. 12);



      (2)   Indiana Building Code: (675 I.A.C. 13 IBC); 2012
International Building Code (1st printing) with Indiana Amendments; effective
December 1, 2014;



      (3)   Indiana Residential Code: (675 I.A.C. 14 OTFDC); 2003
International Residential Code (5th printing) with Indiana amendments;
effective April 15, 2012);



      (4)   Indiana Plumbing Code: (675 I.A.C. 16 IPC): 2006
International Plumbing Code with Indiana amendments; effective December 24,
2012;



      (5)   Indiana Electrical Code: (675 I.A.C. 17 1EC); 2008
National Electrical Code (1st printing) with Indiana amendments; effective
August 26, 2009;



      (6)   Indiana Mechanical Code: (675 I.A.C. 18); 2012
International Mechanical Code (1st printing) with Indiana amendments;
effective December 1, 2014;



      (7)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code 2010: (675 I.A.C. 19);
ASHRAE 90.1 2007 Edition with Indiana amendments; effective May 6, 2010;



      (8)   Indiana Swimming Pool Code: (675 I.A.C. 20); 1989
Indiana Swimming Pool Code with Indiana amendments; effective April 24, 2011;



      (9)   Indiana Fire Code: (675 I.A.C. 22); 2012 International
Fire Code (1st printing) with Indiana amendments; effective December 1, 2014;



      (10)   Indiana Fuel Gas Code: (675 I.A.C. 25); 2012
International Fuel Gas Code (1st printing) with Indiana amendments; effective
December 1, 2014; and



      (11)   Code books: code books can be obtained through the
International Code Council (ICC) www.iccsafe.org .



(Prior Code, § 151.01)  (Ord. 1980-1, passed 1-15-1980; Ord. 1988-5, passed
3-15-1988; Ord. 1993-7, passed 11-2-1993; Ord. 2001-2, passed 3-20-2001)



§ 151.02  OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is established the Office of Building Inspector.



   (B)   The Building Inspector shall possess the following
qualifications: a minimum of a high school education or equivalent, plus five
years work experience in the building trades with a working knowledge of
state and local building codes; certification by the Council of American
Building Officials or possess an equivalent certification from another
recognized builder council.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to approval of the Common Council; the Inspector’s appointment
shall continue during good behavior and service, and shall not be terminated
from office, except for cause after full opportunity for a hearing.



   (D)   The Building Inspector is authorized and directed to enforce
all the provisions of the building codes as adopted herein.



(Prior Code, § 151.02)  (Ord. 1999-11, passed 1-18-2000)



§ 151.03  PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, remove, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure in the
city, or cause the same to be done, until first having obtained a separate
building permit for each such building or structure from the Building
Inspector, who may require plans thereof together with a statement of
materials to be used.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued until an improvement
location permit shall have been obtained pursuant to Ch. 153 of this code of
ordinances.



   (C)   To obtain a permit, the applicant must first file an
application therefor in writing on a form to be furnished by the Building
Inspector, and every applicant shall complete all information requested on
the form.



   (D)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets
of plans and specifications.



   (E)   The applications, plans and specifications, filed by an
applicant for a permit shall be checked by the Building Inspector. If the
Building Inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for
a permit and the plans filed therewith conform to the requirements of the
code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he or she shall review the
plans and specifications for code compliance. If any code violations are
noted or any additional information is needed, the Building Department will
notify the applicant immediately. Such code compliant plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without
authorization from the Building Inspector. In identified floodway fringe
districts, the Building Inspector shall review all permit applications to
endorse that all buildings are designed and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and to minimize
potential flood damages.



(Prior Code, §151.03)  (Ord. 1981-5, passed 6-16-1981; Ord. 2017-21, passed
12-5-2017)



STANDARDS; ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.15  ADOPTION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-3, 36-7-9-1 through and inclusive of 36-7-9-28,
and as the same is amended from time to time, is adopted by the city and all
provisions thereof are incorporated herein by reference and with the same
force and effect, as if fully set forth herein.



(Prior Code, § 155.01)  (Ord. 1983-9, passed 6-7-1983)



§ 151.16  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The Office of the Building Inspector shall be responsible for
the administration of the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through and inclusive
of 36-7-9-29.



   (B)   The Building Inspector, as the chief administrative officer,
is hereby designated as the enforcement authority for the Office of Building
Inspector under I.C. 36-7-9-2.



   (C)   The Mayor shall designate a hearing officer to serve as the
Hearing Authority pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-2 in the event orders are issued by
the Enforcement Authority which necessitates an administrative hearing to be
held under I.C. 36-7-9-7. When appointing a hearing officer, the Mayor shall
give preference to an attorney who is licensed to practice law, who has
experience in serving as a hearing officer, and who can serve impartially.
The hearing officer shall be responsible for conducting the administrative
hearing in accordance with and pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-7. An audio recording
of the hearing shall be made. The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing
in an informal manner and without strict adherence to the technical rules of
evidence and procedure which govern judicial proceedings. The hearing officer
shall rule on the admissibility of any offer of proof, and on other motions,
and shall exclude evidence that is irrelevant, immaterial, unduly
repetitious, or excludable on constitutional or statutory grounds. Requests
for discovery may be permitted by the hearing officer, if permissible under
the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure in the context of an administrative
hearing and if a request for discovery is made in compliance with such rules.
Improper requests for discovery may be denied by the hearing officer. In
addition, the hearing officer may take official notice of any section of the
city's building code, standards and enforcement contained in this Chapter
151, and any law or fact that could be judicially noticed in the courts. The
testimony of each party and witness shall be made under oath or affirmation.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may make findings and
take action to affirm an enforcement order, rescind the order, or modify the
order in a manner that is less stringent. The hearing officer may also impose
civil penalties of up to $2,500 per civil penalty as may be permitted
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-7 and I.C. 36-7-9-7.5, collection of which may be
made in the form of collection of a judgment pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-13 or
may be processed and collected as a special assessment pursuant to I.C.
36-7-9-13.5. The decision of the hearing officer shall be based exclusively
upon the evidence of record in the hearing and on matters officially noticed
therein. Certain actions taken by the hearing officer shall be considered
final and may be appealed pursuant to I.C. 36-7-9-8.



(Prior Code, §155.02)  (Ord. 1983-9, passed 6-7-1983; Ord. 2007-8, passed
10-2-2007; Ord. 2018-9, passed 4-17-2018)



§ 151.17  MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   (A)   The maximum amount of a performance bond applicable to orders
requiring repair of an unsafe building shall be at the rate of $20 per square
foot of affected area.



   (B)   The maximum amount of performance bond applicable to an order
requiring removal of all or part of an unsafe building shall be at the rate
of $3 per square foot of the building to be removed.



(Prior Code, § 155.03)  (Ord. 1984-2, passed 5-15-1984)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §§ 151.01
through 151.03 of this chapter or Building Code or fail to comply therewith
on any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, enlarge,
alter, repair, move, remove, demolish, convert, occupy or use a building or
structure in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 151.01 through 151.03
of this chapter or the Building Code shall be punishable by fine of not less
than $10 and not more than $100.



(Prior Code, § 151.99)  (Ord. 1988-5, passed 3-15-1988)



CHAPTER 152:  HOUSE NUMBERING



Section



   152.01   House numbering required



   152.02   System of numbering



   152.03   Duties of City Engineer



   152.04   Duty of home owner



   152.05   Size of numbers



§ 152.01  HOUSE NUMBERING REQUIRED.



   The owner of every building erected on any street, avenue or alley in
the city shall be and is hereby required to number the building by placing
the number thereof in a conspicuous place on the front of such building.



(Prior Code, § 152.01)



§ 152.02  SYSTEM OF NUMBERING.



   The owner of any building on any street, avenue or alley in the city
shall be furnished the information relative to the number of such building by
the City Engineer. One whole number shall be allowed on every 22 feet of
ground wherever practicable, whether improved or vacant; provided that, any
house or tenement with less frontage than 22 feet shall receive a whole
number, and business rooms shall receive an extra number if the second floor
is occupied by tenants; and all streets, avenues or alleys running north and
south shall be numbered north from Madison Street with even numbers on the
east side and the odd numbers on the west side of the streets, avenues or
alleys; and all streets, avenues and alleys running north and south shall be
numbered south from Madison Street with even numbers on the west side of the
streets, avenues or alleys and odd numbers on the east side of the streets,
avenues or alleys; and all streets, avenues or alleys running east and west
shall be numbered east from First and High Streets with even numbers on the
south side of the streets, avenues or alleys and odd numbers on the north
side of the streets, avenues or alleys; and all streets, avenues or alleys
running east and west shall be numbered west from First and High streets with
the even numbers on the north side of the streets, avenues or alleys and odd
numbers on the south side of the streets, avenues or alleys. In numbering
streets, avenues or alleys, 100 numbers shall be allowed to each block of
usual length so that the number of each consecutive block will commence with
101.



(Prior Code, § 152.02)



§ 152.03  DUTIES OF CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)   The City Civil Engineer, in making out the proper numbers of
the houses, shall be governed by the initial or starting point which shall be
Madison Street and First and High Streets, respectively, allowing 100 numbers
for each square, with an even number at the commencement of each square as
aforesaid, and in all respects adhering to the decimal system of enumeration.
Also, in all streets running in opposite direction, but which do not extend
to the initial points, the same order of enumeration shall be observed as
though such streets did actually extend to such points. In such parts of the
city as may be impracticable to actually follow this system, the City Civil
Engineer shall arrange the numbering as nearly in accordance therewith as
possible.



   (B)   The City Civil Engineer is required to have the different lots
and blocks herein required to be numbered in the proper spaces and to fix to
each of the spaces the proper number and to enter into a suitable record to
be prepared by him or her and kept in his or her office, a distinct
memorandum of such spaces of the corresponding numbers. At all reasonable
hours when requested to do so, the Engineer shall permit such information to
be inspected and copies to be taken therefrom and he or she shall furnish
information as to the proper number to represent any building or piece of
ground, whether or not required to be numbered by Council.



(Prior Code, § 152.03)



§ 152.04  DUTY OF HOME OWNER.



   The numbers shall be placed in position on the buildings as above
provided within 60 days from the date of the passage of this chapter without
further notice and, upon their failure to be so placed by the property
owners, the city shall, at the expense of the property owners, proceed to
place the numbers. The costs and expenses of placing the numbers by the city
shall be due and payable to the Clerk-Treasurer within ten days after being
so placed. Upon failure of the property owners to pay the same, the costs and
charges shall be declared a lien on the property and be certified by the
Clerk-Treasurer to the County Auditor who shall place the same on the tax
duplicate and collect as other delinquent taxes are collected.



(Prior Code, § 152.04)



§ 152.05  SIZE OF NUMBERS.



   The numbers shall be a minimum three-inch block figures, in contrasting
colors or engraved in monument stone. Home numbers shall be a minimum 75 feet
from the right-of-way. Use of a pole, pedestal or constructed monument shall
be acceptable. Monument mounting of house numbers shall be set within ten
feet of the house drive.



(Prior Code, § 152.05)



CHAPTER 153:  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS



Section



   153.01   Improvement location permit required



   153.02   Building Inspector to issue permits



   153.03   Site plan; permit fee



   153.04   Appeals



   153.05   Injunctive proceedings



   153.06   Amendments



   153.07   Calculations, design standards and specifications



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Within the territorial jurisdiction of the City Plan Commission, no
structure, improvement or use of land may be altered, changed, placed,
erected or located on platted or unplatted lands, unless the structure,
improvement or use, and its location conform with the master plan and
ordinance of the city, issuance of a land disturbance permit, if required
under this code of ordinances has occurred and an improvement location permit
for such structure, improvement or use has been issued.



(Prior Code, § 153.01)  (Amended 7-22-2008)



§ 153.02  BUILDING INSPECTOR TO ISSUE PERMITS.



   The Building Inspector shall issue an improvement location permit, upon
written application, when the proposed structure, improvement or use and its
location conform in all respects to the master plan for the city.



(Prior Code, § 153.02)



§ 153.03  SITE PLAN; PERMIT FEE.



   (A)   Every application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the
structure, improvement or use to be altered, changed, placed, erected or
located, the dimensions of the lot to be improved, the size of yards and open
spaces, existing and proposed streets and alleys adjoining or within the lot,
and the manner in which the location is to be improved.



   (B)   Application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of $50.



(Prior Code, § 153.03)



§ 153.04  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any decision of the Building Inspector concerning the issuance
of an improvement location permit may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals when the decision in question involves a requirement of Ch. 150 of
this code of ordinances, or to the City Plan Commission when the decision in
question involves the requirements of other parts of the master plan, by any
person claiming to be adversely affected by such decision.



   (B)   A decision of the City Plan Commission may be reviewed by
certiorari procedures as provided for the appeal of zoning cases from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Prior Code, § 153.04)



§ 153.05  INJUNCTIVE PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Commission, the Building Inspector or any designated
enforcement official or any person or persons, firm or corporation, jointly
or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit
Court of the county to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from
violating the provisions of this title of the code of ordinances.



   (B)   The Commission or the Board may also institute a suit for
mandatory injunction directing any individual, corporation or governmental
unit to remove a structure erected in violation of the provisions of this
title of the code of ordinances.



   (C)   Any building erected, raised or converted, or land or premises
used in violation of any provisions of this chapter or the requirement
thereof, is declared to be a common nuisance and as such may be abated in
such manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under existing
law.



(Prior Code, § 153.05)  (Ord. 1993-7, passed 11-2-1993)



§ 153.06  AMENDMENTS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with §§ 64 and
37 through 42 of Ch. 174 of the Acts of the Indiana General Assembly of 1947,
and all Acts amendatory thereto.



(Prior Code, § 153.06)



§ 153.07  CALCULATIONS, DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   The calculation methods as well as the type, sizing, placement of storm
sewers, inlets, manholes and all stormwater pollution prevention measures for
construction sites shall meet the design criteria included in the Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual adopted and approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction, shall be fined not less than $10 and not more than $300 for each
offense.



(Prior Code, § 153.99)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Short title



   154.002   Purpose



   154.003   Application



   154.004   Definitions




Procedures for Submission, Review and Approval of Subdivision




   154.015   Application



   154.016   Sketch plan



   154.017   Primary plat



   154.018   Secondary plat



   154.019   Final plat



   154.020   Bonding procedure and final plat approval



   154.021   Recording of final plat and covenants




Related Procedures




   154.035   Resubdivision plats



   154.036   Withdrawal of approval



   154.037   Expiration of approval



   154.038   Dedication and reservation of land for park and recreation
purposes




Sketch Plan Requirements




   154.050   Information




Primary Plat Requirements




   154.065   Primary plat content



   154.066   Primary plat plan statement



   154.067   Preliminary site drawing



   154.068   Primary plat



   154.069   Preliminary cross-section plan




Secondary Plat Requirements




   154.080   Plan requirements




Final Plat Requirements




   154.095   Drawing and information requirements



   154.096   Supplementary material



   154.097   Final plat sections




Improvements Required




   154.110   Improvements to conform to requirements of chapter



   154.111   Street grading and surfacing



   154.112   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks



   154.113   Water supply and sewage disposal



   154.114   Storm drainage



   154.115   Street signs



   154.116   Street lighting



   154.117   Monuments



   154.118   Revegetation and landscaping



   154.119   Floodplains and other hazards



   154.120   Fire protection



   154.121   Parks and public areas



   154.122   Offer of dedication




Design Standards




   154.135   General standards



   154.136   Streets



   154.137   Street names



   154.138   Sidewalks, curbs and gutters



   154.139   Blocks



   154.140   Lots



   154.141   Easements



   154.142   Building setback lines



   154.143   Monuments and line markers



   154.144   Park principles and standards



   154.145   Fee in lieu of land dedication



   154.146   Limitation on park




Improvement Inspections




   154.160   Inspections



   154.161   Notification




Certificates




   154.175   Certificate forms




Minimum Standards for Road and Street Construction




   154.190   Classification system



   154.191   General requirements




Violations




   154.205   Violations designated



 



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter, and ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto, shall
be known as the “Subdivision Control Code” or “this chapter”
throughout.



(Prior Code, § 154.01)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.002  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the city; to assist orderly, efficient
and integrated development of the city; to promote an adequate, efficient and
safe street and road system; to assure planning for and provision of an
adequate and safe water supply and sewage disposal system; to provide for
adequate utilities and public improvements; to prevent loss and injury from
fire, floods and other hazards, to safeguard the interests of the public,
homeowner and subdivider; and to protect the natural resources of the city.



(Prior Code, § 154.02)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.003  APPLICATION.



   The regulations established by this chapter shall apply to all
subdivisions or parts of subdivisions or lands defined in § 154.004 of this
chapter, lying wholly or partly within the city or its official planning
jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 154.03)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A minor public way, primarily for vehicular access to the rear
or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.



   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded
by streets, highways, railways or waterways, or the exterior boundaries of
the subdivision.



   BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINES (FRONT YARD SETBACK). A line on a plat between
which line and the adjacent street line, buildings or structures may not be
erected.



   COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission.



   DISPOSITION. A contract of sale resulting in the transfer of equitable
title to an interest in subdivided land; an option to purchase an interest in
subdivided land; a lease or an assignment of an interest in subdivided land;
or any other conveyance of an interest in subdivided land.



   DWELLING UNIT OR UNITS. A place of residence that may be located in
either a single or multiple dwelling unit building.



   EASEMENTS. Areas other than streets and alleys which are reserved,
conveyed or dedicated for specialized or limited purposes.



   EVIDENCE. Any map, table, chart, contract or any other document of
testimony prepared or certified by a qualified person to attest to a specific
claim or condition which evidence must be relevant and competent and must
support the position maintained by the subdivider.



   FLOOD or FLOODWATER. The water of any watercourse which is above the
banks or outside the channel and banks of such watercourse.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Any floodplain, floodway or floodway-fringe
district, or any combination thereof as shown on the zoning map of the city;
provided, such area, for purpose of participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program under the Federal Insurance Administration only, shall
include any area designated as a flood hazard area on the most current
Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard Boundary Map, as revised from
time to time, in addition to area otherwise designated as a flood hazard area
by Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances.



   FRONT YARD SETBACK. A line on a plat between which line and the
adjacent street line, buildings or structures may not be erected.



   IMPROVEMENT PLAN. A map, engineering drawing, text or other supporting
materials detailing the improvements required or proposed for a subdivision
and showing how these will be constructed or provided.



   LOT. A parcel of portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by
metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, separate use or building
development.



   MASTER PLAN. A complete plan or any part of such plan for the
development of the city as prepared and adopted by the City Plan Commission.



   NECESSARY LAND. The land to be dedicated for school or park purposes
shall mean that amount of suitable acreage which is required by the
Commission or Board of Public Works in connection with the formulas and
standards provided in this chapter.



   PLAT. A map and supporting materials of certain described land,
prepared in accordance with the subdivision regulations as an instrument for
recording of real estate interests with the County Recorder.



   PRIMARY PLAT. The map or maps of a proposed subdivision and specific
supporting materials, drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter to permit the evaluation of the proposal prior to detailed
engineering and design.



   PUBLIC HEARING or HEARING. A hearing, held by the Plan Commission,
pursuant to notice stating the matter to be heard, the time and place of the
hearing, published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, unless
otherwise designated by statute, at least seven days prior to the date set
for the hearing, for the purpose of affording the public an opportunity to be
heard with regard to such matter. In the event that any applicable statute
specifies a different manner of notice or is otherwise in conflict, the
requirements of the statute shall control and shall be followed in lieu of
these notice requirements.



   SKETCH PLAN. A drawing of a proposed subdivision, drawn and submitted
in accordance with the requirements of § 154.050 of this chapter in order
for the Plan Commission to evaluate the design characteristics and
feasibility of a proposed subdivision at an early state in the planning.



   STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of
vehicular access to abutting property whether indicated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, drive, parkway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, land or
otherwise.



   SUBDIVIDER or DEVELOPER. Any person, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association or corporation who shall participate as owner, promoter,
developer or sales agent, in the planning, platting, development, promotion,
sale or lease of a subdivision.



   SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDED LAND. Any parcel of land in the city or its
official planning jurisdiction including land to be used for condominiums,
apartments or any other multiple dwelling units unless such land when
previously subdivided was accompanied by a filing which complied with the
provisions of this chapter with substantially the same density, or which is
divided into two or more parcels, separate interests or interests in common,
unless exempted under divisions (1) or (2) below.



      (1)   The terms SUBDIVISION and SUBDIVIDED LAND, as defined in
this section, shall apply to the division of any parcel of land, shown as a
unit, as part of a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding transfer
of ownership, into two or more parcels or lots for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or improvement of one or more
of these parcels of land  for residential, commercial or industrial
structures or groups of structures. All divisions of land meeting the above
described definition of a SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVIDED LAND shall have a plat
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.



      (2)   Unless the method of disposition is adopted for the
purpose of evading this chapter, the terms SUBDIVISION and SUBDIVIDED LAND,
as defined in this section, shall not apply to any division of land:



         (a)   Created by order of any court in this state or by
operation of law;



         (b)   Created by lien, mortgage, deed of trust or any
other security instrument;



         (c)   Created by a security or unit of interest in any
investment trust regulated under the laws of the state or any other interest
in any investment entity;



         (d)   Created as cemetery lots; or



         (e)   Created by the acquisition of an interest in land
in the name of a husband and wife or other persons in joint tenancy or as
tenants in common and such interest shall be deemed for purposes of this
section as only one interest.



(Prior Code, § 154.04)



PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION, REVIEW, AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION



§ 154.015  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any subdivider desiring to subdivide or lay out any
subdivision of land situated within the corporate limits of the city or its
official planning jurisdiction shall, prior to the sale of any lot, lots or
lands in such proposed subdivision, obtain final approval of the subdivision
and record in the office of the County Recorder, a correct final plat of
subdivision, in the manner and form hereinafter prescribed.



   (B)   A subdivider desiring the approval of a plat for the
subdivision of any lands, as referred to above, shall make application as set
forth in this chapter.



   (C)   The Plan Commission is authorized in specific cases to grant
variance from the terms of this chapter which will not be contrary to the
public interest, where owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated by the
facts presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this would result
in unnecessary hardships and so that the spirit of the chapter shall be
observed and substantial justice done.



(Prior Code, § 154.10)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.016  SKETCH PLAN.



   (A)   Filing of sketch plan. A sketch plan of a proposed
subdivision, conforming with the requirements of § 154.050 of this chapter,
shall be filed in the office of the City Building Inspector.



   (B)   Zoning Administrator action. The Zoning Administrator will
hold an executive meeting with the City Engineer, City Building Inspector and
applicant to review the proposed plan.  The Zoning Administrator shall
review the sketch plan and communicate suggestions, recommendations and a
prospective schedule to the subdivider..



(Prior Code, § 154.11)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.017  PRIMARY PLAT.



   (A)   Filing of primary plat. A primary plat, conforming with the
requirements of §§ 154.065 through 154.069 of this chapter, shall be filed
in the office of the City Building Inspector, together with the appropriate
filing fee. Ten copies of the primary plat shall be filed. The City Building
Inspector shall refer the preliminary plan to the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Referral and review. Upon receipt of the complete primary
plat, the City Building Inspector shall distribute copies of the primary plat
to any agency or person affected by or interested in the proposed
subdivision. The agency or person shall make recommendations or comments to
the Plan Commission within ten days after receipt. Recommendations shall be
in writing and filed in the office of the City Building Inspector, who shall
refer them to the Plan Commission at its meeting for consideration of the
plan as provided in division (C) below.



   (C)   Public  hearing. Upon receipt of the primary plat and
recommendations or comments from agencies or persons to whom copies of the
primary plat were distributed pursuant to division (B) above, the Plan
Commission shall set a date for a public hearing on the primary plat,
notifying the applicant-subdivider in writing of the date, time and place.
Notice of the meeting shall be published in the manner described in §
154.004 of this chapter. The public hearing may be continued if the Plan
Commission, in  its discretion, deems it necessary to afford all interested
persons an opportunity to be heard or if it is necessary for the Plan
Commission to make an informed and reasoned judgment on the primary plat.



   (D)   Plan Commission action. Within 90 days after the filing of a
primary plat, unless the time is extended by agreement of the subdivider, the
Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the primary plat. The decision of
the Plan Commission shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. If the
primary plat is disapproved, the reason for the disapproval shall be recorded
in the minutes of the meeting in clear and concise terms, together with a
clear and concise statement of what, if any, changes to the primary plat will
render the plan acceptable. A copy of the Plan Commission minutes, containing
the approval of a primary plat shall be referred to the Board of Public Works
for its information and to the subdivider, upon written request. If the Plan
Commission does not take action within 90 days from the date the primary plat
is filed or within the period of any extension, the primary plat shall be
deemed approved and the subdivider may proceed in the manner hereinafter
provided.



(Prior Code, § 154.12)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.018  SECONDARY PLAT.



   (A)   General. After the approval of the primary plat but before the
commencement of any construction work or the filing of the final plat, the
subdivider shall file three complete copies of a secondary plat, conforming
with the requirements of § 154.080 of this chapter, in the office of the
City Building Inspector, who shall refer the plan to the Plan Commission,
Board of Public Works and City Engineer, who shall make recommendations to
the Board.



   (B)   Subject to provisions in this section, if a subdivider wishes
to present a secondary plat of an approved larger primary plat in sections,
the subdivider shall be allowed such flexibility with the following
conditions:



      (1)   The secondary plat shall be treated as a separate plat
both for review and fee purposes.



      (2)   Submittals, required improvement and design
considerations shall be consistent throughout.



      (3)   Subdivider shall present all relevant information with
each application or section.  No reference to prior submittals will be
allowed.



      (4)   No needed improvements from an early section shall be
promised in future phases without providing a surety bond to the City Board
of Works consistent with the required improvements.



      (5)   Subdivisions shall maintain a consistent name and
section description, for example “Cottonwood Subdivision - Section 1”,
“Cottonwood Subdivision - Section 2” and the like.



      (6)   Transfer of any prior approvals for a primary plat or
secondary plat from one subdivider to a successor subdividor is subject to
Plan Commission and Board of Works approval.



   (C)   Action on secondary plat. The Plan Commission and the Board of
Public Works shall each inspect the secondary plat for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, standard engineering practices and any other
applicable ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations.



      (1)   The City Engineer shall, within ten working days after
the receipt of a copy of the improvement plan, approve or disapprove the
same, with regard to plans and specifications for stormwater, sanitary sewer
and water lines only. In the event the City Engineer disapproves these
portions of the improvement plan, he or she shall record the reasons in clear
and concise language and shall also issue a clear and concise statement of
what, if any, changes will render these portions of the secondary plat
acceptable.



      (2)   After the City Engineer has approved the secondary plat
and a copy of the notice containing such approval has been received by the
Plan Commission and Board of Works, the Plan Commission and Board of Works
shall within 30 days meet for the purpose of considering the secondary plat.
The Plan Commission and Board of Works shall determine whether the plan
conforms with the approved primary plat and whether the secondary plat
complies with all applicable requirements of this chapter, all other
ordinances, statutes, rules or regulations. The decision of the Plan
Commission and Board of Works shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting
at which the secondary plat is considered and shall be stated in clear and
concise terms. In the event the secondary plat is disapproved by the Plan
Commission or Board of Works, the reasons shall be stated in clear and
concise terms, together with a statement of what changes in the plan, if any,
will render the plan acceptable. A copy of the minutes shall be delivered to
the subdivider, upon written request. If the Plan Commission or Board of
Works does not take action on the secondary plat within 30 days from the date
the notice of approval from the City Engineer to the Plan Commission and
Board of Works, the secondary plat shall be denied.



(Prior Code, § 154.13)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.019  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Time for filing. A final plat which complies with the
requirements of §§ 154.095 through 154.097 shall be filed in the office of
the City Building Inspector, within 18 months from the date of the Plan
Commission’s and Board of Works’ approval of a secondary plat, whichever
is later.



   (B)   Installation of improvements or bond required. All
improvements required to be installed in any subdivision shall be installed
prior to the filing of a final plat, or in the event all improvements shall
not have been installed at such time, a bond, together with sufficient and
satisfactory surety in the manner and form hereinafter specified, shall be
filed simultaneously with the final plat. The bond and surety shall be
sufficient to pay the cost of installing any and all improvements not
installed at the time of the filing of the final plat. If all of the required
improvements have been installed, a certification of such fact shall be
endorsed by the City Engineer on the final plat.



   (C)   Bond and surety requirements. A bond shall:



      (1)   Run to the city;



      (2)   Be in an amount determined by the Board of Works to be
sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in compliance with
this chapter and any ordinance of the city;



      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to the Board of Works; and



      (4)   Specify the time for the completion of the improvements
and installations.



(Prior Code, § 154.14)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.020  BONDING PROCEDURE AND FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   Notice of intent to file bond. In the event the subdivider
desires to file a bond, with surety thereon, in lieu of completing the
installation of all required improvements prior to filing a final plat for
approval, he or she shall notify the City Building Inspector in writing of
such intention within 90 days from the date of the Plan Commission’s
approval of the secondary plat. The City Building Inspector shall refer such
notice to the City Engineer who shall prepare a cost estimate of the cost of
installation of all required improvements based upon the information and
specifications supplied by the subdivider in the primary plat and the
secondary plat. Within 30 days from the receipt of the notice, the City
Engineer shall deliver the cost estimate to the City Building Inspector, who
shall refer the cost estimate to the Board of Works.



   (B)   Determination of amount of bond. The Board of Works shall,
within 30 days from the date of receipt of the cost estimate by the City
Building Inspector, meet and determine the amount of the bond which shall be
filed by the subdivider based upon the City Engineer’s cost estimate and
any other relevant factors. The determination of the amount of the bond shall
be recorded in the minutes of the Board of Works and a copy of the minutes
shall be mailed to the subdivider. The subdivider shall then file a final
plat and a bond, in satisfactory form, in the amount determined by the Board
of Works, together with surety thereon satisfactory to the Board of Works, in
the office of the City Building Inspector, who shall refer the bond and
surety to the Board of Works for approval of the surety on the bond.



   (C)   Approval of surety on bond. If the Board of Works determines
that the surety on the bond filed by the subdivider is satisfactory, a
certification shall be endorsed on the surety document or shall be appended
thereto and the approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the Board of
Works. The bond and surety shall be filed by the City Building Inspector in
the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer. If the Board of Works disapproves the
surety, its action shall be recorded in the minutes of its meeting together
with a statement in clear and concise language specifying the reason or
reasons for the disapproval and what, if anything, can remedy the defect of
the surety as submitted. A copy of such minutes, in the event the surety is
disapproved, shall be mailed by the City Building Inspector to the
subdivider, who shall cure such defects and resubmit the surety for approval
by the Board of Works. In the event the Board of Works disapproves the
surety, the City Building Inspector shall not consider the final plat until
such time as the surety on the bond is approved. In the event the Board of
Works approves the surety on the bond, the City Building Inspector shall
proceed with consideration of the final plat. No final plat shall be
considered or approved by the Plan Commission until the required bond has
been filed by subdivider and the surety has been approved by the Board of
Works.



   (D)   Approval of final plat. In the event the Board of Works
approves the surety on the subdivider’s bond, the Plan Commission shall
commence its consideration of the subdivider’s final plat and shall either
approve or disapprove the final plat within a reasonable time. If the Plan
Commission approves the final plat, it shall affix the signature of its
president thereto, which signature shall be attested to by the Secretary, and
such approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the Plan Commission meeting
at which the final plat was approved. If the Plan Commission disapproves the
final plat, it shall record its reasons in clear and concise language in the
minutes of the meeting of the Plan Commission at which the final plat was
disapproved and shall mail a copy of the minutes to the subdivider.



   (E)   Installation of improvements in event of default by
subdivider.  In the event that a subdivider does not complete work included
under a surety bond within two years of the approval of the final plat, the
Board of Works may notify the subdivider of its intention of proceeding with
the work.  The subdivider shall within 180 calendar days of said notice,
install all of the improvements and execute all dedications required by his
or her covenants.  In the event the subdivider fails to install such
improvements, the city shall proceed upon the subdivider’s bond and shall
install such improvements. In the event that the subdivider’s bond is
insufficient to pay the cost of all of such improvements, the subdivider
shall be responsible for the payment of the cost for such improvements in
excess of that amount covered by the proceeds of the bond.



(Prior Code, § 154.15)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.021  RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT AND COVENANTS.



   (A)   After the Plan Commission has approved a secondary plant and
the subdivider has completed the required improvements for the subdivision or
a section thereof, the final plat, along with any protective or restrictive
covenants and any homeowner’s or landowner’s association declaration,
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder. In the event a plat
is in sections, each section shall be recorded upon being approved.



   (B)   The final plat shall not be released by the City Building
Inspector until a copy of record as-built drawings have been received and
approved by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 154.17)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



RELATED PROCEDURES



§ 154.035  RESUBDIVISION PLATS.



   In the event an existing subdivision or parcel is resubdivided so that
the street alignment, utility services, development density, lot design or
drainage will be changed, the area constitutes a new subdivision and the
procedure for filing preliminary and final plats as outlined in this chapter
is applicable and shall be followed.



(Prior Code, § 154.20)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.036  WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL.



   The Plan Commission may withdraw any recommendation or approval by the
Plan Commission of a plan or plats if and when it is determined that the
information and specifications provided by the  subdivider upon which such
decision was based, is false, inaccurate or not being complied with and any
authority by virtue of such prior decision, shall terminate.



(Prior Code, § 154.21)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.037  EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.



   Except as otherwise provided, approval of a primary plat shall be
effective for 18 months only. Thereafter, approval of the primary plat shall
have expired unless a final plat has been submitted to the Plan Commission
prior thereto, or a mutually agreed upon extension has been granted by the
Plan Commission, which extension shall be recorded in the minutes of the Plan
Commission meeting in clear and concise terms.



(Prior Code, § 154.22)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.038  DEDICATION AND RESERVATION OF LAND FOR PARK AND RECREATION
PURPOSES.



   The Plan Commission may require as a condition to the approval of a
final subdivision plat, the dedication or reservation of lands, payment of
fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for park and recreational
purposes. Dedication requirements shall be accomplished by conveying said
lands to the city by a duly recorded legal instrument upon approval of the
final plat, and the deposit of such fees into a special park fund established
for this purpose, as the Plan Commission shall have determined is in
accordance with the limitations, principles and standards enumerated herein.



(Prior Code, § 154.23)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



SKETCH PLAN REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.050  INFORMATION.



   Every sketch plan shall be legibly drawn and shall contain the
following information:



   (A)   Adequate information to readily determine the location of the
proposed subdivision including property boundaries, true north, a site sketch
and indication of scale; (Scale should be one inch equals 50 feet to a
maximum of one inch equals 200 feet.)



   (B)   Significant natural and human-made features on the site and
the vicinity including existing topographic contours at five-foot intervals
drawn from available data such as the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
maps;



   (C)   The approximate number of lots, lot size, layout and acreage
of the proposed subdivision;



   (D)   Zoning of the property and the contemplated use of the
property as it pertains to the zoning;



   (E)   The name, address and phone number of the owner and developer
of the property;



   (F)   Any further information that the applicant feels would be
vital to the proposed division of property; and



   (G)   Relevant site characteristics and analysis applicable to the
proposed subdivision including the following, which shall be submitted by the
subdivider with the sketch plan:



      (1)   Reports concerning streams, lakes, topography and
vegetation;



      (2)   Reports concerning geologic characteristics of the area
significantly affecting the land use and determining the impact of such
characteristics on the proposed subdivision; and



      (3)   Maps and tables concerning suitability of types of soil
in the proposed subdivision, in accordance with the national cooperative soil
survey.



(Prior Code, § 154.30)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



PRIMARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.065 PRIMARY PLAT CONTENT.



   A primary plat shall consist of the following:



   (A)   A primary plat statement;



   (B)   A primary plat site sketch;



   (C)   A primary plat drawing; and



   (D)   A preliminary cross-section plan.



(Prior Code, § 154.40)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.066  PRIMARY PLAT PLAN STATEMENT.



   A primary plat plan statement shall be typewritten, on eight and
one-half inch by 11-inch bond paper, double spaced, dated and signed by the
subdivider, and containing the following information in clear and concise
language:



   (A)   The name of the proposed subdivision, which name shall be
different from any existing subdivision in the city;



   (B)   A metes and bounds or other legal description of the tract of
land to be subdivided;



   (C)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner or
owners of the land, the subdivider, and the engineer or surveyor who will be
responsible for the designing of the subdivision lay- out;



   (D)   The proposed restrictive covenants, if any, and any proposed
homeowner’s or landowner’s association declaration;



   (E)   A description of the types of structures proposed to be
constructed in the subdivision, for example, single-family residences,
duplexes, apartments and the like;



   (F)   If the subdivision is proposed incidental to or involves
participation by the subdivider in any federal housing program, a statement
describing the project, its intended purpose, the federal administrative
agencies involved and the federal law and administrative rules pertaining
thereto;



   (G)   If the subdivision, or a portion thereof is intended for
occupancy by individuals or families of a certain income group pursuant to a
federal housing project or program, a complete description and explanation
from which it can be determined whether the proposed subdivision conforms to
the master plan and Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances;



   (H)   A statement of the total acreage of the proposed subdivision
to the nearest half-acre, and the percentage of the total subdivision area
which will be devoted to lots, streets, common area and to any other type of
specific use; and



   (I)   Reports concerning streams, lakes, topography, vegetation and
geologic characteristics which significantly affect the land use of the area
which the proposed subdivision would comprise and showing the impact of such
characteristics on the proposed subdivision. Maps and tables concerning the
suitability of types of soil in the subdivision area in accordance with the
national cooperative soil survey shall be appended to comprise a part of the
preliminary plan statement.



(Prior Code, § 154.41)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.067  PRELIMINARY SITE DRAWING.



   The preliminary site sketch shall be legibly drawn to a scale of 100
feet to one inch; except that, when use of this scale results in a drawing
having a dimension in excess of 30 inches, a scale of 200 feet to one inch
may be used, showing the following:



   (A)   The location of the proposed subdivision in relation to
contiguous property and identifying the location of the subdivision by
section, township and range;



   (B)   North point and scale references;



   (C)   Location, names, present width and grades of adjacent or
abutting roads, streets highways and public ways or railroads;



   (D)   Existing features pertaining to the subdivision area,
particularly, the following shall be shown:



      (1)   The location of all existing structures, with an
indication as to whether they are to remain on the property or are to be
removed;



      (2)   The location of all easements, telephone lines, gas
lines, power lines and other features located within the proposed subdivision
and within 500 feet of its boundaries;



      (3)   The location of all sewer lines, water mains, culverts
or other underground facilities within the subdivision tract or within 500
feet thereof, indicating the pipe size, grades and exact locations as
obtained from public records; and



      (4)   The location of boundary lines of adjacent tracts of
unsubdivided and subdivided land, showing the owner’s names as shown from
public records.



   (E)   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation by
the regulatory flood or storm water overflow and the location, width and
direct flow of all water sources.



(Prior Code, § 154.42)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978; Ord. 1981-5, passed
6-16-1981)



§ 154.068  PRIMARY PLAT.



   The primary plat shall be legibly drawn to a scale of 100 feet to one
inch; except that, when the use of this scale results in a drawing have a
dimension in excess of 30 inches, a scale of 200 feet to one inch may be
used, showing the following:



   (A)   The boundary lines of the subdivision tract, together with
accurate distances and angles and the exact location of all existing and
recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract;



   (B)   Angles or referenced bearings (true north, grid north,
magnetic north or assumed bearing) and distances to the nearest established
street line or existing official monuments which shall be accurately
described;



   (C)   The location, names, widths and approximate grades of all
roads, streets, highways, public ways and rights-of-way in the proposed
subdivision or to be offered for dedication;



   (D)   The location and proposed width of all easements for drainage,
sewer and public utilities. In the event there is intended to be any
limitations on any easements, such limitations shall be described in the
primary plat plan statement;



   (E)   The location and dimensions of all lots and lot numbers;



   (F)   The location and dimension of all property which is proposed
to be offered for dedication for public use and the description and location
of any property that may be reserved by deed, covenant or restrictions for
the common use of property owners of the subdivision;



   (G)   The location of building setback for front, side and rear
yards, showing dimensions and  location;



   (H)   Location of street lights;



   (I)   The name of the proposed subdivision;



   (J)   The name and address of the subdivider; and



   (K)   Certificate by a registered professional engineer and/or
registered land surveyor.



(Prior Code, § 154.43)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.069  PRELIMINARY CROSS-SECTION PLAN.



   The preliminary cross-section plan shall be legibly drawn and shall
show the typical cross-sections and proposed grades for streets, highways and
alleys and the details of all curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other
improvements proposed to be located within the subdivision. Such drawings
shall be of such scale to show all details clearly.



(Prior Code, § 154.44)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



SECONDARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.080  PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A complete final grading plan of the portion of the
subdivision to be recorded;



   (B)   Profiles drawn to scale showing ground and grade elevations of
all streets, highways, walkways, alleys, sanitary and storm sewers, and
drainage ways;



   (C)   Detailed plans and specifications for street grading and
construction of pavement section, curbs, gutters and sidewalks where required;



   (D)   Detailed plans and specifications for drainage structures and
flood-control provisions;



   (E)   Detailed plans and specifications for sewer lines and water
lines; and



   (F)   Detailed plans and specifications for power systems, including
location and easements to be used.



(Prior Code, § 154.50)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS



§ 154.095  DRAWING AND INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The final plat shall be drawn in India ink or other
substantial solution on a reproducible medium with outer dimensions of 24
inches by 36 inches, and shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or
larger.



   (B)   The final plat shall show the following:



      (1)   The boundary lines of the subdivided tract, together
with accurate distances and angles and the exact location of all existing and
recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract;



      (2)   Angles or referenced bearings, (true north, grid north,
magnetic north or assumed bearing) and distances to the nearest established
street line or existing official monuments, which shall be accurately
described on the plat;



      (3)   An accurate metes and bounds description of the tract;



      (4)   Street names;



      (5)   The length of all arcs and radii, central angles,
internal angles, points of curvature and tangency, and the length of all
tangents;



      (6)   All easements for rights-of-way for public services and
utilities and any limitations on such easements;



      (7)   Lot numbers and dimensions;



      (8)   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths and with angles to street, alley and lot lines;



      (9)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and
lot markers;



      (10)   The accurate outline of all property offered for
dedication for public use with the purpose indicated. All property that may
be reserved by deed, covenant or restrictions for the common use of property
owners of the subdivision;



      (11)   Building setback line locations and dimensions with
regard to front, side and rear yards;



      (12)   Restrictions of all types which run with the land;



      (13)   Name of the subdivision;



      (14)   Name and address of the subdivider;



      (15)   North point, scale and date;



      (16)   Certification of title showing that the subdivider is
the landowner;



      (17)   Certificate by a registered professional engineer or
registered land surveyor;



      (18)   Certificate of dedicator of public lands;



      (19)   Certificate for approval by the City Plan Commission
and Board of Public Works; and



      (20)   Other data: a notation stating total acreage,
benchmarks and date of survey.



(Prior Code, § 154.60)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.096  SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL.



   (A)   Perpetual drainage easements and protective covenants in form
for recording, if required; and



   (B)   Other data, certificates, affidavits or documents as may be
required by the Plan Commission in the enforcement of these regulations.



(Prior Code, § 154.61)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.097  FINAL PLAT SECTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   In the event that the Plan Commission has authorized
the subdivider, pursuant to § 154.021 of this chapter, to submit a final
plat in sections for final approval, the final plat requirements of §
154.095 of this chapter shall be complied with in full at the time the
subdivider requests final approval of the first section.



      (2)   However, the final plat drawing shall clearly indicate
and identify each section.



   (B)   In addition to the complete final plat plan described in
division (A) above, such final plat drawing shall be accompanied by a
separate drawing of the individual section for which final approval is sought
and the drawing shall be in the same manner and form described in § 154.095
of this chapter and shall contain the same information required therein.



   (C)   (1)   After the first final plat section has been approved,
when final approval of the remaining sections is desired, the subdivider
shall file only a final plat for the section for which final approval is
sought.



      (2)   It shall clearly identify the section and shall be drawn
in the same manner and form described in § 154.095 of this chapter and shall
contain the information required therein.



(Prior Code, § 154.62)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED



§ 154.110  IMPROVEMENTS TO CONFORM TO REQUIREMENTS OF CHAPTER.



   The subdivider shall install improvements described in this chapter and
the improvements shall be constructed and installed in the manner described
in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 154.70)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.111  STREET GRADING AND SURFACING.



   Streets and other open ways shall be brought to grades as shown on
plans and profiles prepared by the subdivider and surfaced in accordance with
the requirements and specifications of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 154.71)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.112  CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS.



   Concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required by the Plan
Commission where the density and use warrant such improvements.



(Prior Code, § 154.72)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.113  WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   The subdivision shall be provided with a complete public sewer system,
unless a written waiver is granted by the City Engineer and authorized by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, which shall connect with such outlet. The
installation is to be done in accordance with plans and specifications
prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city and state
agencies. In the absence of such sewer mains, proper provisions shall be made
for the disposal of sanitary sewage according to requirements of the county
and State Board of Health. Similar requirements shall apply to the provisions
for a proper water supply for the subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 154.73)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.114  STORM DRAINAGE.



   The developer/subdivider shall install stormwater collection,
detention, retention, outlet controls and pollution prevention measures in
accordance with the City of Decatur Stormwater Technical Standards Manual
adopted and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.  No storm
sewers shall ever be connected to sanitary sewers.



(Prior Code, § 154.74)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.115  STREET SIGNS.



   The subdivider shall erect standard city street signs at the
intersection of all streets.



(Prior Code, § 154.75)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.116  STREET LIGHTING.



   The subdivider shall install adequate street lights at locations
approved and required by the Plan Commission.



(Prior Code, § 154.76)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.117  MONUMENTS.



   The subdivider shall install permanent reference monuments and lot and
block monuments as required in § 154.143 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 154.77)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.118  REVEGETATION AND LANDSCAPING.



   The subdivider shall restore all substantial disturbances of the land
created by construction of structures, roads, water or sewer facilities,
drainage control systems, installation of utilities or other improvements, by
proper grading and filling, reseeding and revegetation of the affected area
with native plant materials.



(Prior Code, § 154.78)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.119  FLOODPLAINS AND OTHER HAZARDS.



   If the subdivision or a portion thereof is to be located in a flood
hazard area, the Commission shall forward pertinent plans and materials to
the State Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. The Plan
Commission may require appropriate changes and modifications in order to
minimize flood damages. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage. Adequate drainage shall be provided so as
to reduce exposure to flood hazards. On-site waste disposal systems, if
provided, shall be located to avoid impairment to or contamination from them
during the occurrence of any regulatory flood.



(Prior Code, § 154.79)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.120  FIRE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Provision shall be made for an adequate fire protection system.



   (B)   Such system shall meet the standards and approval of the Fire
Department and any fire code or regulations adopted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 154.80)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.121  PARKS AND PUBLIC AREAS.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall require adequate provisions for
suitable areas for parks and playgrounds, as well as measures which will
preserve and enhance the scenic values of the city and conditions making for
excellence of residential, commercial or industrial development.



   (B)   Such provisions shall not be construed to be an obligation on
the part of the city to maintain such park or playground areas, until such
time as they are dedicated to and accepted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 154.81)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.122  OFFER OF DEDICATION.



   An offer of dedication of all parcels of land intended and designated
to be used for public purposes shall be made to the city or other appropriate
governing body. Such offer of dedication shall be by certificate on the final
plat or by other appropriate acts.



(Prior Code, § 154.82)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 154.135  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   A subdivision shall comply substantially with the master plan
and the zoning ordinance of the city, with particular respect to street
right-of-way, utility easements and public open space.



   (B)   A subdivision shall be designed so as to avoid casting an
undue burden on the street system, storm drainage system or other municipal
facilities, utilities and services on or adjacent to the tract.



   (C)   A proposed subdivision shall be designed so as to be
coordinated with adjoining subdivisions with respect to alignment of streets
and utility and drainage easement rights-of-way and reservation of open space.



   (D)   Subdivision design and layout shall give consideration to the
preservation of wooded areas, streams, unusually attractive topography and
other desirable natural landscaped features.



(Prior Code, § 154.90)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.136  STREETS.



   (A)   The width of the local streets shall be at least 30 feet and
shall meet the standards of construction as prescribed herein.



   (B)   The minimum right-of-way width of streets shall be 60 feet.



   (C)   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts but
should be included in commercial areas where needed for loading and unloading
or access purposes and where platted shall have right-of-way of at least 20
feet in width.



   (D)   The centerlines of streets should intersect as nearly at right
angles as possible.



   (E)   At intersections of streets and alleys, property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs of at lease 25 feet of radii.



   (F)   At intersections of streets, the property line corners shall
be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than 25 feet.



   (G)   The smaller angle or intersection of two streets shall not be
less than 60 degrees.



   (H)   Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
prohibited and intersections shall not be located closer than 200 feet from
each other.



   (I)   Cul-de-sac streets may be permitted when they form a part of a
logical design. They shall terminate in a circle with a minimum property line
diameter of 120 feet, and a minimum pavement diameter of 90 feet or other
open terminal area providing equivalent turning space. Any street over 1,000
feet in length, as measured to the center of the cul-de-sac, that terminates
in a circle, shall have a minimum property line of 140 feet and a minimum
pavement diameter of 110 feet or other open terminal area providing
equivalent turning space.  No parking allowed in the cul-de-sac. Greenspace
may be permitted in the center of the cul-de-sac. The greenspace to be
maintained by the developer or homeowner’s association.



   (J)   Where limited access or parkways or other special type of
designed streets are involved, the Commission may apply special standards to
be followed in their design.



   (K)   Visibility on curved streets may be maintained along the
centerline as follows:



      (1)   Primary arterials: to be determined by the Commission,
but generally not less than 400 feet;



      (2)   Secondary arterials: 300 feet;



      (3)   Collector streets: 250 feet; and



      (4)   Local streets: 200 feet.



   (L)   Curvature measured along the centerline shall have a minimum
radius as follows:



      (1)   Primary arterialize: 1,000 feet;



      (2)   Secondary arterials: 800 feet;



      (3)   Collector streets: 600 feet; and



      (4)   Local streets: 500 feet.



   (M)   No residential driveways shall connect to existing collector
streets.



(Prior Code, § 154.91)  (Ord. 2000-05, passed 4-4-2000)



§ 154.137  STREET NAMES.



   Names of new streets shall not duplicate names of existing streets. New
streets which are extensions of or in alignment with existing streets shall
bear the names of such existing streets.



(Prior Code, § 154.92)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.138  SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   Where required, sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed
according to current city standards and subject to the following general
specifications.



   (A)   Sidewalks eight feet in width are required along all
commercial streets.



   (B)   Sidewalks five feet in width are required on both sides of all
residential streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to the outer
edge of the right-of- way.



   (C)   Sidewalks of  a width acceptable to the Plan Commission shall
also be required through the center of long blocks, to connect cul-de-sac
streets and to provide access to school, park, playground and river areas.



   (D)   If approved by the Plan Commission, sidewalks may be
eliminated on one or both sides of streets in subdivisions with lots larger
than one acre or where the Plan Commission finds them impractical.



(Prior Code, § 154.93)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978; Ord. 2000-05, passed
4-4-2005)



§ 154.139  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Blocks shall not exceed 1,320 feet in length unless unusual
instances justify greater length.



   (B)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots
of appropriate depth.



   (C)   (1)   In blocks of over 750 feet in length, the Commission
may require at or near the middle of the block, a public walk connecting
adjacent streets or other public areas.



      (2)   Such walks shall be at least five feet in width and
shall be intended for the use of pedestrians only.



(Prior Code, § 154.94)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.140  LOTS.



   (A)   All lots shall abut on a street.



   (B)   Side lines generally shall be at right angles to straight
street lines and radial to curved street lines.



   (C)   Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the minimum
required by Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances for the district in which the
subdivision is located.



   (D)   Where lots are to be used for commercial purposes, provisions
shall be made in the subdivision for off-street parking as required by Ch.
150 of this code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 154.95)



§ 154.141  EASEMENTS.



   Where alleys are not provided, easements shall be provided for
utilities. Such easements shall generally be located along rear or side lot
lines, in which case a minimum width of 20 feet, ten feet on  either side of
the lot line shall be provided, or if such easement is within a lot, total
minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided. Easements shall be laid out so
that a proper continuity may be had for utilities from block to block.



(Prior Code, § 154.96)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.142  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Building setback lines shall conform to those established by Ch. 150 of
this code of ordinances; except that, the Commission may approve greater
setbacks.



(Prior Code, § 154.97)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.143  MONUMENTS AND LINE MARKERS.



   (A)   Monuments shall be of bronze encased in concrete. The minimum
monument shall be standard weight one-half inch nominal diameter pipe, 30
inches long, driven with the ground and surrounded on all sides by not less
than five inches of concrete to a depth of not less than 12 inches. In soft,
marsh ground and other unusual conditions or locations, the City Engineer may
prescribe special monuments to be installed. The top of any pipe may be open
or sheared but must be cut off perpendicular to its length and driven without
being seriously deformed or battered on top. On all pipe monuments, the
center of the pipe will be considered the center of the monument.



   (B)   Monuments shall be placed:



      (1)   So that the center of the monument coincides exactly
with the intersection of the lot or property line at that point and shall be
set so that the top of the monument is level with the surface of the
surrounding ground;



      (2)   At the intersection of all angles in the boundary line
of the survey;



      (3)   At the intersection of street property lines;



      (4)   At the beginning and ending of all curves where streets
and alleys are so laid out; and



      (5)   At all angles in property lines of streets and alleys.



   (C)   The corners of all lots not marked by monuments shall be
marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least two
feet in length and not less than one-half inch in diameter, the top of the
pipe or bar to be set level with the surrounding ground.



   (D)   All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the City Engineer and shall be installed prior to recording of the final
plat, or guaranteed by a bond as provided in § 154.020 of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 154.98)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.144  PARK PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to cooperate with other
government entities, subdividers or groups of residents to secure adequate
recreational opportunities for the neighborhood and the city.



   (B)   The amount and location of land to be dedicated, or the fees
to be paid, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of park and
recreation facilities by the future inhabitants of the subdivision. They
shall be based on population densities characteristic for the several types
of current residential development as determined by the Plan Commission.



      (1)   Basic formula for parks and recreation:



         (a)   Single-family residences: 3.5 persons, 610 square
feet per dwelling unit;



         (b)   Duplexes and town houses: 3.2 persons, 553 square
feet per dwelling unit; and



         (c)   Multi-family apartments: 2.4 persons, 419 square
feet per dwelling unit.



      (2)   The total acreage of park and recreation space needed to
meet the standards set forth shall be the cumulative amount of square feet or
acres determined for the respective number of dwelling units in each category
which are included in the final subdivision plat filed with the Plan
Commission for approval.



(Prior Code, § 154.99)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.145  FEE IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Amount of fee.



      (1)   Where fees are required to be paid in lieu of land
dedication, such fees shall be based on the current market value of land in
that subdivision as determined by an appraisal acceptable to the Plan
Commission or by agreement at the time of the preliminary plan approval.



      (2)   The amount of such fees shall be a sum equal to the fair
market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required for
dedication according to the foregoing formula.



      (3)   In the case of a combination of fee payment and land
dedication, the amount of fee shall represent a sum equal to the fair market
value of that land portion which remains after the acreage of dedicated land
is deducted from the total acreage requirement which has been determined by
the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Content of appraisal.  If the subdivider objects to the
appraisal, he or she may, at his or her expense, obtain an appraisal of the
property by a qualified real estate appraiser which may be accepted by the
Plan Commission if found reasonable.



   (C)   Use of fees for smaller subdivisions.



      (1)   Dedication of land for park or recreational purposes may
not be required in subdivisions containing 20 parcels or less, but payment of
fees in lieu thereof may be required.



      (2)   Fees shall be applied to acquisition of park and
recreational facilities in the city.



(Prior Code, § 154.100)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.146  LIMITATION ON PARK.



   The park land, fees or combination thereof are to be used only for the
purpose of  providing park or recreational sites and facilities which serve
present and future residents of the city.



(Prior Code, § 154.101)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



IMPROVEMENT INSPECTIONS



§ 154.160  INSPECTIONS.



   The City Engineer, or other person designated by the Board of Public
Works, shall make inspections of all improvements installed in any
subdivision. In such regard, no water mains, sewer lines or other lines which
shall be connected to any city water main, sewer line or other drain, shall
be covered until such have been inspected as herein provided. The subdivider
shall notify the City Engineer as hereinafter provided.



(Prior Code, § 154.110)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



§ 154.161  NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   The subdivider shall notify the City Engineer upon completion
of each stage of subdivision construction and he or she shall not proceed
with further construction until he or she has received authorization from the
City Engineer.



   (B)   Any required inspections shall be made by the City Engineer
not later than one week following the notification.



(Prior Code, § 154.111)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



CERTIFICATES



§ 154.175  CERTIFICATE FORMS.



   In order to provide uniformity in the processing of subdivision plats,
the following forms shall be used on final plats which will then be used for
record plats.



   (A)   City Plan Commission approval.



 

This plat was given approval by the City Plan Commission of the city, at a
meeting held this               day of                     ,
20            .


                                                   
                 


President


                                                   
                 


Secretary



 



   (B)   Board of Public Works and Safety approval.



 


Approval by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city, at a meeting
held this                   day of                      
    , 20            .


 


                                                   
                 



Chairperson


 


                                                   
                 



Member


 


                                                   
                 



Member


 



 



   (C)   Registered engineer or surveyor’s certificate. Each final
plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a certificate
signed by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor in substantially
the following form:



 


I hereby certify that I am a (registered professional engineer/registered
land surveyor) licensed in compliance with the laws of the State of Indiana;
that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on this      
    day of                                     , 20   
    ; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist; and that their
location, size, type and material are accurately shown.



(SEAL)


                                                   
                 



 



   (D)   Certificate of dedication. Each final plat submitted to the
Commission shall include a dedication form in substantially the following
form:



 


We, the undersigned       (Names)      , owners of the real estate
shown and described herein certify that we have laid off, platted and
subdivided said real estate in accordance with the within plat.


 


This subdivision shall be known and designated as     (Name of
subdivision)    , an addition to the City of Decatur, Indiana.


 


All streets, alleys and other land proposed to be but not yet dedicated and
shown hereon are hereby dedicated to the public.


 


Front and side building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this
plat. Between these lines and the property lines of the streets, no building
or structure shall be erected or maintained other than an open one-story
porch.


 


There are strips of ground 5 feet in width as shown on this plat and marked
“easement”, reserved for the use of the public utilities for the
installation of mains, poles, duct lines and wires, subject at all times to
the proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved.


 


No permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained on said
strips of land. The owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their
titles subject to the rights of the public utilities and to the rights of the
owners of other lots in this subdivision.


 


(Additional dedications and protective covenants or private restrictions
should be inserted here. These may include the use and intensity of use of
property, character of homes, minimum floor areas of residences, off-street
parking for motor vehicles and other desires of the owner which do not
conflict with provisions of law.)


 


The foregoing covenants or restrictions are to run with the land and shall be
binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until January 1,
20        . (Usually a period of 25 years, at which time said covenants
or restrictions shall be automatically extended for successive periods of 10
years unless by vote of the majority of the then owners of the building lots
covered by these covenants or restrictions, it is agreed to change such
covenants or restrictions in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of the
covenants or restrictions by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction
shall in no way affect any of the other covenants or restrictions which shall
remain in full force and effect.


 


The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right
to cause the removal by due process of law of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision
and to their heirs and assigns.


 


Witness our hands and seals this                     day of    
                                , 20        .


 

 


                                                   
                 


 

 


                                                   
                 



OWNERS


 


ESTATE OF INDIANA   )



SS:



COUNTY OF ADAMS    )


 




Before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public, in and for the aforesaid County
and State, personally appeared (names of owners) and each separately and
severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or
her voluntary act and deed for the purposes therein expressed.


 


Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this                        
day of                                   , 20        .


 


                                                   
                 



Notary Public


 



 



(Prior Code, § 154.120)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROAD AND STREET CONSTRUCTION



§ 154.190  CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.



   A collector street serves internal traffic movement within an area of
the city, such as a subdivision and connects this area with the major
arterial system.



(Prior Code, § 154.140)



§ 154.191  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Minimum requirements for road and street improvements shall be
in accordance with applicable provisions of current Standard Specifications
of the State Highway Commission, or as approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   The following are specifications for the three major types of
construction materials for both types of streets:



 

 

Collector (Inches)

 

Local (Inches)





Deep strength asphalt



   Uniform design thickness

 

9

 

8




   See attached

 


 




Flexible type pavement



   Asphaltic surface course

 

1

 

1




   Asphaltic binder course

 

3

 

3




   Aggregate base

 

14

 

10




   Total

 

18

 

14



Rigid type pavement (plain cement concrete)



   Uniform design thickness

 

7

 

6





 



   (C)   (1)   All curb and gutter construction shall be in
conformity and compliance with the specifications shown in the following
drawing and specifications, and methods, materials and workmanship, including
subgrade, shall conform to all other applicable provisions thereof and all
other applicable provisions contained in the city code of ordinances not in
conflict with any provision of this section. (Reinforcing bars shall be
overlapped a minimum of eight inches.) Typical cross-section for combined
concrete curb and gutter: six-inch curb back height with four-inch radium.



      (2)   All construction methods, materials and workmanship
including subgrade shall conform to the city or the State Highway Standard
Specifications.



(Prior Code, § 154.141)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978; Ord. 1979-2, passed
1-16-1979)



VIOLATIONS



§ 154.205  VIOLATIONS DESIGNATED.



   It is unlawful for any person to offer to sell, to contract to sell or
to sell any subdivision or any part thereof, until a final plat or record of
survey has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the County Recorder
in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the statutes of
the state.



(Prior Code, § 154.150)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)  Penalty, see §
154.999



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation owning any lands which have
been sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall not be
entitled to a building or improvement location permit for improvements
erected on said lot, lots or lands as required by Ch. 150 of this code of
ordinances.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not less
than $10, nor more than $500.



(Prior Code, § 154.999)  (Ord. 1978-6, passed 4-4-1978)



CHAPTER 155:  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



Section



Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Objectives



   155.001   Statutory authorization



   155.002   Findings of fact



   155.003   Statement of purpose



   155.004   Objectives



Definitions



   155.010   Definitions



General Provisions



   155.020   Lands to which this chapter applies



   155.021   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   155.022   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   155.023   Compliance



   155.024   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   155.025   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations



   155.026   Interpretation



   155.027   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   155.035   Designation of Administrator



   155.036   Permit procedures



   155.037   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   155.045   General standards



   155.046   Specific standards



   155.047   Standards for subdivision proposals



   155.048   Critical facility



   155.049   Standards for identified floodways



   155.050   Standards for identified fringe



   155.051   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes



   155.052   Standards for flood prone areas




Variance Procedures




   155.060   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board



   155.061   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   155.062   Variance procedures



   155.063   Conditions for variances



   155.064   Variance notification



   155.065   Historic structure




Special Conditions




   155.070   Special conditions



 



   155.999   Penalties for violation



STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND OBJECTIVES



§ 155.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 granted the power to local
government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore,
the Common Council of the city does hereby adopt the following floodplain
management regulations.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.002  FINDINGS OF FACTS.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
inadequately flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.003  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters.



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase erosion or flood damage.



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



   (F)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures and
their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.004  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health.



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in floodplains.



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.010  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   A ZONE.  Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A
zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The
definitions are presented below:



      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown.



      (2)   ZONE AE and A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the
one-percent annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base
flood elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised
maps in place of Zones A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AO.  Areas subject to inundation by one-percent
annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where
average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      (4)   ZONE AH.  Areas subject to inundation by one-percent
annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average
depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.



      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent
annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon
completion of an under-construction federal flood protection system. These
are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the
construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to
consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used
when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress
toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure with a floor
area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property
as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of
the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal
initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to
have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are
detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one- percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the one-percent annual
chance flood.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BOUNDARY RIVER. The part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary
between Kentucky and Indiana.



   BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of a boundary river.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).  A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   D ZONE. Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but
flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating
communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads, or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc.;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   Development does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or
the construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls),
pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure's elevation information. This certification must be signed and
sealed by a land surveyor, engineer, or architect authorized by law to
certify elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area acknowledged by a community as being
susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See FLOOD.)



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management
requirements.



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   HARDSHIP. (As related to variances of this chapter) means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURES. Any structures individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local
flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All renewal
and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after
June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD). A letter issued by FEMA during the
mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the
new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the
six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain
management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has
previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
The definitions are presented below:



      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment by letter
to the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not
located in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data.
A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to
the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood
zones, delineations, and elevations.



      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An
official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides
FEMA's determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been
elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest elevation described among the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure.



      (2)   The top of the basement floor.



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure.



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars.



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has
more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;



         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at
least one  square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the
bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the
exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening,
whichever is higher; and



         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929. As corrected in 1929
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of construction
commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain
ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY. The floodway of any river or stream other
than a boundary river.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993 is
a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance flood. See
REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a community's
FEMA map to effect changes to base (one-percent annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community's participation in the NFIP
where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and
higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 155.021. The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known
by the term BASE FLOOD,ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD, and 100 YEAR FLOOD.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SECTION 1316. That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the
City of Decatur are generally identified as such on the Adams County, Indiana
and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 29, 2010 as
well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown
on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 40% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40%
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements.



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or
type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. See A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C, and X.  Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.020  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known flood prone areas
within the jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.021  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.



   This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best
available regulatory flood data is listed below.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city shall be as
delineated on the one-percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Adams County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated
September 29, 2010 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated
September 29, 2010 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits
for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the city, delineated as an A
Zone on the Adams County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate
Map dated September 29, 2010 as well as any future updates, amendments, or
revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most
recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing
data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be
considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources for review and subsequently approved.



   (C)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources, provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD), any
more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be
utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.022  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.023  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.024  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.025  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site
shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not
be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.026  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements.



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.027  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the city, the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 155.035  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Common Council of the city hereby appoints the Superintendent of
the Building and Zoning Department to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.036  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the
following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage
facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following
information is required:



   (A)   Application stage.



      (1)   A description of the proposed development;



      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and
streams;



      (3)   A legal description of the property site;



      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



      (5)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD;



      (6)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed; and



      (7)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted
to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map Revision. (See §
155.037 (B)(6) for additional information.)



   (B)   Construction stage.



      (1)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an elevated
structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of the
applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
NAVD 88 or NGVD 29 elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor, professional engineer or architect and certified by
the same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor
elevation survey data submitted. The applicant shall correct deficiencies
detected by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work
undertaken prior to submission of the elevation certification shall be at the
applicant's risk.



      (2)   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation of a
floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered professional
engineer or architect and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall
correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or
failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project.



   (C)   Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an
elevation certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future
updates) which depicts the "as-built" lowest floor elevation is required to
be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing
Certificate Form 81-65 or any future updates) is required to be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.037  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations.



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to § 155.049 and § 155.051(A), and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment).



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the
floodplain development permit.



      (5)   Maintain and track permit records involving additions
and improvements to residences located in the floodway.



      (6)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.



      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Change
(LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.



      (8)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change (LOMC) or
Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA
maps of the community.



      (9)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.



      (10)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance.



      (11)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 155.036.



      (12)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance
with § 155.036.



      (13)   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure that
all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have been
satisfied. The first upon the establishment of the Flood Protection Grade
reference mark at the development site; the second upon the establishment of
the structure's footprint/establishment of the lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished
construction elevation certificate. Authorized city officials shall have the
right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



      (14)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (15)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter, in cases where there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation, or
replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation
of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 155.045  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG.



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located
at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG.



   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.



   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.



   (J)   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHA shall
be constructed with permeable materials.



   (K)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an equivalent volume
of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least
equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of one to one) due to
the fill or structure.



      (1)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain and in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.



      (2)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located, will
be accessible to the regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding
when not inundated by flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.



      (3)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of
floodwater but shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood
water.



      (4)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a drainage way
leading to the floodplain.



      (5)   The grading around the excavation shall be such that the
excavated area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.



      (6)   The fill or structure shall be of a material deemed
stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and
shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



      (7)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and filled
shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any site
work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.046  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   (A)   In addition to the requirements of § 155.045, all structures
to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG.
This building protection requirement applies to the following situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet.



      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure
where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 40% of the
value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land).



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred.



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days.



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.



      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure.



      (7)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure
with a previous repair, addition or improvement constructed since the
community's first floodplain ordinance.



   (B)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of § 155.046(D).



   (C)   Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or
manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be
floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of § 155.046(D). Structures located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in
lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in § 155.037(B)(12).



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   (D)   Elevated structures.



      (1)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG.



      (2)   Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be
designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a
minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than
one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath
each opening, whichever is higher.



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions.



         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be
at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



         (g)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in
any direction in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole
in the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device.



         (h)   Property owners shall be required to execute a
flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be
maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the
openings in any way will violate the requirements of § 155.046(D). Periodic
inspections will be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to ensure
compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded, along with the deed, in the
office of the Adams County Recorder.



         (i)   Property owners shall be required to execute and
record with the structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that
the area below the lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure
exceeds six feet) shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the
community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. The
non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Adams County
Recorder.



   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test
showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file.



      (2)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of
the structure before sloping below the BFE.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



      (6)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or earthen
material.



   (F)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements:



      (1)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as a result of a flood:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in § 155.046(D).



         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have
openings.



      (2)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be
placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that
has not been substantially damaged by a flood:



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that
the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



         (b)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in § 155.046(D).



         (c)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not attached
to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required to have
openings.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes as
stated earlier in this section.



   (G)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



      (1)   Shall not be used for human habitation.



      (2)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.



      (3)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.



      (4)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.



      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.



      (6)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures in § 155.046(D).



   (H)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas
or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral
movement.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.047  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



   (E)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in the
SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



   (F)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access into/out of
SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency responders).



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.048  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the 500-year (0.20% Annual Chance)
Flood Hazard Area. Construction of new critical facilities shall be
permissible within the 500-year (0.20% Annual Chance) Flood Hazard Area if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed
within the 500-year (0.20% Annual Chance) Flood Hazard Area shall have the
lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and
sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be
displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above
the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.049  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 155.021, are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to
the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and
has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction
of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial
addition/ improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)



   (B)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator until
a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of
authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources,
the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development
permit, provided the provisions contained in §§ 155.045 through 155.052
have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive
than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive
regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



   (C)   No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, that will adversely affect
the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This
adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory
flood of at least 0.15 of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory
flood elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or
pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.



   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.050  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the Floodplain
Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the
provisions contained in §§ 155.045 through 155.052 have been met. The key
provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially
improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.051  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile:



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the
one-percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended Flood
Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the
proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be issued provided
the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not less restrictive
than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
and the provisions contained in §§ 155.045 through 155.052 have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile:



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and one-percent
annual chance flood elevation for the site.



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 155.045 through 155.052 have been met.



   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development shall not
adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the
floodway. This adverse affect is defined as an increase in the elevation of
the regulatory flood of at least 0.15 of a foot as determined by comparing
the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the
natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.052  STANDARDS FOR FLOOD PRONE AREAS.



   All development in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps,
or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards
as required per §§ 155.045 through 155.052.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



VARIANCE PROCEDURES



§ 155.060  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The City of Decatur Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.061  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
Adams County Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.062  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



   (A)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (D)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



   (J)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.063  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; or



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
§ 155.049 and § 155.051(A) may be granted.



   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to § 155.049 and
§ 155.051(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
155.046, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration
of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures. (Refer
to § 155.065).



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade
and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that
the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See § 155.064.)



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
155.064.)



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.064  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the
lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and



      (2)   Such construction below the flood protection grade
increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded
by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.065  HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



SPECIAL CONDITIONS



§ 155.070  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 155.060 through
155.070, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



§ 155.999  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such
in accordance with the provisions of the zoning code for the city. All
violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.



   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator, hereinafter identified in §§
155.035 through 155.037, shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 2017-7, passed 8-15-2017)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ZONING CHANGES



      II.   VACATIONS



      III.   ANNEXATIONS



TABLE I:  ZONING CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1979-1
 
1-16-1979
 
Parcel of land in Section 35, T28N, R14E, in Adams County from FP to B-1.


1979-6
 
3-20-1979
 
Parcel of land commencing at the northwest corner of the east half of the
southwest quarter of Section 35, T28N, R14E, from FP to B-1; Tract Number 1,
Section 35, T28N, R14E, from FP to B-1.


1980-9
 
5-20-1980
 
Inlot 18 in subdivision of outlots 43 and 200 in Joseph Crabbs’ Western
Addition to the city from R-1 to B-1.


1982-7
 
8-3-1982
 
Lot 915 in Lynch’s subdivision from R-1 to B-1.


1982-12
 
12-7-1982
 
Lots 999, 1000, 1001 and 1004 in Erwin’s and Archbold’s Addition to the
city from R-1 to B-2.


1983-17
 
8-16-1983
 
Inlots 864 and 965 in Zimmerman heir’s subdivision of outlots 15, 16 and
17, except a certain parcel thereof from R-1 to R-2.


1984-21
 
12-18-1984
 
The southwest part of outlot 290 in Crabbs’ Western Addition from R-1 to
B-2.


1985-1
 
2-19-1985
 
A portion of the north half of Section 2, T27N, R14E, from R-1 to R-2.


1986-1
 
1-21-1986
 
Inlots 1015 and 1016 in Lenhart’s Subdivision of a part of outlot 24 in the
Southern Addition and part of outlot 84 in Nuttman’s Southern Addition from
R-1 to R-2.


1988-1
 
2-16-1988
 
Parcel of land commencing at the northwest corner of inlot 682 in Crabbs’
Subdivision of a subdivision of outlots 250, 251, 252 and 253 in Crabbs’
Third Western Addition to the city from B-1 to B-3.


1988-2
 
2-16-1988
 
The following property from R-1 to I-1:


 
 
 
 
(1) Inlot 3 and part of the west side of inlot 2 in Murray’s Subdivision of
a part of outlot 86 in the city;


 
 
 
 
(2) Beginning at a point 165 feet west of the southeast corner of outlot 86
in Crabbs’ Addition to the city; and


 
 
 
 
(3) Beginning at a point located 165 feet north and 132 feet east of the
southwest corner of outlot 86 in Crabbs’ Addition of outlots to the city.


1988-15
 
7-5-1988
 
A portion of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 35, T28N,
R14E, from B-1 conditional to B-1.


1988-16
 
7-5-1988
 
A portion of the east half of the southeast quarter of Section 35, T28N,
R14E, from R-1 to B-1.


1988-17
 
7-5-1988
 
A portion of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 33,
T28N, R14E, from A-1 to R-2.


1988-18
 
7-5-1988
 
Lots 8-11 and 18 in Citizens Second Addition from R-1 to R-2.


1988-19
 
7-5-1988
 
Parcel of land commencing at a point west of the northwest corner of inlot 19
in Meyer’s Addition to the city from R-1 to B-3.


1988-22
 
9-27-1988
 
Parcel of land commencing on the south side of the former Chicago and Erie
Railroad at a point south of the south line of said former right-of-way on
the west line of the first alley east of and running parallel with Winchester
Street from R-1 to I-1.


1988-23
 
11-5-1988
 
Parcel of land commencing at a point on the north line of the southeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 33, T28N, R14E, from R-2 to B-3.


1989-3
 
3-21-1989
 
Lots 1, 2 and 3 in Woodlands at Cross Creek from B-1 to R-1; and lots 118,
119 and 120 in Highlands of Cross Creek from B-1 to R-2.


1989-4
 
3-21-1989
 
Part of southeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E,
containing 12.6 acres.


1989-5
 
3-21-1989
 
Part of northeast quarter of southeast quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E,
containing 13.3 acres.


1989-8
 
5-2-1989
 
Parcel of land commencing 221.56 feet south of the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E, from B-1 to I-1.


1989-9
 
5-16-1989
 
Lots 1-22 and 26-36 in Briarwood Subdivision from A-1 to R-1; and lots 23, 24
and 25 in Briarwood Subdivision from A-1 to R-2.


1989-10
 
5-16-1989
 
8.54 acres, part of north 22 acres of the east half of the southeast quarter
of Section 35, T28N, R14E, from A-1 to B-3.


1989-15
 
7-18-1989
 
Portion of northwest quarter of Section 10, T27N, R14E, containing 25.45
acres, from B-3 to I-1.


1990-2
 
4-3-1989
 
Part of southeast quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E, containing 11.6 acres,
from R-S to B-2 and part of the southeast quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E,
containing 5.77 acres, from R-2 to B-2.


1990-8
 
7-17-1990
 
Part of the southeast quarter of Section 33, T28N, R14E, containing 11.73
acres, from R-2 to B-3.


1990-14
 
11-20-1990
 
Lots 26 through 98 consecutively in Highlands of Cross-Creek from R-2 to R-1.


1992-13
 
10-20-1992
 
Lot 88 in Hanna’s Addition from R-1 to B-1.


1992-17
 
12-15-1992
 
Lots 64, 65 and 66 to Homewood Addition from R-1 to B-1.


1992-18
 
12-15-1992
 
Lots 117 and 118 in Joseph Crabb’s Western Addition from R-1 to I-1.


1993-5
 
9-7-1993
 
Inlot 19 in William H. Meyer’s Addition for R-1 to B-3.


1994-8
 
6-21-1994
 
A portion of Section 4, T27N, R14E, from Agriculture to I-1 (Shultz Farm).


1994-13
 
10-18-1994
 
Inlots 682, 683, 684 and 685 in Joseph Crabb’s Subdivision from R-1 and B-1
to B-2.


1994-14
 
10-18-1994
 
A portion of Section 35, T28N, R14E, containing 6.65 acres, from R-1 to B-2.


1996-1
 
2-6-1996
 
One and one-half acres located between 13th Street and Cherry Lane from R-1
and B-3 to B-2 (Haugks Plumbing & Heating).


1997-2
 
4-15-1997
 
Northeast quarter of Section 9, T27N, R14E, containing 6.41 acres, from
Agriculture to R-2 (Larry Lengacher - Decatur Fuel Stop, Inc.).


1998-12
 
12-1-1998
 
Part of the northwest quarter of Section 9, T27N, R14E, containing 6.19
acres, from Agricultural to Residential (Eiting Acres).


1999-7
 
9-21-1999
 
Lots numbered 680 and 681 in the McConnehy Addition from R-1 to B-3 (Super
Wash).


1999-8
 
10-19-1999
 
Corner of Piqua Road and Bellmont Road from Agriculture to R-1, containing
ten acres (Crossroad Ministries).


2000-12
 
12-19-2000
 
8.53 acres on Morningstar Drive from R-2 and R-S to B-2 (K-Mart-Biggs).


2001-4
 
6-5-2001
 
939 N. 12th Street from R-1 to B-3.


2001-9
 
8-21-2001
 
Lots 133 and 134 at 12th Street and Meibers Street from R-1 to B-3.


2001-14
 
12-18-2001
 
13.4 acres from A-1 to R-2 (Bell Farm-Biggs).


2002-1
 
2-19-2002
 
111 S. 13th Street from R-1 to B-3 (Steve and Lori Smith).


2002-2
 
6-4-2002
 
Six lots at Line Street and Niblick Street from Industrial to R-2 (D.J.
Lopez).


2002-6
 
7-16-2002
 
Lots 1315, 1323, 1329 on W. Monroe Street from R-1 to B-3 (Rice).


2002-8
 
9-3-2002
 
1314 Madison Street from R-1 to B-3 (Morningstar).


2002-13
 
1-7-2003
 
105 S. 13th Street from R-1 to B-3 (Harvey).


2003-3
 
2-18-2003
 
61.66 acres, 561 W. 450 N from A-1 to I-1 (Nidlinger).


2004-12
 
9-21-2004
 
77 acres U.S. Hwy. 27, CR 400 N, CR 450 N from R-1 and C-2 to B-2
(Reidenbach).


2004-14
 
10-19-2004
 
1404 Madison Street from R-1 to B-3, Joe and Leah Klinker.


2004-16
 
11-2-2004
 
Lots 1316 and 1322, W. Monroe Street from Residential to B-2 (Gary Myers).


2004-17
 
11-2-2004
 
40.199 acres located on the south side of W. Monroe Street, west of 28th
Street, from Agriculture to R-1 (Robert S. Bechert & Oakmont Development,
LLC).


2005-2
 
3-15-2005
 
Winchester Road and Eagle Glen Court, The Meadows of Cross Creek from
Agriculture to R-1, 79.285 acres.


2005-11
 
12-6-2005
 
1023 N. 2nd Street from R-1 to B-1, Scott and Jason Ellsworth Hi-Way Service.


2006-11
 
12-5-2006
 
Lots 16, 17 and 44 in White Tail Drive and Deer Run Trail from R-1 to R-2.


2007-1
 
1-16-2007
 
South 55 feet of lots 674, 675 and 676 in the McConnehey Addition from R-1 to
B-3.


2008-7
 
8-5-2008
 
Lots 90, 91, 121, 122 and 123 of the original plat to the city from R-2 to
B-2.


2009-1
 
1-6-2009
 
Inlots 674, 675 and 676 in Eliza J. McConnehey’s Subdivision of outlot 261
in Cook’s Addition to the town from R-1 to B-3.


2009-2
 
1-6-2009
 
Inlot 677 of Eliza J. McConnehey’s Subdivision of outlot 261 in Cook’s
Addition from R-1 to B-3.


2010-2
 
4-20-2010
 
Portion of lot 121 in the original plat of the town from R-1 to B-2.


2010-10
 
11-1-2010
 
Portions of outlot 83 in Joseph D. Nuttman’s Southern Addition to the town
from R-1 to R-2.


2013-8
 
10-1-2013
 
Parcels in Section 35, T28N, R14E, in Root Township, Adams County, from A-1
to R-1.


2013-10
 
10-1-2013
 
Lot 65 in Bellmont Park Addition from R-1 to B-2.


2014-6
 
12-2-2014
 
Part of Section 10, T27N, R14E, in Adams County, from R-2 and B-3 to B-2.


2015-1
 
1-20-2015
 
Inlots 558, 559, 560, 561 and 562 from Glass and Rice’s Subdivision of
outlot 151, 154 and 155 in Joseph Crabb’s Western Addition from R-2 to B-2.


2015-13
 
10-6-2015
 
Rezoning of certain real estate from B-1, B-2, and B-3 to C-1, C-2 and C-3.


2016-7
 
6-21-2016
 
Rezoning of certain real estate from R-1 to C-2.


2017-14
 
10-3-2017
 
Rezoning part of outlot 153 in J.D. Crabb’s Western Addition from I-1 to R-2


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1983-7
 
3-15-1983
 
Vacating a portion of Patterson Street.


1989-20
 
10-3-1989
 
Vacating a portion of Guy Brown Drive.


1991-4
 
4-2-1991
 
Vacating a portion of Midway Drive.


1992-4
 
6-2-1992
 
Vacating a portion of Highland Pass.


1992-11
 
9-1-1992
 
Vacating utility easement between lots 61 and 62 in Stratton Place Addition.


1992-14
 
10-20-1992
 
Vacating alley adjoining Lincoln Street in Joseph Crabb’s Subdivision.


1992-15
 
11-3-1992
 
Vacating an alley between lots 1, 2, 9 and 8 in the Gay-Zehr Subdivision of
outlots 291 and 292.


1994-12
 
10-18-1994
 
Vacating an alley between 4th Street and 3rd Street and an alley between
Jefferson Street and Adams Street.


1995-1
 
1-17-1995
 
Vacating an easement between 10th Street and Pennsylvania Railroad
right-of-way.


1995-6
 
6-6-1995
 
Vacating a portion of Adams Street adjacent and west of 13th Street.


1995-9
 
6-20-1995
 
Vacating an alley between lots 62 and 65 in Citizens Second Addition.


1995-14
 
10-3-1995
 
Vacating a portion of an alley north of inlot 760 in Niblick’s Subdivision.


1997-5
 
7-1-1997
 
Vacating a portion of an alley between 3rd Street and 4th Street between
Monroe Street and Madison Street.


1998-4
 
3-3-1998
 
Vacating a portion of an alley between 1st Street and the St. Mary’s River
(Mark’s Heating).


1999-3
 
6-1-1999
 
Vacating a portion of a street which runs east and west between U.S. Hwy. 27
and Arnold Addition (Decatur Rental & Subway).


2001-3
 
6-5-2001
 
Vacating a portion of Guy Brown Drive (Driggs Dairy).


2005-3
 
3-15-2005
 
Vacating a portion of an alley (east-west between 13th Street and 15th Street
to develop Walgreens).


2006-1
 
2-7-2006
 
Vacating an alley (north-south adjacent to Elm Street, west of Winchester
Street), petitioned by Reinking and Darling.


2009-4
 
8-4-2009
 
Vacating a portion of Studabaker Street.


2016-1
 
4-5-2016
 
Vacating a platted alley, public way (Macklin-South 1st Street).


2016-6
 
6-21-2016
 
Vacating a platted alley, public way (Pizza Hut-North 13th Street).


2018-16
 
8-7-2018
 
Vacating a portion of an easement located on Lot 18 in the plat of Water’s
Edge and East Ridge.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
3-17-1953
 
Real estate located in Section 2, T27N, R14E, designated as Stratton Place
Addition.
(1978 Code, § 11.02)


-
 
5-4-1954
 
Real estate located in Section 10, T27N, R14E, designated as Gage’s Second
Addition.
(1978 Code, § 11.03)


-
 
5- -1955
 
Real estate located in Section 10, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.04)


-
 
2-19-1957
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E, designated as Leo F.
Schultz’s Addition.
(1978 Code, § 11.05)


-
 
10-15-1963
 
Real estate located in Section 33, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.06)


-
 
7-21-1964
 
Real estate located in Section 35, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.07)


-
 
10-6-1964
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.08)


-
 
9-5-1967
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.17)


-
 
10-17-1967
 
Real estate located in Section 11, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.18)


-
 
10-17-1967
 
Real estate located in Section 3, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.19)


-
 
10-17-1967
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.20)


-
 
5-21-1968
 
Real estate located in the city.
(1978 Code, § 11.09)


-
 
8-20-1968
 
Real estate located in Section 2, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.10)


-
 
8-20-1968
 
Real estate located in Sections 34 and 35, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.11)


-
 
10-15-1968
 
Real estate located in Section 34, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.12)


-
 
9-17-1968
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.13)


-
 
10-1-1968
 
Lot 48 in the Stratton Place Addition.
(1978 Code, § 11.14)


-
 
10-15-1968
 
Real estate located in Section 2, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.15)


-
 
10-15-1968
 
Real estate located in Section 33, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.16)


-
 
2-17-1970
 
Real estate located in Section 10, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.21)


-
 
4-20-1971
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.22)


-
 
4-4-1972
 
Real estate located in Section 35, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.23)


-
 
12-5-1972
 
Real estate located in Section 33, T28N, R14E, and Section 34, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.24)


-
 
2-6-1973
 
Real estate located in Section 28, T28N, R14E, and Section 33, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.25)


-
 
5-1-1973
 
Real estate located in Section 10, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.26)


-
 
7-3-1973
 
Real estate located in Section 33, T28N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.27)


-
 
8-5-1975
 
Real estate located in Section 2, T27N, R14E, and Section 11, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.28)


-
 
2-7-1978
 
Real estate located in Section 4, T27N, R14E.
(1978 Code, § 11.29)


1988-3
 
2-2-1988
 
Annexing the following territory in Adams County:


 
 
 
 
(1) The northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 33, T28N, R14E;
and


 
 
 
 
(2) Part of the west half of the northeast quarter, together with part of the
east half of the northwest quarter, all in Section 33, T28N, R14E.


1989-1
 
2-7-1989
 
A portion of Sections 1 and 2, T27N, R14E, 4.07 acres.


1989-2
 
2-7-1989
 
22 acres off of the east half, southeast quarter, Section 35, T28N, R14E.


1989-22
 
11-21-1989
 
A portion of Section 35, T28N, R14E, commencing at the intersection point of
the centerline of Belmont Road and the centerline of CR 200 E (Fleetwood).


1989-23
 
11-21-1989
 
A portion of the west half of Section 10 and the east half of Section 9,
T27N, R14E, beginning at the intersection point of the easterly right-of-way
line of U.S. 27 and northerly line of Winchester Street (All American Homes).


1989-24
 
11-21-1989
 
A portion of northwest quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E, beginning at
intersection point of west line of the northeast quarter of Section 4 and
south right-of-way line of Consolidated Rail Corporation (Thunderbird).


1989-25
 
11-21-1989
 
Part of southwest quarter of Section 27 and the northwest quarter of Section
34, T28N, R14E, beginning at intersection point of the south line of Section
27 and the easterly right-of-way line of Monmouth Road (Soya).


1990-10
 
9-4-1990
 
Part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 9, T27N, R14E,
Adams County, Indiana, containing 9.02 acres (Arbys).


1991-11
 
12-17-1991
 
Anthony Wayne Meadows Subdivision.


1992-1
 
3-3-1992
 
Lake Shores III.


1993-11
 
12-7-1993
 
Part of the southwest quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E, containing 24.742
acres (Shultz).


1994-2
 
3-1-1994
 
Part of Section 33, T28N, R14E, containing 29 acres (Porter-Brune).


1994-7
 
4-5-1994
 
A portion of Section 5, T27N, R14E, containing 54.81 acres (Kohne Farm).


1997-1
 
2-18-1997
 
A part of the northeast quarter of Section 9, T27N, R14E, containing 27.32
acres (Lengacher).


1997-4
 
5-20-1997
 
A part of the southwest quarter of Section 4, T27N, R14E (Bultemeier).


1997-6
 
9-2-1997
 
A portion of Section 2, T27N, R14E, containing 4.14 acres (Dryer).


1998-7
 
7-7-1998
 
Part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 33, T28N,
R14E, 3.05 acres (Fairway Lakes).


1998-8
 
7-7-1998
 
A portion of Section 2, T27N, R14E, containing 20.39 acres (Lake Shores).


1998-11
 
11-3-1998
 
The southwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 10, T27N, R14E,
containing 0.3084 acres (Habegger Floor Covering).


1999-1
 
4-6-1999
 
The west half of the northeast quarter of Section 35, part of the east half
of the northwest quarter of Section 35, and portion of north half of the
northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 35 containing 130.439
acres (Bell Farms).


2000-01
 
3-21-2000
 
Section 36, T28N, R14E, containing 64.94 acres (Waters Edge East Ridge
Subdivision).


2001-8
 
7-17-2001
 
1.364 acres (Decatur Fuel Stop, Inc.).


2003-1
 
2-18-2003
 
61.66 acres (Nidlinger).


2004-4
 
4-6-2004
 
Paul W. Reidenbach Equipment & Paul Reidenbach Enterprises (U.S. Hwy. 27, CR
400 N, CR 450 N (Wal-Mart Supercenter), 77 acres.


2004-5
 
5-4-2004
 
Forrest and Dorothy Dryer East Monroe Street, Lake Shores Section VII, 24.247
acres.


2004-13
 
10-5-2004
 
Robert S. Bechert & Ironwood, LLC (Grey Goose Subd.) W. Monroe St. Extended,
40.199 acres.


2004-20
 
1-4-2005
 
GKB Enterprises LLC (Meadows of Cross Creek Subd.), 79.285 acres.


2005-1
 
1-18-2005
 
Amending Ord. 2004-20; legal description for The Meadows of Cross Creek
Subdivision.


2015-3
 
4-7-2015
 
St. Mary of the Assumption Wetland, 40.14 acres.


2015-5
 
6-2-2015
 
Adams Memorial Hospital, Woodcrest Retirement Community villas, garden
apartments, and nursing home facilities, 133.4 acres.


2016-8
 
9-6-2016
 
Adams County Correctional Facility/Miller Farm Property, 159.564 acres.


2017-17
 
12-19-2017
 
1.18 acres (1122 S 13th Street, 1124 S 13th Street, 1118 S 13th Street).


2018-11
 
6-19-2018
 
14.756 acres at least 13% contiguous to city boundaries.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to Indiana Administrative Code





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Section
 
Code Section




5-3-1-2
 
150.375


5-3-1-4
 
150.375


5-4-1
 
33.006


5-4-1-5.1
 
33.006


5-4-1-18
 
33.006


5-10.3-1-1 et seq.
 
33.050


5-11-10
 
33.003


5-22
 
33.015


5-22-2-25
 
33.016


5-22-2-26
 
33.017


5-22-2-30
 
33.019


5-22-2-38
 
33.019


5-22-7
 
33.020


5-22-7.5
 
33.020


5-22-9
 
33.020


5-22-10
 
33.020


5-22-10-4(a)
 
33.019


6-3.5-1.1-25
 
33.100


6-7-1-31.1
 
33.070


7.1-1-3-5
 
94.01


8-1.5
 
52.003


8-1.5-3-3
 
52.003


8-1-34
 
33.005


9-3-1-3
 
33.001


14-28-1
 
155.049


14-28-1-26
 
155.049


14-34
 
52.082


22-3-2-1 et seq.
 
30.02


22-9-1-4 et seq.
 
97.02


22-9.5-1 et seq.
 
97.01


22-9.5-2-2
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-3
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-4
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-7
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-8
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-9
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-10
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-10(b)
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-10(c)
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-11
 
97.02


22-9.5-2-13
 
97.02


22-9.5-3
 
97.03


22-9.5-3 et seq.
 
97.09


22-9.5-4-8
 
97.10


22-9.5-5
 
97.02


22-9.5-5-1
 
97.03


22-9.5-6
 
97.02, 97.10


22-11-21
 
30.05


22-12-1-14
 
150.002


22-12-1-16
 
150.002


22-12-1-17
 
150.002


35-48-1-9
 
94.01


35-50-5-1.1
 
Ch. 30


36-1-3
 
33.110


36-1-3-5
 
33.002


36-1-3-8
 
54.150


36-1-3-8(10)
 
10.99


36-1-6-2
 
92.03


36-4-4-4
 
31.01


36-4-5-2
 
30.01


36-4-6-1 et seq.
 
31.01


36-4-6-2
 
30.01


36-4-6-4
 
31.04


36-4-6-5
 
31.02


36-4-6-7
 
31.03


36-4-6-8
 
31.03


36-4-6-10
 
31.03


36-4-6-12
 
31.03


36-4-6-13
 
31.03


36-4-7-2
 
30.03


36-4-7-3
 
30.03


36-4-10-2
 
30.01


36-7-2-7
 
33.110


36-7-4
 
155.001


36-7-4-200 et seq.
 
32.030


36-7-4-207
 
32.030


36-7-4-503 through 36-7-4-509
 
150.390


36-7-4-607 through 36-7-4-611
 
150.390


36-7-4-901 through 36-7-4-915
 
150.370


36-7-4-902
 
150.370


36-7-4-905
 
150.370


36-7-4-906
 
150.370


36-7-4-912
 
150.370


36-7-4-913
 
150.371


36-7-4-915
 
150.371


36-7-4-918.1 through 36-7-4-918.8
 
150.373


36-7-4-919
 
150.372


36-7-4-920
 
150.372, 150.375


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28
 
151.15


36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-29
 
151.16


36-7-9-2
 
151.16


36-7-9-3
 
151.15


36-7-9-7
 
151.16


36-7-9-7.5
 
151.16


36-7-9-8
 
151.16


36-7-9-13
 
151.16


36-7-9-13.5
 
151.16


36-7-10.1-1 et seq.
 
92.99


36-8-3-7
 
32.015


36-8-14
 
33.072


36-9-2-5
 
Ch. 93


36-9-2-7
 
Ch. 93


36-9-16-2
 
33.072


36-9-16-3
 
33.072


36-9-16.5
 
33.072


36-9-17
 
33.072


36-9-26
 
33.072


36-10-3-1 through 36-10-3-39
 
32.045


36-10-3-3
 
32.045


36-10-3-21
 
33.072


36-10-4-36
 
33.072


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO INDIANA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE



 

I.A.C. Section
 
Code Section




327 I.A.C. 5-5-6.5(a)(8)
 
52.080, 52.091


327 I.A.C. 15
 
52.082


327 I.A.C. 15-2-6
 
52.082


327 I.A.C. 15-5
 
52.051, 52.080—52.082


327 I.A.C. 15-6
 
52.051, 52.081


329 I.A.C. 10
 
52.082


675 I.A.C. 12
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 13
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 14
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 16
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 17
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 18
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 19
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 20
 
151.01


675 I.A.C. 25
 
91.25


 
 
 




 



 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2015 Code Section




10.01
 
10.01


10.02
 
10.02


10.03
 
10.03


10.04
 
10.04


10.05
 
10.05


10.06
 
10.06


10.07
 
10.07


10.08
 
10.08


10.99
 
10.99


11.01
 
11.01


11.02
 
TSO Table III


11.03
 
TSO Table III


11.04
 
TSO Table III


11.05
 
TSO Table III


11.06
 
TSO Table III


11.07
 
TSO Table III


11.08
 
TSO Table III


11.09
 
TSO Table III


11.10
 
TSO Table III


11.11
 
TSO Table III


11.12
 
TSO Table III


11.13
 
TSO Table III


11.14
 
TSO Table III


11.15
 
TSO Table III


11.16
 
TSO Table III


11.17
 
TSO Table III


11.18
 
TSO Table III


11.19
 
TSO Table III


11.20
 
TSO Table III


11.21
 
TSO Table III


11.22
 
TSO Table III


11.23
 
TSO Table III


11.24
 
TSO Table III


11.25
 
TSO Table III


11.26
 
TSO Table III


11.27
 
TSO Table III


11.28
 
TSO Table III


11.29
 
TSO Table III


30.01
 
30.01


30.02
 
30.02


30.03
 
30.03


32.01
 
31.01


32.02
 
31.02


32.03
 
31.03


32.04
 
31.04


33.01
 
32.001


33.10
 
32.015


33.11
 
32.016, 33.071


33.20
 
32.030


33.25
 
32.045


33.40
 
33.001


34.01
 
33.050


34.02
 
33.051


34.03
 
33.052


34.04
 
33.053


34.05
 
33.054


34.06
 
33.055


34.10
 
33.070


34.12
 
33.072


34.13
 
33.073


34.20
 
33.002


34.30
 
33.085


34.31
 
33.086


34.32
 
33.087


34.33
 
33.088


34.50
 
33.003


49.01
 
50.01


49.20
 
50.15


49.21
 
50.16


49.22
 
50.17


49.23
 
50.18


49.24
 
50.19


49.25
 
50.20


49.30
 
50.35


49.31
 
50.36


49.32
 
50.37


50.01(1.1)
 
54.001


50.01(1.2)
 
54.002


50.01(1.3)
 
54.003


50.01(1.4)
 
54.003


50.02
 
54.004


50.03
 
54.005


50.04
 
54.006


50.05
 
54.007


50.06
 
54.008


50.07
 
54.009


50.08
 
54.010


50.09
 
54.011


50.10
 
54.012


50.20(2.1)
 
54.030


50.20(2.2)
 
54.031


50.20(2.3)
 
54.032


50.20(2.4)
 
54.033


50.20(2.5)
 
54.034


50.20(2.6)
 
54.035


50.20(3.1)
 
54.050


50.20(3.2)
 
54.051


50.20(3.3)
 
54.052


50.20(4.1)
 
54.065


50.20(4.2)
 
54.066


50.20(4.3)
 
54.067


50.20(4.4)
 
54.068


50.20(4.5)
 
54.069


50.20(4.6)
 
54.070


50.20(4.7)
 
54.071


50.20(5.1)
 
54.085


50.20(5.2)
 
54.086


50.20(5.3)
 
54.087


50.20(5.4)
 
54.088


50.20(5.5)
 
54.089


50.20(5.6)
 
54.090


50.20(5.7)
 
54.091


50.20(5.8)
 
54.092


50.20(6.1)
 
54.105


50.20(6.2)
 
54.106


50.20(6.3)
 
54.107


50.20(6.4)
 
54.108


50.20(6.5)
 
54.109


50.20(6.6)
 
54.110


50.20(6.7)
 
54.111


50.20(6.8)
 
54.112


50.20(6.9)
 
54.113


50.20(6.10)
 
54.114


50.20(6.11)
 
54.115


50.20(6.12)
 
54.116


50.20(6.13)
 
54.117


50.20(7.1)
 
54.130


50.20(7.2)
 
54.131


50.20(8)
 
54.013


50.20(9.1)
 
54.145


50.20(9.2)
 
54.146


50.20(9.3)
 
54.147


50.20(9.4)
 
54.148


50.20(9.5)
 
54.149


50.20(9.6)
 
54.150


50.20(9.7)
 
54.151


50.20(9.8)
 
54.152


50.20(10.1)
 
54.999


50.20(10.2)
 
54.999


50.20(10.3)
 
54.999


50.20(11.1)
 
54.014


50.25
 
54.015


50.30
 
54.165


50.31
 
54.166


50.32
 
54.167


50.33
 
54.168


50.34
 
54.169


50.35
 
54.170


50.36
 
54.171


50.37
 
54.172


50.38
 
54.173


50.39
 
54.174


50.40
 
54.175


50.41
 
54.176


50.43
 
54.177


50.44
 
54.178


50.45
 
54.179


50.46
 
54.180


50.50
 
55.01


50.51
 
55.02


50.52
 
55.03


50.53
 
55.04


51.00
 
53.001


51.01
 
53.002


51.02
 
53.003


51.03
 
53.004


51.04
 
53.005


51.05
 
53.006


51.06
 
53.007


51.07
 
53.008


51.08
 
53.009


51.20
 
53.025


51.21
 
53.026


51.22
 
53.027


51.23
 
53.028


51.24
 
53.029


51.25
 
53.030


51.26
 
53.031


51.27
 
53.032


51.28
 
53.033


51.29
 
53.034


51.30
 
53.035


51.31
 
53.036


51.32
 
53.037


51.33
 
53.038


51.40
 
53.050


51.41
 
53.051


51.42
 
53.052


51.43
 
53.053


51.44
 
53.054


51.45
 
53.055


51.46
 
53.056


51.50
 
53.070


51.51
 
53.071


51.52
 
53.072


51.53
 
53.073


51.54
 
53.074


51.55
 
53.075


51.56
 
53.076


51.57
 
53.077


51.58
 
53.078


51.59
 
53.079


51.60
 
53.080


51.61
 
53.081


51.62
 
53.082


51.63
 
53.083


51.64
 
53.084


51.65
 
53.085


51.66
 
53.086


51.70
 
53.100


51.71
 
53.101


51.72
 
53.102


51.73
 
53.103


51.74
 
53.104


51.75
 
53.105


51.76
 
53.106


51.77
 
53.107


51.78
 
53.108


51.79
 
53.109


51.80
 
53.120


51.81
 
53.121


51.82
 
53.122


51.100
 
53.135


51.101
 
53.136


51.102
 
53.137


51.103
 
53.138


51.104
 
53.139


51.105
 
53.140


51.106
 
53.141


51.150
 
53.010


51.151
 
53.011


51.152
 
53.012


51.153
 
53.013


51.999
 
53.999


53.10
 
52.001—52.015


53.20
 
52.030—52.035


53.30
 
52.050—52.066, 52.999


53.40
 
52.080—52.092, 52.999


70.1
 
70.01


70.2
 
70.01


70.3
 
70.01


70.4
 
70.01


70.5
 
70.01


70.6
 
70.01


70.7
 
70.01


70.8
 
70.01


70.9
 
70.01


70.10
 
70.01


70.11
 
70.01


70.12
 
70.01


71.1
 
70.02


71.2
 
70.03


72.1
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


72.2
 
Ch. 77, Schd. II


72.3
 
Ch. 77, Schd. III


72.5
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IV


73.1
 
Ch. 77, Schd. V


74.1
 
71.15


74.2
 
71.16


75.1
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


75.2
 
Ch. 77, Schd. IX


76.1
 
71.30


76.2
 
71.31


76.3
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VI


77.1
 
75.01


77.2
 
75.02


77.5
 
Ch. 78, Schd. I


77.6
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


77.10
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


77.11
 
75.03, Ch. 78, Schd. IV


77.12
 
75.04


77.13
 
75.05


77.14
 
75.06


77.15
 
75.07


77.16
 
75.08


77.17
 
75.09


77.99
 
75.99


79.1
 
73.01


79.2
 
73.02


79.3
 
73.03


79.4
 
73.04


79.5
 
73.05


80.1
 
74.01


80.2
 
74.02


80.3
 
74.03


80.4
 
74.04


80.5
 
74.05


80.6
 
74.06


80.7
 
74.07


80.8
 
74.08


80.9
 
74.09


80.10
 
74.10


80.11
 
74.11


80.12
 
74.12


80.13
 
74.13


80.14
 
74.14


80.99
 
74.99


81.1
 
70.04


81.2
 
70.05


81.3
 
70.06


81.4
 
70.07


81.5
 
70.08


81.6
 
70.09


81.7
 
70.10


81.8
 
70.11


82.1
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VII


83.1
 
72.01


83.2
 
72.02


84.1
 
71.01


84.2
 
71.02


84.3
 
71.03


85.1
 
70.99


85.2
 
70.99


85.4
 
70.99


90.01
 
90.01


90.02
 
90.02


90.06
 
90.03


90.09
 
90.04


90.10
 
90.05


90.11
 
90.06


90.12
 
90.07


90.13
 
90.08


90.14
 
90.09


90.15
 
90.20


90.16
 
90.21


90.17
 
90.22


90.99
 
90.99


91.01
 
91.01


91.02
 
91.02


91.04
 
91.03


91.05
 
91.04


91.06
 
91.05


91.07
 
91.06


91.08
 
91.07


91.09
 
91.08


91.10
 
91.09


91.11
 
91.10


91.20
 
91.25


91.21
 
91.26


91.22
 
91.27


91.23
 
91.28


91.24
 
91.29


91.99
 
91.99


92.01
 
92.01


92.02
 
92.02


92.03
 
92.03


92.04
 
92.04


92.05
 
92.05


92.06
 
92.06


92.99
 
92.99


93.01
 
93.01


93.02
 
93.02


93.03
 
93.03


93.04
 
93.04


93.05
 
93.05


93.06
 
93.06


93.07
 
93.07


93.08
 
93.08


93.09
 
93.09


93.10
 
93.10


93.12
 
93.11


93.99
 
93.99


94.01
 
93.25


94.04
 
93.26


94.09
 
93.27


94.10
 
93.28


94.99
 
93.99


95.01
 
94.01


95.02
 
94.02


95.05
 
94.03


95.06
 
94.04


95.10
 
94.05


95.11
 
94.06


95.15
 
94.07


95.20
 
94.08


95.25
 
94.09


95.26
 
94.10


95.30
 
94.30


95.31
 
94.31


95.32
 
94.32


95.33
 
94.33


95.34
 
94.34


95.35
 
94.45


95.36
 
94.46


95.37
 
94.47


95.38
 
Ch. 77, Sch. X


95.39
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


95.40
 
94.11


95.45
 
94.12


95.46
 
94.13


95.50
 
94.14


95.55
 
94.15


95.60
 
94.60


95.61
 
94.61


95.65
 
94.62


95.99
 
94.99


96.01
 
95.01


96.02
 
95.02


96.03
 
95.03


96.04
 
95.04


96.05
 
95.05


96.06
 
95.06


96.99
 
95.99


97.01
 
96.01


97.02
 
96.02


97.03
 
96.03


97.04
 
96.04


97.05
 
96.05


97.06
 
96.06


97.07
 
96.07


97.08
 
96.08


97.09
 
96.09


97.10
 
96.10


97.11
 
96.11


97.12
 
96.12


97.13
 
96.13


97.14
 
96.14


97.15
 
96.15


97.16
 
96.16


97.17
 
96.99


115.01
 
110.01


115.02
 
110.02


115.03
 
110.03


115.04
 
110.04


115.05
 
110.05


115.06
 
110.06


115.07
 
110.07


115.08
 
110.08


115.09
 
110.09


115.10
 
110.10


115.11
 
110.11


115.12
 
110.12


115.13
 
110.13


115.14
 
110.14


115.15
 
110.15


115.99
 
110.99


130.01
 
130.01


130.04
 
130.02


130.99
 
130.99


150.01
 
150.001


150.02
 
150.002


150.03
 
150.003


150.04
 
150.004


150.05
 
150.005


150.06
 
150.006


150.07
 
150.007


150.10
 
150.020


150.11
 
150.021


150.12
 
150.022


150.13
 
150.023


150.14
 
150.024


150.15
 
150.025


150.16
 
150.026


150.17
 
150.027


150.18
 
150.028


150.20
 
150.040


150.21
 
150.041


150.22
 
150.042


150.23
 
150.043


150.24
 
150.044


150.25
 
150.045


150.26
 
150.046


150.27
 
150.047


150.28
 
150.048


150.29
 
150.049


150.30
 
150.050


150.40
 
150.065


150.41
 
150.066


150.42
 
150.067


150.43
 
150.068


150.44
 
150.069


150.45
 
150.070


150.46
 
150.071


150.47
 
150.072


150.48
 
150.073


150.49
 
150.074


150.50
 
150.075


150.60
 
150.090


150.61
 
150.091


150.62
 
150.092


150.63
 
150.093


150.64
 
150.094


150.65
 
150.095


150.66
 
150.096


150.67
 
150.097


150.68
 
150.098


150.69
 
150.099


150.80
 
150.110


150.81
 
150.111


150.82
 
150.112


150.83
 
150.113


150.84
 
150.114


150.85
 
150.115


150.86
 
150.116


150.87
 
150.117


150.88
 
150.118


150.89
 
150.119


150.90
 
150.130


150.91
 
150.131


150.92
 
150.132


150.93
 
150.133


150.94
 
150.134


150.95
 
150.135


150.96
 
150.136


150.97
 
150.137


150.98
 
150.138


150.99
 
150.139


150.100
 
150.150


150.101
 
150.151


150.102
 
150.152


150.103
 
150.153


150.104
 
150.154


150.105
 
150.155


150.106
 
150.156


150.107
 
150.157


150.108
 
150.158


150.109
 
150.159


150.120
 
150.170


150.121
 
150.171


150.122
 
150.172


150.123
 
150.173


150.124
 
150.174


150.125
 
150.175


150.126
 
150.176


150.127
 
150.177


150.128
 
150.178


150.130
 
150.190


150.130
 
150.197


150.131
 
150.191


150.132
 
150.192


150.133
 
150.193


150.134
 
150.194


150.135
 
150.195


150.136
 
150.196


150.138
 
150.198


150.140
 
150.210


150.141
 
150.211


150.142
 
150.212


150.143
 
150.213


150.144
 
150.214


150.145
 
150.215


150.146
 
150.216


150.147
 
150.217


150.148
 
150.218


150.160
 
150.230


150.161
 
150.231


150.162
 
150.232


150.163
 
150.233


150.164
 
150.234


150.165
 
150.235


150.166
 
150.236


150.167
 
150.237


150.168
 
150.238


150.169
 
150.239


150.170
 
150.240


150.171
 
150.241


150.172
 
150.242


150.173
 
150.243


150.174
 
150.244


150.175
 
150.245


150.176
 
150.246


150.177
 
150.247


150.178
 
150.248


150.179
 
150.249


150.190
 
150.260


150.191
 
150.261


150.192
 
150.262


150.193
 
150.263


150.194
 
150.264


150.200
 
150.275


150.201
 
150.276


150.202
 
150.277


150.203
 
150.278


150.204
 
150.279


150.210
 
150.290


150.220
 
150.315


150.221
 
150.316


150.222
 
150.317


150.223
 
150.318


150.224
 
150.319


150.225
 
150.320


150.226
 
150.321


150.227
 
150.322


150.228
 
150.323


150.229
 
150.324


150.230
 
150.325


150.231
 
150.326


150.232
 
150.327


150.233
 
150.328


150.234
 
150.329


150.235
 
150.330


150.236
 
150.331


150.237
 
150.332


150.240
 
150.345


150.241
 
150.346


150.242
 
150.347


150.243
 
150.348


150.244
 
150.349


150.245
 
150.350


150.246
 
150.351


150.247
 
150.352


150.248
 
150.353


150.249
 
150.354


150.250
 
150.355


150.251
 
150.356


150.252
 
150.357


150.253
 
150.358


150.260
 
150.370


150.261
 
150.371


150.262
 
150.372


150.263
 
150.373


150.264
 
150.374


150.265
 
150.375


150.266
 
150.376


150.270
 
150.390


150.999
 
150.999


151.01
 
151.01


151.02
 
151.02


151.03
 
151.03


151.99
 
151.99


152.01
 
152.01


152.02
 
152.02


152.03
 
152.03


152.04
 
152.04


152.05
 
152.05


153.01
 
153.01


153.02
 
153.02


153.03
 
153.03


153.04
 
153.04


153.05
 
153.05


153.06
 
153.06


153.99
 
153.99


154.01
 
154.001


154.02
 
154.002


154.03
 
154.003


154.04
 
154.004


154.10
 
154.015


154.11
 
154.016


154.12
 
154.017


154.13
 
154.018


154.14
 
154.019


154.15
 
154.020


154.17
 
154.021


154.20
 
154.035


154.21
 
154.036


154.22
 
154.037


154.23
 
154.038


154.30
 
154.050


154.40
 
154.065


154.41
 
154.066


154.42
 
154.067


154.43
 
154.068


154.44
 
154.069


154.50
 
154.080


154.60
 
154.095


154.61
 
154.096


154.62
 
154.097


154.70
 
154.110


154.71
 
154.111


154.72
 
154.112


154.73
 
154.113


154.74
 
154.114


154.75
 
154.115


154.76
 
154.116


154.77
 
154.117


154.78
 
154.118


154.79
 
154.119


154.80
 
154.120


154.81
 
154.121


154.82
 
154.122


154.90
 
154.135


154.91
 
154.136


154.92
 
154.137


154.93
 
154.138


154.94
 
154.139


154.95
 
154.140


154.96
 
154.141


154.97
 
154.142


154.98
 
154.143


154.99
 
154.144


154.100
 
154.145


154.101
 
154.146


154.110
 
154.160


154.111
 
154.161


154.120
 
154.175


154.140
 
154.190


154.141
 
154.191


154.150
 
154.205


154.999
 
154.999


155.01
 
151.15


155.02
 
151.16


155.03
 
151.17


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
3-17-1953
 
TSO Table III


-
 
5-4-1954
 
TSO Table III


-
 
5- -1955
 
TSO Table III


-
 
2-19-1957
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-15-1963
 
TSO Table III


-
 
7-21-1964
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-6-1964
 
TSO Table III


-
 
9-5-1967
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-17-1967
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-17-1967
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-17-1967
 
TSO Table III


-
 
5-21-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
8-20-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
8-20-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
9-17-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-1-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-15-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-15-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
10-15-1968
 
TSO Table III


-
 
2-17-1970
 
TSO Table III


-
 
4-20-1971
 
TSO Table III


-
 
4-4-1972
 
TSO Table III


-
 
12-5-1972
 
TSO Table III


-
 
2-6-1973
 
TSO Table III


1976-11
 
8-3-1976
 
Ch. 77, Sch. X; 94.01—94.07—94.15, 94.30—94.46, 94.60—94.62, 94.99


1978-4
 
3-21-1978
 
150.001—150.006, 150.020—150.028, 150.040—150.050, 150.065—150.075,
150.090—150.099, 150.110—150.119, 150.130—150.139, 150.150—150.159,
150.170—150.173, 150.177, 150.178, 150.190—150.198, 150.210—150.218,
150.231, 150.233—150.249, 150.260—150.263, 150.275—150.279, 150.290,
150.315—150.328, 150.330—150.332, 150.345—150.356, 150.370—150.376,
150.390, 150.999


1978-6
 
4-4-1978
 
154.001—154.003, 154.015—154.021, 154.035—154.038, 154.050,
154.065—154.069, 154.080, 154.095—154.097, 154.110—154.122, 154.135,
154.137—154.139, 154.141—154.146, 154.160—154.161, 154.175, 154.191,
154.205, 154.999


1978-47
 
12-19-1978
 
30.01


1979-1
 
1-16-1979
 
TSO Table I


1979-2
 
1-16-1979
 
154.191


1979-6
 
3-20-1979
 
TSO Table I


1980-1
 
1-15-1980
 
151.01


1980-9
 
5-20-1980
 
TSO Table I


1981-5
 
6-16-1981
 
150.002, 150.003, 151.03, 154.067


1982-7
 
8-3-1982
 
TSO Table I


1982-8
 
8-17-1982
 
31.04


1982-9
 
8-17-1982
 
32.001, 32.045


1982-12
 
12-7-1982
 
TSO Table I


1983-4
 
2-1-1983
 
31.03


1983-1
 
2-15-1983
 
54.004—54.013


1983-2
 
2-15-1983
 
54.165—54.169, 54.171, 54.173—54.180


1983-7
 
3-15-1983
 
TSO Table II


1983-9
 
6-7-1983
 
151.15, 151.16


1983-11
 
6-21-1983
 
70.01, 70.03—70.11, 70.99, 71.15, 71.16, 71.30, 71.31, 73.01—73.05,
74.01—74.14, 74.99, 75.01, 75.02, 75.09, Ch. 77, Schd. II, III, V, VI, IX


1983-17
 
8-16-1983
 
TSO Table I


1984-2
 
5-15-1984
 
151.17


1984-9
 
8-21-1984
 
33.002, 33.070, 33.071, 33.073


1984-21
 
12-18-1984
 
TSO Table I


1985-1
 
2-19-1985
 
TSO Table I


1985-3
 
5-21-1985
 
33.070—33.073


1986-1
 
1-21-1986
 
TSO Table I


1986-8
 
9-23-1986
 
70.99


1987-3
 
4-7-1987
 
150.370


1988-3
 
2-2-1988
 
TSO Table III


1988-1
 
2-16-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-2
 
2-16-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-5
 
3-15-1988
 
151.01, 151.99


1988-10
 
5-17-1988
 
33.001


1988-13
 
6-7-1988
 
33.085—33.088


1988-15
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-16
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-17
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-18
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-19
 
7-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-21
 
9-27-1988
 
95.01—95.06, 95.99


1988-22
 
9-27-1988
 
TSO Table I


1988-23
 
11-5-1988
 
TSO Table I


1989-1
 
2-7-1989
 
TSO Table III


1989-2
 
2-7-1989
 
TSO Table III


1989-3
 
3-21-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-4
 
3-21-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-5
 
3-21-1989
 
TSO Table I


1990-2
 
4-3-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-8
 
5-2-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-9
 
5-16-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-10
 
5-16-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-13
 
6-20-1989
 
Ch. 77, Sch. I


1989-15
 
7-18-1989
 
TSO Table I


1989-20
 
10-3-1989
 
TSO Table II


1989-21
 
11-7-1989
 
50.37


1989-22
 
11-21-1989
 
TSO Table III


1989-23
 
11-21-1989
 
TSO Table III


1989-24
 
11-21-1989
 
TSO Table III


1989-25
 
11-21-1989
 
TSO Table III


1990-3
 
6-5-1990
 
53.001


1990-7
 
7-3-1990
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


1990-8
 
7-17-1990
 
TSO Table I


1990-10
 
9-4-1990
 
TSO Table III


1990-14
 
11-20-1990
 
TSO Table I


1991-4
 
4-2-1991
 
TSO Table II


1991-8
 
- -1991
 
91.99


1991-11
 
12-17-1991
 
TSO Table III


1992-1
 
3-3-1992
 
TSO Table III


1992-2
 
4-22-1992
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I


1992-4
 
6-2-1992
 
TSO Table II


1992-11
 
9-1-1992
 
TSO Table II


1992-13
 
10-20-1992
 
TSO Table I


1992-14
 
10-20-1992
 
TSO Table II


1992-15
 
11-3-1992
 
TSO Table II


1992-16
 
12-15-1992
 
Ch. 78, Schd. III


1992-17
 
12-15-1992
 
TSO Table I


1992-18
 
12-15-1992
 
TSO Table I


1993-5
 
9-7-1993
 
TSO Table I


1993-7
 
11-2-1993
 
151.01, 153.05


1993-8
 
11-2-1993
 
150.115—150.117, 150.135—150.137, 150.155—150.157, 150.174—150.176,
150.323


1993-10
 
12-7-1993
 
96.99


1993-11
 
12-7-1993
 
TSO Table III


1994-2
 
3-1-1994
 
TSO Table III


1994-7
 
4-5-1994
 
TSO Table III


1994-8
 
6-21-1994
 
TSO Table I


1994-11
 
10-18-1994
 
53.002


1994-12
 
10-18-1994
 
TSO Table II


1994-13
 
10-18-1994
 
TSO Table I


1994-14
 
10-18-1994
 
TSO Table I


1995-1
 
1-17-1995
 
TSO Table II


1995-6
 
6-6-1995
 
TSO Table II


1995-9
 
6-20-1995
 
TSO Table II


1995-8
 
6-30-1995
 
54.170, 54.177


1995-8
 
10-3-1995
 
54.172


1995-14
 
10-3-1995
 
TSO Table II


1996-1
 
2-6-1996
 
TSO Table I


1996-5
 
10-1-1996
 
Ch. 78, Schd. II


1997-1
 
2-18-1997
 
TSO Table III


1997-2
 
4-15-1997
 
TSO Table I


1997-4
 
5-20-1997
 
TSO Table III


1997-5
 
7-1-1997
 
TSO Table II


1997-6
 
9-2-1997
 
TSO Table III


1998-2
 
3-3-1998
 
150.332


1998-3
 
3-3-1998
 
54.003, 54.014, 54.015


1998-4
 
3-3-1998
 
TSO Table II


1998-7
 
7-7-1998
 
TSO Table III


1998-8
 
7-7-1998
 
TSO Table III


1998-11
 
11-3-1998
 
TSO Table III


1998-12
 
12-1-1998
 
TSO Table I


1999-1
 
4-6-1999
 
TSO Table III


1999-3
 
6-1-1999
 
TSO Table II


1999-7
 
9-21-1999
 
TSO Table I


1999-8
 
10-19-1999
 
TSO Table I


1999-11
 
1-18-2000
 
150.357, 150.358, 151.02


2000-01
 
3-21-2000
 
TSO Table III


2000-4
 
3-21-2000
 
150.007, 150.331


2000-05
 
4-4-2000
 
150.332, 154.136


2000-9
 
- -2000
 
75.09


2000-12
 
12-19-2000
 
TSO Table I


2001-2
 
3-20-2001
 
151.01


2001-12
 
3-20-2001
 
150.232


2001-3
 
6-5-2001
 
TSO Table II


2001-4
 
6-5-2001
 
TSO Table I


2001-8
 
7-17-2001
 
TSO Table III


2001-9
 
8-21-2001
 
TSO Table I


2001-11
 
9-18-2001
 
150.332


2001-14
 
12-18-2001
 
TSO Table I


2002-1
 
2-19-2002
 
TSO Table I


2002-2
 
6-4-2002
 
TSO Table I


2002-6
 
7-16-2002
 
TSO Table I


2002-7
 
- -2002
 
31.02


2002-8
 
9-3-2002
 
TSO Table I


2002-11
 
11-19-2002
 
70.02


2002-13
 
1-7-2003
 
TSO Table I


2003-1
 
2-18-2003
 
TSO Table III


2003-3
 
2-18-2003
 
TSO Table I


2004-4
 
4-6-2004
 
TSO Table III


2004-5
 
5-4-2004
 
TSO Table III


2004-8
 
7-20-2004
 
33.070—33.073


2004-12
 
9-21-2004
 
TSO Table I


2004-13
 
10-5-2004
 
TSO Table III


2004-14
 
10-19-2004
 
TSO Table I


2004-16
 
11-2-2004
 
TSO Table I


2004-17
 
11-2-2004
 
TSO Table I


2004-18
 
11-16-2004
 
33.003


2004-20
 
1-4-2005
 
TSO Table III


2005-1
 
1-18-2005
 
TSO Table III


2005-2
 
3-15-2005
 
TSO Table I


2005-3
 
3-15-2005
 
TSO Table II


2000-05
 
4-4-2005
 
154.138


2005-5
 
4-5-2005
 
150.047, 150.071


2005-6
 
6-7-2005
 
71.02


2005-11
 
12-6-2005
 
TSO Table I


2006-1
 
2-7-2006
 
TSO Table II


2006-9
 
11-8-2006
 
150.331


2006-11
 
12-5-2006
 
TSO Table I


2007-1
 
1-16-2007
 
TSO Table I


2007-4
 
6-19-2007
 
91.11, 91.99


2007-6
 
7-17-2007
 
91.12, 91.99


2007-8
 
10-2-2007
 
151.16


2008-5
 
7-15-2008
 
33.015—33.018, 33.020—33.022


2008-7
 
8-5-2008
 
TSO Table I


2009-1
 
1-6-2009
 
TSO Table I


2009-2
 
1-6-2009
 
TSO Table I


2009-6
 
7-21-2009
 
72.15—72.23, 72.99


2009-4
 
8-4-2009
 
TSO Table II


2009-8
 
8-25-2009
 
97.01—97.12, 97.99


2009-5
 
9-1-2009
 
53.002


2009-10
 
9-15-2009
 
72.15, 72.21, 72.23


2009-11
 
10-6-2009
 
51.01—51.14, 51.99


2009-13
 
12-15-2009
 
53.002


2010-1
 
3-2-2010
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII, IX


2010-2
 
4-20-2010
 
TSO Table I


2010-3
 
5-4-2010
 
Ch. 77, Schd. I—VII


2010-4
 
5-18-2010
 
75.03, 75.09, 75.10, Ch. 78, Schd. I—IV


2010-5
 
7-6-2010
 
92.01, 92.03, 92.04, 92.99


2010-8
 
- -2010
 
130.03, 130.99


2010-10
 
11-1-2010
 
TSO Table I


2011-1
 
3-15-2011
 
Ch. 77, Schd. VIII


2011-3
 
5-3-2011
 
92.01


2011-4
 
6-21-2011
 
32.075—32.079


2011-7
 
9-20-2011
 
53.028


2011-8
 
9-20-2011
 
Ch. 78, Schd. IV


2011-9
 
12-20-2011
 
94.08, 130.01


2012-1
 
1-17-2012
 
52.003, 52.030


2012-2
 
4-3-2012
 
111.01—111.03, 111.15—111.23, 111.35—111.41, 111.99, 150.171, 150.191,
150.325


2012-6
 
7-3-2012
 
92.03


2012-7
 
8-7-2012
 
70.12, 70.99


2012-9
 
8-21-2012
 
97.02


2012-13
 
10-16-2012
 
31.02


2013-2
 
2-5-2013
 
32.030, 32.031


2013-3
 
6-4-2013
 
33.035—33.037


2013-5
 
7-1-2013
 
33.004


2013-8
 
10-1-2013
 
TSO Table I


2013-10
 
10-1-2013
 
TSO Table I


2013-11
 
10-15-2013
 
32.045


2013-12
 
11-19-2013
 
51.08, 51.99


2013-14
 
12-3-2013
 
33.016


2014-6
 
12-2-2014
 
TSO Table I


2014-13
 
5-20-2014
 
33.005


2015-1
 
1-20-2015
 
TSO Table I


—
 
- -2015
 
110.01—110.05, 110.07—110.15, 110.99


2015-4
 
3-17-2015
 
31.05


2015-3
 
4-7-2015
 
TSO Table III


2015-5
 
6-2-2015
 
TSO Table III


2015-7
 
5-5-2015
 
52.035


2015-8
 
6-16-2015
 
32.045


2015-9
 
7-7-2015
 
Adopting Ordinance


2015-10
 
8-4-2015
 
33.100


2015-11
 
9-15-2015
 
93.12


2015-13
 
10-6-2015
 
TSO Table I


2015-14
 
10-20-2015
 
33.110


2015-17
 
12-1-2015
 
33.006


2016-1
 
4-5-2016
 
TSO Table II


2016-2
 
4-19-2016
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II, VIII


2016-3
 
5-17-2016
 
Adopting Ordinance


2016-4
 
5-17-2016
 
33.120


2016-5
 
6-7-2016
 
34.001—34.017


2016-6
 
6-21-2016
 
TSO Table II


2016-7
 
6-21-2016
 
TSO Table I


2016-8
 
9-6-2016
 
TSO Table III


2016-9
 
8-16-2016
 
53.002


2016-10
 
9-6-2016
 
54.016


2016-11
 
8-16-2016
 
51.15


2016-13
 
9-20-2016
 
33.130


2016-16
 
10-4-2016
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VIII


2016-17
 
11-1-2016
 
33.140


2016-18
 
11-1-2016
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


2017-2
 
5-2-2017
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


2017-5
 
6-6-2017
 
33.070—33.073


2017-7
 
8-15-2017
 
155.001—155.004, 155.010, 155.020—155.027, 155.035—155.037,
155.045—155.052, 155.060—155.065, 155.070, 155.999


2017-9
 
9-5-2017
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


2017-10
 
10-3-2017
 
53.002


2017-13
 
10-3-2017
 
Adopting Ordinance


2017-14
 
10-3-2017
 
TSO Table I


2017-16
 
11-21-2017
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


2017-17
 
12-19-2017
 
TSO Table III


2017-19
 
12-5-2017
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


2017-20
 
11-21-2017
 
Ch. 77, Schs. VII, VIII


2017-21
 
12-5-2017
 
151.03


2017-23
 
12-19-2017
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


2018-2
 
2-6-2018
 
53.002


2018-4   
 
2-6-2018
 
150.357


2018-5
 
2-20-2018
 
72.18, 72.99


2018-6   
 
2-20-2018
 
92.03, 92.99


2018-8
 
4-17-2018
 
33.003


2018-9   
 
4-17-2018
 
151.16


2018-10
 
5-15-2018
 
30.04


2018-11
 
6-19-2018
 
TSO Table III


2018-13
 
6-19-2018
 
150.331


2018-14
 
6-19-2018
 
150.327


2018-15
 
8-7-2018
 
50.40, 50.41, 51.16, 52.013, 53.072, 54.175


2018-16
 
8-7-2018
 
TSO Table II


2018-17
 
8-21-2018
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


2018-18
 
8-21-2018
 
30.05, 30.99


 
 
 
 
 




 


