
Greendale, IN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF GREENDALE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2012 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2012-1, passed 2-27-2012
State legislation current through 2011 ALS Pamphlet No. 6



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
432 Walnut Street, 12th Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Email: customerservice@amlegal.com
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OF GREENDALE, INDIANA
CITY OFFICIALS



 



CITY OFFICIALS
 
 


MAYOR
 
Doug Hedrick


DEPUTY MAYOR
 
Al Abdon


MANAGER
 
Steve Lampert


CLERK-TREASURER
 
Mary Jo “Joey” Lynch


DEPUTY CLERK-TREASURER
 
Angela Walters


ATTORNEY
 
Richard Butler


POLICE CHIEF
 
DeWayne Uhlman


FIRE CHIEF
 
Shannon Craig


BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
 
Al Abdon and Bill Lansing


CODE ENFORCEMENT; PLANNING AND ZONING
 
Al Putnam




 



 



CITY COUNCIL
 
 


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Al Abdon


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Ty Bowell


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Eddie Edwards


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Bill Lansing


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Vince Karsteter


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Robert Bishoff


COUNCIL MEMBER
 
Walt “Doc” Wilson




 



City of Greendale



488 Ludlow Street



Greendale, IN 47025



Phone:  (812) 537-9219



Fax:  (812) 537-4915



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   CITY STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities



   10.17   Incorporation of material by reference



   10.18   Conflict with statutory provisions



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“City Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto, and newly enacted laws.  Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code.  All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between two or more sections.



   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved
by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted.  The
section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters, or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content.  These
descriptive headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect
the meaning, application, or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation.  This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense.  Technical  words and phrases having a peculiar
and appropriate  meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



      (5)   A citation designated “I.C.” refers to the title,
article, chapter, and section, as denoted by the numerals following the
reference, of the Indiana Code; and unless otherwise noted is a reference to
the Indiana Code and also refers implicitly to any supplements or act of the
General Assembly amendatory thereto.  Other legal citations used in this
code may include citations to the Indiana Administrative Code (IAC) and the
Indiana Acts (Act 19--). In general, all legal citations are of common and
generally understood form and shall be construed to have their usual meanings
for purposes of reference. (’85 Code, § 1-2-3)



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLERK-TREASURER.  The Clerk-Treasurer of the City Council.



      COUNCIL.  The City Council.



      COUNTY.  Dearborn County, Indiana.



      HIGHWAY.  Includes bridges, roads, and streets, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      MONTH.  One calendar month.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver, and bodies politic. 
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or
agents thereof.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  When referring to sections or
divisions in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or
next preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      TOWNSHIP.  The township or townships in which the city is
located.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING.  Include printing, lithographing, or
other modes of representing words and letters.  Where the written signature
of a person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person,
or the person’s mark.



      YEAR.  One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable.  If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



   (D)   The repeal of a statute stating that the provisions of an act
are severable as provided in division (B) does not affect the operation of
division (B) with respect to that act.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices.  Reference to a public office or
officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations.  Whenever any ordinance or resolution of
the Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; or at the time of the effective date
of that ordinance or subsequent thereto, the rights, powers, duties, or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority, or instrumentality, whether correctly named in
the ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named
entity, or the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers, and rights
were transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall
be excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provides.  The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture, or liability
incurred under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly
provides.  The section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the
purposes of sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement
of the penalty, forfeiture, or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall
not be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings,
and prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective
date of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if
this code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section.  In addition to an
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section.  Example:



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985; Ord. 30, passed - -; Ord. passed
1-1-1995; Ord. passed - -)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.  Example: 



(I.C. 36-5-2-2)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1985 and subsequently amended, the
previous code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(1985
Code, §     ).”



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election
of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.17  INCORPORATION OF MATERIAL BY REFERENCE.



   When the text of any materials are incorporated into and made a
substantive part of any provision of this code or a supplementary ordinance
by reference, rather than being directly set forth, the materials are
declared to be and are made public documents, and two copies of each complete
document or of that portion thereof so incorporated by reference shall be
kept on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and made available for
public inspection and copying in the same manner as other public documents. 
However, this requirement does not apply to instances where a statute or
similar law or written regulation, already being a promulgated public
document, is cited or referenced merely for the purpose of establishing legal
basis or authority, legal procedure, or legal precedent incident to the
implementation or administration of a provision of this code; nor to
instances where some such document or portion thereof is not incorporated as
an actual substantive part of the provision, but is cited or referred to
merely for the purpose of establishing administrative guidelines, standards,
or procedures incidental to the administration of the substantive parts of
the provision.



(1985 Code, § 1-2-6)



§ 10.18  CONFLICT WITH STATUTORY PROVISIONS.



   This code is in all respects subordinate to the laws of the state,
except to the extent that any law expressly makes a provision of this code
superior; and except in the case, if any provision of this code is found to
be prohibited by or in conflict with a provision of any state statute,
whether the statute was enacted prior or subsequent to the enactment of the
prohibited or conflicting code provision, then the provision of the statute
shall prevail.  However, nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the City Council from enacting any provision which is collateral or
supplementary to a statute, and any such provision shall be invalid only if
and to the extent that it is overtly inconsistent with a prescriptive or
proscriptive provision of  the statute; preempts the actual field of
operation of a statute; impairs or denies a right, privilege, or power
conferred on any person by a statute; prevents or impairs any person from
performing a duty or other act required to be performed by a statute; or
contravenes the purpose for which a statute was enacted by the General
Assembly; but, provided further, that no collateral or supplementary
provision shall fix or apply a penalty of fine or other forfeiture for any
act or condition which is also a penal violation of any statute.



(1985 Code, § 1-2-8)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent
violations, except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and
parking.



   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)



CHAPTER 11:  CITY STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   City boundaries



§ 11.01  CITY BOUNDARIES.



   The corporation boundary of the City of Greendale is hereby declared,
adopted, and defined to be as follows, subject to such additional annexation
or disannexation of territory as may hereafter be provided in this chapter or
by an amendatory ordinance:



   Beginning in the south line of Section 2, Township 5 North, Range 1
West, at the southeast corner of the former French lands and at a point
supposed to be 1272.5 feet east of the southwest corner of Section 2, and
running west, with the section line, 892 feet, more or less, to a corner of
the existing corporate limits of the City of Greendale; thence with the
present boundary lines of the town in the order here set out, viz; south 19
30' west 708.62 feet; south 4 30' east 743.25 feet; south 54 45' west 257.4
feet; south 23 33' west 1764.9 feet; south 7 33' west 3409.25 feet, and south
51 40' west 470.52 feet to the center of the main track of the New York
Central Railroad Co. (Newtown Switch), this latter line following in part the
north line of former Mill Street, in the City of Lawrenceburg; thence
continuing with the existing corporate limits of the City of Greendale, and
with the center of the main track of the New York Central Railroad Co., south
24 00' east 213.95 feet; and then south 73 35' west to the center of Tanner's
Creek; thence up the creek thereof, to the westerly right-of-way line of the
main line of the New York Central Railroad Co.; thence with the railroad
company right-of-way southerly, southeasterly and easterly to a large
concrete post standing at the most northerly corner of the lands belonging to
the Thatcher Glass Mfg. Co., Inc., thence with the lands of the Thatcher
Glass Mfg. Co., Inc., south 33 57' west 319.0 feet to an iron pipe; thence
south 16 20' east, 277.0 feet to an iron pipe standing in the north line of
the former Dam lands; thence south 89 58' west 700.4 feet to an iron pipe
standing at the northwest corner of the former Dam lands; thence with the
west line of the former Dam lands south 1 50' west 1284.6 feet to an iron
pipe standing at the southwest corner of the former Dam lands, this line
passing a stone standing at the northeast corner of lands owned by Dearborn
Homes, Inc. (the former French lands), at 1077.7 feet; thence with the south
line of the former Dam lands, south 89 54' east 2038.5 feet to a concrete
monument standing at the southwest corner of the lands now owned by Bonard F.
Dam and by Mayme Steiner and Benjamin Steiner, her husband, this line passing
a concrete monument, at 1544.2 feet, which stands in the line between
Sections 2 and 3 and 2016.5 feet north of the southwest corner of Section 2;
thence with the west line of the Dam and Steiner lands north 0 08' east 216.5
feet to the southwest corner of a parcel of land containing 0.434 acres
conveyed unto Farling Brothers by Bonard F. Dam, Mayme Steiner and Benjamin
F. Steiner; thence along and with the south line of the Farling Brothers
parcel of land, north 86 32' east 382.5 feet to the center of the public road
leading to the premises of the Thatcher Glass Mfg. Co., Inc., and the most
easterly corner of the parcel of land containing 0.766 acres conveyed unto
Farling Brothers by Bonard F. Dam (at 358.0 feet on this line passing the
northwest corner, at the top, of the end wall on the west side of a large
stone culvert); thence northwesterly along the center of the highway to the
southerly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad Co.; thence with
the right-of-way line, eastwardly, to a point where the east line of the
parcel of land belonging to Roy K. Culbertson and wife, containing 9.596
acres, would, if extended northerly, intersect the said railroad right-of-way
line; thence south 19 53' east to the southeast corner of the Culbertson
lands; thence with the south line of the Culbertson lands, in part, and in
part with the south line of the parcel of land containing 1.025 acres
belonging to Dwight H. Rowe and wife, south 81 50' west 318.18 feet to the
southwest corner, of the Rowe lands; thence with the west line of the Rowe
lands, north 0 50 west 48.8 feet to the southeast corner of the lands
formerly belonging to Enoch McElfresh; thence with the south line of the
former McElfresh lands, south 78 00' west 186.1 feet, more or less, to the
east line of the Bellview M.E. Church lands in Homestead; thence with the
Church lands south 0 50' east 102.0 feet, more or less, to the southeast
corner of the Church lands; thence with the south line of the Church lands
south 78 00' west 79.0 feet, more or less, to the southwest corner thereof;
thence with the extended west line of the Church lands, south 0 50' east
1853.3 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. EXCEPTING THEREFROM the
following: Beginning in a south line of the school lands, in the line
dividing Sections 2 and 3, at a point 1165.6 feet north of the southwest
corner of Section 2 and running south 82 28' west 1.5,.9 feet to the
southwest corner of the school lands; thence north 7 32' west 299.1 feet, to
the northwest corner of the school lands and to a point in the south line of
the Hutchinson lands; thence with the Hutchinson lands east 192.1 feet to the
southeast corner thereof and to the line dividing Sections 2 and 3; thence
south 65 21' east 118.3 feet; thence south 89 38' east 200.0 feet to the
northeast, corner of the school lands and to the west line of Wayne Avenue;
thence south 21 35' west 108.0 feet; thence south 18 06' west 115.5 feet to
the southeast corner of the school lands; thence north 89 38' west 108.4
feet; thence south 82 28' west 124.9 feet, to the point of beginning.
Containing 2.519 acres, more or less.



(’85 Code, § 2-1-1) (Ord. 3-1962, passed 6-18-1962)



Cross-reference:



   Annexations, see T.S.O. I



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY GOVERNMENT



      31.   CITY EMPLOYEES



      32.   CODE ENFORCEMENT



      33.   FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS



      34.   FINANCES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY GOVERNMENT



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Organization



   30.02   Executive branch



   30.03   Legislative branch



   30.04   Other parts of city government



   30.05   Powers and duties of city officials



   30.06   Official agency



City Manager



   30.15   Office of City Manager created; appointment; supervision



   30.16   Salary of City Manager



   30.17   Duties and scope of authority of City Manager



City Council



   30.30   Composition of the Council



   30.31   Composition of Council Districts



   30.32   Council District boundaries; annexed territories



   30.33   Method of electing Council Members



   30.34   President Pro Tempore



   30.35   City Council meetings; notices



   30.36   Rules of procedure at City Council meetings



Other Governing Bodies



   30.50   Economic Development Commission



   30.51   Department of Redevelopment; Redevelopment Commission



City Policies



   30.65   Charge for copies of public records




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   To the extent state law requires that powers of city
government be divided between executive and legislative branches, this
organization subchapter is intended to so provide.  This subchapter shall be
interpreted to be consistent with the requirements of state law.



   (B)   To the extent the Home Rule Law allows municipal governments
to choose the manner for exercising their authority, this subchapter
specifies how some municipal powers shall be exercised and what board,
commission, department, or utility is responsible for municipal operations
undertaken pursuant to those powers.  Relying on the Home Rule Law, this
city government has chosen not to designate, as either executive or
legislative, several municipal operations or the boards, commissions,
departments, or utilities responsible for them.



   (C)   All operations of the city not specifically identified in this
subchapter as being a part of the executive or legislative branches,
including those under certain statutory boards and commissions, shall be
managed or conducted, as required by this subchapter or by statute, without
consideration as to whether they are an executive or legislative function.



(Ord. 3-1996, passed 5-15-1996)



§ 30.02  EXECUTIVE BRANCH.



   (A)   The following executive departments are hereby established:



      (1)   Police Department;



      (2)   Fire Department;



      (3)   Department of Public Works;



      (4)   Department of Parks and Recreation; and



      (5)   Department of Law.



   (B)   (1)   The Mayor is the city executive and the head of the
executive branch.  The Mayor shall have those powers and duties set forth in
I.C. 36-4-5 et seq., and other state statutes which specifically convey
authority or responsibility.



      (2)   There is hereby established the Office of Deputy Mayor,
pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-7.  A member of Council shall be appointed by the
Mayor for a term of one year to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during the
absence or incapacity of the Mayor with all the powers of the Office of Mayor.



   (C)   (1)   There is hereby established the Office of City
Manager.  The appointment shall be made by the Mayor and this appointee
serves at the pleasure of the Mayor.



      (2)   The powers and duties of the City Manager shall include
the following:



         (a)   Authority to hire and discharge all city
employees, except those in departments, agencies, or utilities that are under
the head of a different manager, superintendent, or chief;



         (b)   Management of the overall operations of the
municipal government and of the specific activities of those departments,
agencies, or utilities that are not under the head of a different manager,
superintendent, or chief;



         (c)   Maintain and secure all equipment, materials, and
property owned by the city or its utilities that are not under the control of
a different manager, superintendent, or chief; and



         (d)   Subject to the approval of the board or commission
established in or over a department, the Mayor may appoint the City Manager
to serve as the head of any city department, provided that the person serving
as City Manager has the qualifications required by statute for serving as the
head of each department he or she is appointed to head.



   (D)   (1)   There is hereby established a Board of Public Works
and Safety pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-8.  The members of the Board of Public
Works and Safety are the Mayor and two persons appointed by the Mayor.  The
City Clerk-Treasurer is the clerk of this Board.  The City Civil Engineer
shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at the direction of the Board
of Public Works and Safety.



      (2)   The Board of Public Works and Safety  has those powers
over the Police Department that are specifically provided this Board by I.C.
36-8-3.  The head of the Police Department is the Police Chief, who is
appointed by the Mayor.  The Mayor’s appointee to the position of Police
Chief must meet the requirements of I.C. 36-8-4-6.5.



      (3)   The Board of Public Works and Safety  has those powers
over the Fire Department that are specifically provided this Board by I.C.
36-8-3 et seq..  The head of the Fire Department is the Fire Chief, who has
those powers and duties provided by statute and those specified in this
code.  The Mayor’s appointee to the position of Fire Chief must meet the
requirements of I.C. 36-8-4-6, and must be recommended to the Mayor for
appointment by an annual election of the members of the Department.



      (4)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall operate,
manage, and control the Department of Public Works.  The areas of
responsibility of the Department of Public Works shall include all municipal
operations, facilities, and equipment that pertain to the following: 
streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater, drainage, and solid waste disposal. 
The head of the Department of Public Works is the Public Works
Superintendent, who may also serve as City Manager.  The Mayor’s
appointment of Public Works Superintendent is subject to the approval of the
Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (E)   (1)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall operate,
manage, and control the Department of Parks and Recreation.  Pursuant to
I.C. 36-10-3-4, the Board shall consist of four members to be appointed by
the Mayor.  The Board members shall be appointed on the basis of their
interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation, but no more than two
members may be affiliated with the same political party.



      (2)   The head of the Department of Parks and Recreation is
the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation, who has the powers and duties set
forth in I.C. 36-10-3-14.  The Mayor’s appointment of the Superintendent
of Parks and Recreation is subject to the approval of the Board of Parks and
Recreation.  The Mayor may not consider political affiliation in choosing
the Superintendent appointee and this appointee must possess the
qualifications required by I.C. 36-10-3-13.



   (F)   The head of the Department of Law is the City Attorney who
shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall have the powers and duties
specified in I.C. 36-4-9-12.  If this individual is to also serve as
attorney for the Council, pursuant to I.C. 36-4-6-24, or for either or both
of the city’s utilities, this appointment must be approved by the Council.



   (G)   (1)   Subject to I.C. 36-4-11 et seq. and any other statute
specifically applicable, the head of each city department shall be
responsible for appointments and dismissals of all deputy department heads
and other employees of that department.



      (2)   No deputy may be appointed or employee hired unless the
position is authorized in the city’s salary ordinance and there is an
appropriation of monies to fund the position.



   (H)   All members of the boards and commissions in or over the
city’s executive departments shall be city residents unless the statute
governing a particular appointment requires that member to reside outside the
city corporate limits or an interlocal agreement with another governmental
entity provides otherwise.



(Ord. 3-1996, passed 5-15-1996)



§ 30.03  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.



   (A)   The legislative branch of the city is the Council and those
municipal agencies and operations exclusively under the control of the
Council, as provided by state statute or this subchapter.



      (1)   The Council shall have exclusive authority to adopt
ordinances and appropriate tax monies received by the city and to exercise
all other powers necessary or desirable in the conduct of city affairs
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3 et seq. and I.C. 36-4-6 et seq., or other applicable
statutes.



      (2)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-7 et seq., the Council shall fix
the annual compensation of all elected city officers and members of the City
Police and Fire Departments.  Pursuant to I.C. 8-1.5-3-4 et seq., the
Council, as the Utility Board, shall fix the annual compensation of all
employees of the city’s utilities.  Any salaries of deputies or employees
of the City Clerk-Treasurer shall be approved by the Council.  In approving
the Mayor’s determination of the annual compensation to be paid other city
employees, the Council may reduce the amount of any compensation fixed by the
Mayor.



      (3)   Subject only to exceptions that it expressly creates or
statutes requiring otherwise, the Council shall have the exclusive power to
authorize the payment of claims made on the city government.  No check for
the payment of any claim shall be drawn on any account, fund, or monies of
the city without the approval of the claim by the officer or person receiving
the goods or services and by the Council.



      (4)   Subject to Council rules, the Mayor shall preside at
meetings of the Council, but may vote only in order to break a tie.  The
Council shall choose from its members a President Pro Tempore to preside
whenever the Mayor is absent.



      (5)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the clerk of the Council
and shall perform the duties prescribed by I.C. 36-4-6-9 and any other duties
the Council determines that it needs the Clerk-Treasurer to perform.



      (6)   The Council may employ the services of an attorney
without authorization from the head of the Department of Law.



   (B)   (1)   The electric utility and the water utility are a part
of the city’s legislative branch under the control of the Utility Board,
consisting of all the members of the Council.  In this capacity, the Council
has all powers and duties provided to a board under I.C. 8-1.5-3.



      (2)   The Council has the authority to appoint the
Superintendent of each utility and has the sole authority to remove the
utility Superintendents.  The Superintendent of each utility has those
powers and duties specified by I.C. 8-1.5-3-5 and those responsibilities
delegated by the Council.



(Ord. 3-1996, passed 5-15-1996)



§ 30.04  OTHER PARTS OF CITY GOVERNMENT.



   (A)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer is the fiscal officer of the
city, who has the powers and duties set forth in I.C. 36-4-10 et seq. and
other state statutes specifically conveying authority and responsibilities on
the city’s fiscal officer.



      (2)   In order to fulfill the responsibilities of the office,
the Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain city records at a city office facility
with regular hours open to the public.  If the Council employs the
Clerk-Treasurer to be responsible for the billing and collection of municipal
utility rates and charges, the city records shall be maintained at the same
office facility as the utility billing records and the Council shall
determine the hours this office shall be open to the public.



      (3)   Subject to the necessary authorization in the city’s
salary ordinance and Council’s appropriation of sufficient monies, the
Clerk-Treasurer may appoint a deputy or deputies to work under the exclusive
direction of the Clerk-Treasurer and to serve at the pleasure of the
Clerk-Treasurer, consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. 
Subject to Council authorization, the Clerk-Treasurer shall hire all
employees who are responsible for the billing and collection of utility rates
and charges.



   (B)   The City Plan Commission shall have those powers and duties
provided to advisory plan commissions under I.C. 36-7-4 et seq., with the
members of the Commission appointed in accordance with that statute.  The
Plan Commission shall also serve as the Building Authority of the city for
the purpose of overseeing the administration and enforcement of the city’s
building regulations.  The City Council shall appoint the City Building
Commissioner, who shall be responsible for enforcing the city’s building
regulations.



   (C)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have those powers and duties
provided to boards of zoning appeals under the advisory planning law of I.C.
36-7-4, with five members appointed in accordance with that statute.



   (D)   The Economic Development Commission, with three members
appointed in accordance with I.C. 36-7-12 et seq., shall have those powers
and duties provided to economic development commissions and to departments of
economic development by that statute.



   (E)   The Redevelopment Commission, with five members appointed in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-14 et seq., shall have those powers and duties
provided to redevelopment commissions and departments of redevelopment by
that statute.



   (F)   The Housing Authority, with five Commissioners appointed in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-18 et seq., shall have all powers and duties
provided to housing authorities under that statute.



   (G)   The Police Pension Board of Trustees shall be responsible for
performing certain duties prescribed by I.C. 36-8-6 et seq. (1925 Fund) and
I.C. 36-8-8 et seq. (1977 Fund) concerning the statutory pensions of city
police, with the Trustees appointed in accordance with these statutes.



   (H)   The Firefighters’ Pension Board of Trustees shall be
responsible for performing certain duties prescribed by I.C. 36-8-7 et seq.
(1937 Fund) and I.C. 36-8-8 (1977 Fund), concerning the statutory pensions of
city firefighters, with the Trustees appointed in accordance with these
statutes.



(Ord. 3-1996, passed 5-15-1996)



§ 30.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS.



   (A)   All officers, officials, boards, commissions, or other
official entities of the city government shall be construed to have:



      (1)   All powers or duties prescribed for or conferred on any
particular such officer, official, board, commission, or other official
entity by statute;



      (2)   All powers or duties expressly prescribed or conferred
thereon by a provision of this code; and



      (3)   All powers or duties implied by the nature of and
necessary or dispensable to the proper and efficient fulfillment of their
governmental or corporate function or duties of office, including, but not
necessarily limited to, the power to prescribe administrative rules or
procedures for the governance of their respective offices, departments,
agencies, or functions to the extent not inconsistent with nor preempted by a
provision of this code or a statute, or by an applicable and mandatory state
or federal administrative regulation.



   (B)   To the extent provided by this section, the fact that a
particular power or duty is not expressly set forth in this code and
conferred on an officer, official, board, commission, or other official
entity does not of itself imply that the power or duty does not exist or has
been considerately denied or withheld.



(1985 Code, § 1-4-1)



§ 30.06  OFFICIAL AGENCY.



   Any purely ministerial power or function vested in any officer, board,
commission, or other entity by a provision of this code may be delegated to
and exercised or performed by a deputy or other authorized agent or
representative of the authority in whom the ministerial power or function is
vested, except that no person shall be permitted to receive or handle public
funds or other monies in the custody of the city unless that person is
properly bonded or expressly so authorized by law.  The delegation of a
ministerial power or function does not relieve the principal authority in
whom it is vested of responsibility for proper and timely performance.  Any
power or function vested in an officer, board, commission, or other entity
which involves the exercise of official discretion shall be performed or
exercised only by or under the immediate supervision of the authority in whom
it was vested, and it may not be delegated unless a provision of this code or
law expressly so permits.



(1985 Code, § 1-4-2)



CITY MANAGER



§ 30.15  OFFICE OF CITY MANAGER CREATED; APPOINTMENT; SUPERVISION.



   (A)   In order to maintain all the departments under one management,
the City Council deems it necessary to create an office to be known as
Manager.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint a Manager, and the Manager shall be
removed by the Council by giving 60 days’ notice, or the Manager may resign
his or her office by tendering his or her resignation to the Council by
giving 60 days’ notice to be served upon the Council.



   (C)   The Office of Manager shall be under the control and
supervision of the Mayor at all times.



(1985 Code, § 9-4-1)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1946)



§ 30.16  SALARY OF CITY MANAGER.



   The salary of the Manager shall be fixed by City Council, and shall be
subject to change by giving the Manager 30 days’ notice in advance of the
change of salary.



(1985 Code, § 9-4-2)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1946)



§ 30.17  DUTIES AND SCOPE OF AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.



   (A)   The Office of Manager shall manage, maintain, and operate the
following departments:




      (1)   Electric;





      (2)   Water;





      (3)   Sewer;





      (4)   Garbage Disposal;




      (5)   Street; and



      (6)   Parks and Recreation.



   (B)   The Manager shall be vested with the authority to employ and
discharge all employees in the respective departments.  The duties of the
Manager shall be to maintain, operate, and supervise all the departments as
numerated and set out above, and be responsible for all the equipment and
material of the city and the City Utility Department.



(1985 Code, § 9-4-3)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1946)



CITY COUNCIL



§ 30.30  COMPOSITION OF THE COUNCIL.



   The legislative body of the city is comprised of seven members.  This
body is identified in this code as the “Council” or “City Council.”



(1985 Code, § 9-5-1)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -; Ord. 1994-9, passed - -)



§ 30.31  COMPOSITION OF COUNCIL DISTRICTS.



   The city shall have five Council Districts composed of contiguous
territory, reasonably compact, and containing, as nearly as possible, an
equal population according to the most recent United States census. 
Examination and reconfirmation or redistricting shall be performed by Council
upon the reporting of each United States census or, when deemed necessary and
appropriate by the Council, as the result of disproportionate population
change within one or more Districts during a United States census term or the
annexation of additional territory.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-2)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -; Ord. 1994-9, passed - -; Ord. 1997-8, passed - -)



§ 30.32  COUNCIL DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; ANNEXED TERRITORIES.



   (A)   The city is divided into five Council Districts as follows:



      (1)   District No. 1.  Bounded on the east by the east
municipal corporate boundary; on the south by the south corporate boundary;
on the west by the west municipal corporate boundary; and on the north by
Probasco Avenue from the west municipal corporate boundary east to Nowlin
Avenue, then by Nowlin Avenue north to Oakey Avenue, then by Oakey Avenue
east to Ridge Avenue, then by Ridge Avenue north to the Greendale Cemetery
entranceway, then east from the intersection of the Greendale Cemetery
entranceway with Ridge Avenue on an imaginary line extending due east to the
east municipal corporate boundary;



      (2)   District No. 2.  Bounded on the west by the west
municipal corporate boundary; on the south by Probasco Avenue from the west
municipal corporate boundary east to Nowlin Avenue, then by Nowlin Avenue
north to Oakey Avenue, then by Oakey Avenue east to Ridge Avenue; on the east
by Ridge Avenue from Oakey Avenue north to Tebbs Avenue; and on the north by
Tebbs Avenue from Ridge Avenue west to Gunkle Avenue, then by Gunkle Avenue
north to Cook Avenue, then by Cook Avenue west to Tanner Avenue, then by
Tanner Avenue north to Park Avenue, then by Park Avenue continuing due west
along an imaginary line extending from Park Avenue to the west municipal
corporate boundary;



      (3)   District No. 3.  Bounded on the east by Ridge Avenue;
on the south by Tebbs Avenue from Ridge Avenue west to Gunkle Avenue, then by
Gunkle Avenue north to Cook Avenue, then by Cook Avenue west to Tanner
Avenue, then by Tanner Avenue north along an imaginary line extending to Park
Avenue, then by Park Avenue west to the west municipal corporate boundary; on
the west by Rand Avenue from the west municipal corporate boundary north to
Miller Avenue, then by Miller Avenue west and then north to Locust Avenue;
and on the north by Locust Avenue from Miller Avenue east to Nowlin Avenue,
then by Nowlin Avenue south to Park Grove Avenue, then by Park Grove Avenue
east to Heck Drive, then by Heck Drive south to Parkside Avenue, then by
Parkside Avenue east to Hillside Avenue, then by Hillside Avenue north to
Dorman Avenue, then by Dorman Avenue east to its intersection with Ridge
Avenue;



      (4)   District No. 4.  Bounded on the west by the west
municipal corporate boundary; on the north by Tanners Creek, then by Tanners
Creek to easterly the Conrail Railroad right-of-way, then by the Conrail
Railroad right-of-way east to Ridge Avenue; on the east by Ridge Avenue from
the Conrail Railroad right-of-way south to Robinson Drive, then by Robinson
Drive west to Wayne Avenue, then by Wayne Avenue south to Dorman Avenue; and
on the south by Dorman Avenue west to Hillside Avenue, then by Hillside
Avenue south to Parkside Avenue, then by Parkside Avenue to Heck Avenue, then
by Heck Avenue north to Park Grove Avenue, then by Park Grove Avenue west to
Nowlin Avenue, then by Nowlin Avenue north to Locust Avenue, then by Locust
Avenue west to Miller Avenue, then by Miller Avenue south and east to Nowlin
Avenue, then by Nowlin Avenue south to Rand Avenue, then by Rand Avenue
continuing due west along an imaginary line extending from Rand Avenue to the
west municipal corporate boundary; and



      (5)   District No. 5.  All that territory within the
municipal corporate boundaries and bounded on the east by the east municipal
corporate boundary; on the north by the north municipal corporate boundary;
on the west by the west municipal corporate boundary to Tanners Creek; and on
the south by Tanners Creek easterly to the Conrail Railroad right-of-way,
then by the Conrail Railroad right-of-way east to Ridge Avenue, then by Ridge
Avenue south to Robinson Drive, then by Robinson Drive west to Wayne Avenue,
then by Wayne Avenue south to Dorman Avenue, then by Dorman Avenue east to
Ridge Avenue, then by Ridge Avenue south to the Greendale Cemetery
entranceway, then east from the intersection of the Greendale Cemetery
entranceway with Ridge Avenue on an imaginary line extending due east to the
east municipal corporate boundary.



   (B)   In order to address uncertainties that may arise as to where
this code section places Council District boundaries, the Council may
maintain a map delineating the District boundaries as they are applicable to
the current corporate limits.  If the Council determines by ordinance that a
particular map reflects the Council District boundaries, that map may be used
to interpret the boundaries as established in this code section.  If the map
conflicts with any written provision in the code that was not clearly the
result of an error in drafting or transcription, the written code provision
shall govern.



   (C)   In the event any territory is annexed into the city, the
annexed territory shall be added to and become part of that District to which
the largest proportion of the boundary of the new territory is contiguous,
unless the annexation ordinance, or the ordinance adopted in association
therewith, specifies a different allocation of the annexed territory to a
District or Districts.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-3)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 1994-18, passed  - -1994; Ord. 2002-9, passed 12-11-2002)



§ 30.33  METHOD OF ELECTING COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The seven Council Members of the City Council shall be elected to
office as follows.



   (A)   District members.  Five Council Members shall serve as
district members.  They shall be elected to office only by the voters of the
Council district in which the respective candidate/Council Member and voters
reside.



   (B)   At largemembers.  Two Council Members shall serve as at large
members.  They shall be elected to office by the voters of the entire city.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-4)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 1994-9, passed -
-1994; Ord. 1994-18, passed - -1994; Ord. 1997-8, passed 11-12-1997)



§ 30.34  PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE.



   At the first regular meeting of the City Council in January of each
year, the Council shall elect from its members a President Pro Tempore to
preside at a Council meeting whenever the Mayor is absent.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-5)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 14E-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 1996-3, passed - -1996)



§ 30.35  CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS; NOTICES.



   (A)   The City Council shall have no definite session or sessions
during the year, but shall be in continuous session for the conduct of the
legislative business of the city government.



   (B)   The continuous session shall consist of the meetings as are
required for city business as follows.



      (1)   Regularmeetings.  A regular meeting of the City Council
shall convene at 7:00 p.m. on the second Wednesday of each month.  At least
48 hours before the first regular meeting of each year, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall:



         (a)   Post a schedule of the regular meetings outside
the City Council’s regular meeting place; and



         (b)   Mail a copy of the schedule to any of the news
media having requested that notice, in writing, prior to January 1 of the
year.



      (2)   Special meetings.



         (a)   Special meetings of the City Council may be
convened at any time or place for the conduct of any city business which, in
the opinion of the person calling the special meeting, cannot reasonably
await the next regular meeting.  A special meeting may be called by the
Mayor, or by the President Pro Tempore if the Mayor is absent from the city,
or by a written petition signed by a majority of the Members of the City
Council and delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer.  When a special meeting is
called, the Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately give notice thereof, by mail,
telephone, or in person, to all Members of the City Council and the Mayor
other than those calling the special meeting, and stating the time, place,
and principal purpose of the meeting.  However, a special meeting, once
convened, need not be limited to the principal purpose for which it was
called, and any other business proper to the City Council may be introduced
and conducted at the special meeting.  Except in an emergency threatening
the public welfare or the integrity of operations of the city government, a
special meeting shall be called at least 72 hours before the time fixed for
the meeting.  If notice is given in a timely manner, and in good faith, in
accordance with this section, the fact that any official fails to receive the
notice prior to a special meeting shall not be construed to compromise any
action taken at the meeting in the absence of such, nor shall the action be
compromised if any official failing to receive notice attends the meeting
anyway or signs a waiver of notice either before or after the special meeting.



         (b)   In addition, if possible, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall post notice of the special meeting outside the meeting room and shall
notify requesting news media at least 48 hours in advance, or as soon in
advance as possible, but pursuant to I.C. 5-14-1.5-5 the notice is not
otherwise required, and failure of the Clerk-Treasurer to give the notice
does not compromise any action taken at the special meeting.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-6)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 14E-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 1996-1, passed - -1996; Ord. 1996-10, passed 7-22-1996)



§ 30.36  RULES OF PROCEDURE AT CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   Rules of procedure shall apply at City Council meetings and shall have
precedence as follows:



   (A)   All rules of procedure prescribed for a City Council by state
law shall be observed;



   (B)   To the extent not in conflict with the foregoing, any special
rules of procedure or bylaws as specifically adopted by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council shall apply and be observed; and



   (C)   To the extent not in conflict with divisions (A) or (B) above,
rules of parliamentary procedure as set forth in the latest edition of
Robert’s Rules of Order shall apply and be observed.



(1985 Code, § 9-5-7)  (Ord. 3-1963, passed 8-27-1963; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 14E-1984, passed - -1984)



OTHER GOVERNING BODIES



§ 30.50  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Established.  There is hereby created and established a
Department of Economic Development for the city, to be under the control of a
three-member board to be known as the City Economic Development Commission.



(1985 Code, § 3-1-1)



   (B)   Membership.



      (1)   The Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor
upon selection and nomination as follows:



         (a)   One member shall be selected by the Mayor, and
shall serve an initial term of three years from 2-1-1970;



         (b)   One member shall be nominated by the County
Council, and shall serve an initial term of one year from 2-1-1970; and



         (c)   One member shall be nominated by a majority vote
of the City Council, and shall serve an initial term of two years from
2-1-1970.



      (2)   At the expiration of the respective terms, successors
shall be nominated and appointed in the same manner as the original
appointee, and each succeeding member shall serve a term of four years.



(1985 Code, § 3-1-2)



   (C)   Qualifications.  No person shall be appointed as a
Commissioner who is not either a resident of, employed in, or the owner of a
business in the city.



(1985 Code, § 3-1-3)



   (D)   Oath of office.  Each Commissioner, before entering upon his
or her duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the usual form
to be endorsed upon the certificate of his or her appointment, which shall be
promptly filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



(1985 Code, § 3-1-4)



   (E)   Powers and duties.  The Department of Economic Development is
created pursuant to I.C. 36-7-12 et seq., and the Economic Development
Commission is hereby vested with all authority of and subject to the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-12 et seq.



(1985 Code, § 3-1-5)



(Ord. 1969-2, passed 3-12-1969; Ord. 1984-6A, passed - -1984)



§ 30.51  DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT; REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Established.  There is hereby created and established a
Department of Redevelopment for the city, to be under the control of  a
five-member board to be known as the City Redevelopment Commission.



(1985 Code, § 3-1.1-1)



   (B)   Membership.  The Redevelopment Commission members shall be
appointed and serve as follows.



      (1)   The Mayor shall appoint three members and the Council
shall appoint two members of the five-member Commission.



      (2)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner shall serve for one year
from the first day of January after his or her appointment and until his or
her successor is appointed and has qualified, except the original
Commissioners shall serve from the date of their appointment until the first
day of January in the second year after their appointment.  If a vacancy
occurs, a successor shall be appointed in the same manner as the original
Commissioner, and the successor shall serve for the remainder of the vacated
term.



(1985 Code, § 3-1.1-2)



   (C)   Qualifications.  Commission members are subject to certain
requirements as follows.



      (1)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or
her duties, shall execute a bond payable to the state, with surety to be
approved by the Mayor.  The bond must be in the penal sum of $15,000 and
must be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office and the accounting for all monies and property that may come into his
or her hands or under his or her control.  The cost of the bond shall be
paid by the special taxing district.



      (2)   A Redevelopment Commissioner must be at least 18 years
of age, and must be a resident of the city.



      (3)   If a Commissioner ceases to be qualified under this
section, he or she forfeits his or her office.



   (D)   Oath of office.  Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before
beginning his or her duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in
the usual form, to be endorsed on the certificate of his or her appointment,
which shall be promptly filed with the Clerk-Treasurer.



(1985 Code, § 3-1.1-4)



   (E)   Salary.  Redevelopment Commissioners are not entitled to
salaries, but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses necessarily incurred
in the performance of their duties.



(1985 Code, § 3-1.1-5)



   (F)   Powers and duties.  The powers and duties of the
Redevelopment Commission are as follows.



      (1)   The Department of Redevelopment and the Redevelopment
Commission are vested with that authority as provided by I.C. 36-7-14-12.2.



      (2)   Full and complete written minutes of each meeting of the
Redevelopment Commission shall be prepared by it and a copy thereof shall be
promptly delivered to the Mayor, each Member of the Council, the
Clerk-Treasurer, and the City Attorney, and the Commission shall maintain all
its records in the administration office of the city.



(1985 Code, § 3-1.1-6)



(Ord. 1996-13, passed 8-14-1996)




CITY POLICIES




§ 30.65  CHARGE FOR COPIES OF PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3, the city hereby establishes that
there shall not be any charge for the first ten pages copied of any
citizen’s request for public records and that, for any request in excess of
ten pages, the charge per page, including the first ten pages, shall be at
least $.10 per copy.



   (B)   This section shall remain in full force and effect from and
after its passage and posting in three places within the city.



(Ord. 2003-9, passed 9-10-2003)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY EMPLOYEES



Section



Employee Policy, Benefits, and Pension Programs



   31.01   Social Security coverage for city employees



   31.02   Employee Deferred Compensation Program



   31.03   Participation in Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF)



   31.04   Full-paid firefighters; 1977 Firefighters’ Pension and
Disability Fund; membership



   31.05   Full-paid firefighters; supplemental group insurance plan
and maternity benefits



   31.06   1925 Police Pension Fund; membership; Pension Fund Board of
Trustees



   31.07   Full-time police and firefighters; supplementary disability
coverage



   31.08   Union-represented employees; employer/employee pension fund
contributions



   31.09   Union-represented employees; group insurance plan



   31.10   Employee requirements and conditions



Union-Represented Employees’ Work Agreement



   31.20   Definitions; employees excluded from bargaining unit



   31.21   Recognition of union; covered classifications



   31.22   Agency shop; dues obligation; collection by city



   31.23   Seniority of covered employees



   31.24   Work schedule; overtime pay; call-ins



   31.25   Holidays; holiday pay



   31.26   Vacation; eligibility; vacation pay



   31.27   Sick leave allowance; abuse



   31.28   Leave for death in family



   31.29   Classification and wage scales



   31.30   Uniforms and equipment allowance



   31.31   Vacant or new positions; notice to current employees;
applications from current employees



   31.32   Grievance committee and procedure; arbitration



   31.33   Term of agreement; automatic renewal; amendment or
termination




EMPLOYEE POLICY, BENEFITS, AND PENSION PROGRAMS




§ 31.01  SOCIAL SECURITY COVERAGE FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.



   The City Council hereby elects by and under provisions of Chapter 313,
Acts of 1951, coverage under the Old Age and Survivors’ Insurance.  The
following positions are hereby designated as those which are to be covered: 
all positions not covered by an existing retirement or pension plan,
excepting the elective legislative officers and excepting members of the City
Fire Department.  For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Title
II, § 218 of the Federal Social Security Acts and amendments thereof, the
agreement entered into between the state agency with the approval of the
Governor and the Social Security Administrator is made a part of this section
and shall be termed as an agreement between this city and the state agency,
and shall become a part of the agreement or modification of the agreement
between the state and the Social Security Administrator.  Active coverage
shall begin as of 1-1-1953.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-1)  (Ord. passed 11-10-1953; Ord. 1998-7, passed
11-12-1998)



§ 31.02  EMPLOYEE DEFERRED COMPENSATION PROGRAM.



   (A)   Generally.  Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary,
the city shall be authorized to enter into a written contract with any of its
employees to defer any allowable part of the employee’s gross compensation
and may invest the funds in any manner as prescribed by the Deferred
Compensation Program of the city, as permitted under subsequent provisions of
this section.  The Deferred Compensation Program established by this section
shall exist and serve in addition to retirement, pensions, and benefit
systems established by the city.  Any income deferred under a plan shall
continue to be included as regular compensation for the purpose of computing
the retirement and pension benefits earned by an employee.  However, it is
exempt from taxation by the state to the same extent as it is exempt from
income tax imposed by the United States.



   (B)   Scope and coverage.  As used in this section, EMPLOYEE means
any person, whether appointed, elected, or under contract, providing services
for the city for which compensation is paid.



   (C)   Deferred Compensation Commission; membership; duties.  There
is established a City Public Employees Deferred Compensation Commission,
which shall approve any deferred agreement entered into pursuant to this
section, and shall oversee the orderly administration of the assets held by
the city under the agreement.  The Commission shall consist of the Mayor, or
his or her representative, and the City Manager, or his or her
representative, each of whom shall serve for a term commensurate with his or
her term in office; plus three city employees appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council, who shall serve for a term of four years commencing
with their appointment.  The Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson
and shall be required to meet not less than annually or at any other time as
called by the Chairperson or a majority of the Commission.



   (D)   Establishment and administration of plan; copy on file. 
Subject to the Public Employees Deferred Compensation Commission, the Mayor
shall establish and administer a deferred compensation plan for the employees
of the city.  The Commission may directly or through the Mayor contract with
a private corporation or institution for providing the services as may be
part of any plan or may be deemed necessary or proper by the Commission or
the Mayor, including, but not limited to, communicating the plan to
employees, providing consolidated billing, individual and collective record
keeping, and accounting as an asset purchase control and safekeeping.  The
City Public Employee Deferred Compensation Plan is a part of this division
(D).  A copy is on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (E)   Participation by employees; agreement; limitation. 
Participation in the plan shall be a specific written agreement between the
employee and the city, which shall provide for the deferral of amounts of
compensation as requested by the employee.  Participating employees must
authorize deferrals from their wages for the purpose of participation in the
program.  However, in no event shall the total of the amount of deferred
compensation to be set aside under a deferred compensation program exceed the
limits established in § 131 of the Revenue Act of 1978 and incorporated in
§ 457 of the Revenue Code.



   (F)   Investment of deferred monies in insurance and annuity
plans.  Funds held by the Public Employees Deferred Compensation Commission
pursuant to a written deferred compensation agreement between the city and
participating employees may be invested as deemed appropriate by the Mayor
and approved by the Commission, including, but not limited to, insurance and
annuity contracts.  These investments shall not be construed to be a
prohibited use of the general assets of the city.  In no case shall
insurance investments be offered by other than persons and companies
authorized and duly licensed by the state and applicable federal regulatory
agencies to offer insurance or investment programs in compliance with all
relevant provisions of this section.



   (G)   Limitation of city financial liability. The financial
liability of the city shall be limited in each instance to the value of the
particular insurance or annuity contract or other investment options
purchased on behalf of any employee.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-2)  (Ord. 2-1983, passed 6-14-1983; Ord. 1998-7, passed
11-12-1998)



§ 31.03  PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND (PERF).



   (A)   The city elects participation in the Public Employees’
Retirement Fund by including classes of employees as stated below in the
coverage under I.C. 5-10.3-1-1 et seq. and all acts amendatory and
supplemental thereto.  The city agrees to make the required contributions
under the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund Act (I.C. 5-10.3-1-1 et seq.)
and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, including
specifically Acts 1955, Chapter 329, commonly designated as the State Public
Employees’ Social Security Integration and Supplemental Retirement Benefits
Acts.  The following are declared to be covered by the Fund:



      (1)   Full-time city employees, excluding police, and
excluding firefighters hired after 5-1-1977;



      (2)   Full-time water and electric utility employees; and



      (3)   Elected officials.



   (B)   Active membership in the Fund shall begin 1-1-1971.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-3)  (Res. passed 10-13-1970; Res. passed 12-29-1970; Ord.
13-1984, passed - -; Ord. 1998-7, passed 11-12-1998)



§ 31.04  FULL-PAID FIREFIGHTERS; 1977 FIREFIGHTERS’ PENSION AND
DISABILITY FUND; MEMBERSHIP.



   The city elects to become a participant in the 1977 Firefighters’
Pension and Disability Fund as established by Pub. L. No. 9 (Special Session
1977), and all acts amendatory and supplemental thereto.  The city agrees to
make the required contributions under Pub. L. No. 9 (Special Session 1977)
and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, to the 1977
Firefighters’ Pension and Disability Fund in an amount determined by the
Board of Trustees of the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF). 
Full-time firefighters (excluding volunteers) are declared to be covered by
the Fund.  Any full-paid firefighter hired after 5-1-1977 shall be a member
of the 1977 Firefighters’ Pension and Disability Fund.  Each full-paid
firefighter shall contribute 6% of the first-class firefighter’s salary. 
This section establishes a retirement fund for the positions declared above
and supersedes any other provision for a retirement system for those
positions.  The active participating membership of the city shall begin on
1-1-1978.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-4)  (Res. passed 3-14-1978; Ord. 18-1978, passed
12-26-1978; Ord. 13-1984, passed - -; Ord. 1998-7, passed 11-12-1998)



§ 31.05  FULL-PAID FIREFIGHTERS; SUPPLEMENTAL GROUP INSURANCE PLAN AND
MATERNITY BENEFITS.



   The city agrees to pay 94% of the cost of group plan insurance for
full-paid firefighters.  The insurance shall include 26 weeks of disability
pay of 50% of base weekly earnings; comprehensive medical insurance; full
coverage for semi-private room; in addition to diagnostic coverage as
outlined and in effect as of 8-1-1972; and life insurance of at least one
year’s earnings face amount on each full-paid firefighter.  Two hundred
fifty dollars will be paid by the city for maternity benefits for spouses in
addition to the insurance contract.



(Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978; Ord. 1998-7, passed 11-12-1998)



§ 31.06  1925 POLICE PENSION FUND; MEMBERSHIP; PENSION FUND BOARD OF
TRUSTEES.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Police Pension Fund in accordance
with I.C. 36-8-6 et seq. and all acts amendatory and supplementary thereto
(commonly termed a “1925 Police Pension Fund”).  The Police Pension Fund
as established herein shall apply, as to contributions and benefits, to all
paid police officers of the city who are described under I.C. 36-8-6-1,
excepting those exempt therefrom under the provisions of I.C. 36-8-6-15 and
I.C. 36-8-6-16 or who are required or have opted to become members of the
state’s 1977 Police Pension and Disability Fund under I.C. 36-8-8 et seq. 
The Police Pension Fund shall be governed and managed by a Board of Trustees
to be composed of seven members, as follows:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer;



      (3)   The Police Chief;



      (4)   A retired member of the Police Department; and



      (5)   Three active members of the Police Department.



   (B)   The members described under divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) above
shall be elected and serve terms as provided by I.C. 36-8-6-2(c).  However,
if there is not a sufficient number of active and retired members of the
Police Department to elect enough members of the Pension Fund Board of
Trustees under divisions (A)(4) and/or (A)(5) above so that the total
membership of the Board is at least five members, then the ex officio members
described in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(3) above shall alone constitute the
Pension Fund Board of Trustees and have all of its powers and duties.  The
Pension Fund Board of Trustees shall be vested with all authority of, and
subject to regulations as provided by I.C. 36-8-6 and amendments or
supplements thereto.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-6)  (Ord. 1-1969, passed 2-11-1969; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -; Ord. 1998-7, passed 11-12-1998)



§ 31.07  FULL-TIME POLICE AND FIREFIGHTERS; SUPPLEMENTARY DISABILITY
COVERAGE.



   It shall be the policy of the city to pay coverage for disability
resulting from job injuries to full-time police officers and firefighters as
follows:



   (A)   Time covered is to be 26 weeks;



   (B)   The city will pay that portion of employee’s regular weekly
salary not paid by workers’ compensation or the State Police and
Firefighters’ Pension Fund; and



   (C)   Sick leave and vacation pay are not to be applied.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-7)  (Ord. 6-1981, passed 7-14-1981; Ord. 1998-7, passed
11-12-1998)



§ 31.08  UNION-REPRESENTED EMPLOYEES; EMPLOYER/EMPLOYEE PENSION FUND
CONTRIBUTIONS.



   This section applies to employees represented by the union under §§
31.20 through 31.33.  The city agrees to pay 8% of the employees’ gross
pay as the employer’s share of participation in the State Public
Employees’ Retirement Fund.  The employees agree to pay 3% of their gross
pay as their contribution toward participation in the plan.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-8)  (Ord. 12-1982, passed 12-14-1982; Ord. 1998-7, passed
11-12-1998)



§ 31.09  UNION-REPRESENTED EMPLOYEES; GROUP INSURANCE PLAN.



   (A)   This section applies to employees represented by the union
under §§ 31.20 through 31.33.



   (B)   The city agrees to pay 94% of the cost of group plan insurance
for the employees.



   (C)   The insurance shall include 26 weeks of disability pay and
employees will receive a flat $150 per week; comprehensive medical insurance;
full coverage for semi-private room; in addition to diagnostic coverage as
outlined and in effect as of 8-1-1972; and life insurance of at least one
year’s earnings face amount on each employee.



(1985 Code, § 9-6-9)  (Ord. 12-1982, passed 12-14-1982; Ord. 1998-7, passed
11-12-1998)



§ 31.10  EMPLOYEE REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Any person considered for hiring and each employee of the city
and/or the City Utility Department shall meet and be subject to the
requirements and conditions as follows.



   (B)   No person may be considered for hiring or hired who is related
to any serving elected official of the city, or the spouse of any city
official, as a child, grandchild, brother, sister, parent, aunt, uncle,
nephew, or niece.  However, this prohibition shall not apply to a student
applicant for summer part-time employment.  This prohibition shall not be
amended except upon delivery of written notice to all current employees and
unanimous vote of all members of Council at each of three separate
consecutive regular public meetings.



(Ord. 1998-7, passed 11-12-1998)




UNION-REPRESENTED EMPLOYEES’ WORK AGREEMENT




§ 31.20  DEFINITIONS; EMPLOYEES EXCLUDED FROM BARGAINING UNIT.



   As used in this chapter, the following words have the meanings
indicated:



   EMPLOYER. The City of Greendale.



   EMPLOYEES.  All employees of the employer except the following:



      (1)   Supervisors or nonworking foremen;



      (2)   Office employees;.



      (3)   Police Department employees;



      (4)   Fire Department employees;



      (5)   Guards;



      (6)   All other employees who are direct representatives of
the city; and



      (7)   Any employees covered by an agreement between the city
and any union other than that defined in UNION below.



   UNION.  Local No. 1391 of the International Association of Machinists.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-1)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.21  RECOGNITION OF UNION; COVERED CLASSIFICATIONS.



   The city does hereby recognize the Union as the sole labor organization
representing the city’s employees, and recognizes and agrees to treat and
negotiate with the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining agent for and
on behalf of such employees in the classifications as set forth in § 31.29.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-2)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.22  AGENCY SHOP; DUES OBLIGATION; COLLECTION BY CITY.



   Membership in the Union is separate, apart and distinct from the
assumption by one of his equal obligation to the extent that he receives
equal benefits. The Union is required under this agreement to represent all
of the employees in the bargaining unit fairly and equally without regard as
to whether or not an employee is a member of the Union. The terms of this
agreement have been made for all employees in the bargaining unit and not
only for members in the Union, and this agreement has been executed by the
city after it has satisfied itself as the result of a secret ballot that the
Union has been certified by the National Labor Relations Board. Accordingly,
it is fair that each employee in the bargaining unit pay his own way and
assume his fair share of the obligation along with the grant of equal benefit
contained in this agreement. In accordance with the policy set forth above,
all employees shall, as a condition of continued employment, pay to the
Union, as the employees’ exclusive collective bargaining representatives,
an amount of money equal to that paid by other employees in the bargaining
unit who are members of the Union, which shall be limited to an amount of
money equal to the Union’s regular and usual initiation fees, and its
regular and usual dues. Such payments shall commence after 30 days
employment. All sums collected by the city shall be paid once a month to the
financial secretary of the local Union, check payable to IAM & AW Local 1391,
of which the city employees are members; or, to any bonafide official of the
International Union who may be authorized by the International President to
collect such funds together with the list showing the members from whom these
deductions have been made.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-3)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.23  SENIORITY OF COVERED EMPLOYEES.



   Seniority will prevail as shown by the records of the employer for the
period of service that the employee has worked for the city. However,
employees’ seniority will be on department basis, such as Sanitation,
Water, and the like. An employee shall lose all seniority rights if the
employee quits, retires, or is discharged for just cause.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-4)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.24  WORK SCHEDULE; OVERTIME PAY; CALL-INS.



   The regular work week shall be five days per week, eight hours per day,
40 hours per week, Monday through Friday. Time and one-half shall be paid for
all work performed in excess of eight hours in one day or 40 hours in any
week, and shall be paid for all work performed on Saturday. Double time shall
be paid for all work performed on Sunday. Any employee in any department
called in to work by the employer on any day shall receive four hours call-in
pay at the prevailing overtime-rate. This provision shall apply whether the
call-in is made before or after normal working hours.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-5)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.25  HOLIDAYS; HOLIDAY PAY.



   All regular employees covered by this agreement who do not perform work
on the day before New Year’s Day, New Year’s Day, Ash Wednesday, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day,
Thanksgiving Day, the day before Christmas, Christmas Day, and the
employee’s birthday, shall receive eight hours pay at the regular rate of
pay. If a birthday falls on a non-working day, Saturday, or Sunday, the
Superintendent will schedule it as a compensatory day, mutually agreeable to
both parties. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday is to
be observed. When the Fourth of July falls on a Sunday, the preceding Friday
is to be observed. When Christmas Day and New Year’s Day fall on Sundays,
the preceding Thursdays and Fridays are to be observed. Employees who are
required or scheduled to work on any of the above holidays shall receive time
and one-half for all time worked, plus eight hours holiday pay. Employees
scheduled on holidays to raise and lower flags in the city shall receive four
hours pay for putting up flags in the morning, and four hours pay for taking
flags down in the afternoon, straight time, plus eight hours holiday pay.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-6)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.26  VACATIONS; ELIGIBILITY; VACATION PAY.



   (A)   Employees shall receive vacation with pay based on seniority
in accordance with the following schedule:



 



Seniority
 
Vacation/Year


At least:
 
but less than:


1 year
 
2 years
 
1 week


2 years
 
7 years
 
2 weeks


7 years
 
14 years
 
3 weeks


14 years
 
20 years
 
4 weeks*


20 years
 
30 years
 
5 weeks*


30 years
 
--
 
6 weeks*




 



*Three of the 4, 5, or 6 weeks must be scheduled during the summer.



   (B)   In order to qualify for a vacation, an employee must have had
earnings in 26 pay periods during the 12 months preceding his anniversary
date. Employees shall notify employer in writing on or before April 1 as to
their vacation period preference. Vacations shall be scheduled in periods of
not less than five consecutive working days. In the event a holiday occurs
during an employee’s vacation period, he shall be paid for the holiday in
addition to vacation pay.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-7)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.27  SICK LEAVE ALLOWANCE; ABUSE.



   The employer agrees to grant five days sick leave every six months;
which shall not exceed a total of 40 days. The employee must notify the
employer of the sickness by the normal starting time. The employer will be
the sole judge if an employee is qualified for sick-leave benefits. If, in
the opinion of the employer, an employee has abused the above rights and
privileges, the employee shall be laid off for a period of two weeks without
pay or be placed on a waiting period for three days without pay before sick
leave benefits become effective.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-8)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.28  LEAVE FOR DEATH IN FAMILY.



   In the case of the death of a member of the immediate family (father,
mother, sister, brother, spouse, child, father-in-law, mother-in-law and step
children living within the household) the employee shall be allowed three
days leave during the next three calendar days following the date of death,
for which time he shall receive compensation at regular rate of pay if
scheduled to be working. One day’s pay shall be allowed for employees to
attend a funeral for the following other relatives: sister-in-law,
brother-in-law, grandparents and grandchildren.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-9)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.29  CLASSIFICATIONS AND WAGE SCALES.



   Hourly wage rates for employees covered by this agreement, shall be
established by ordinance of the City Council from time to time.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-10)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.30  UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE.



   The employer agrees to furnish seven complete sets of uniforms per
employee per year, green in color. The uniform order is to be placed in
January. Laundering of uniforms is to be done by the employees. The employee
has the option to select the type of fabric. Employees are required to change
uniforms three times a week. Employees may purchase other exterior work
jackets and/or coveralls in the amount not to exceed the equivalent of seven
sets of uniforms. The employer agrees to pay for one pair of approved safety
shoes per employee per year, upon a receipt from the employee, maximum amount
of $30. The employee has the choice of where to purchase shoes.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-11)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.31  VACANT OR NEW POSITIONS; NOTICE TO CURRENT EMPLOYEES; APPLICATIONS
FROM CURRENT EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs, or a new position is created, it
shall be posted on the bulletin board for three working days, during which
time any employee covered by this agreement may make application by
submitting in writing his qualifications. The notice shall state all
necessary information pertaining to the job to be filled, including wage
rates. For the purpose of all applications, seniority shall be applied
according to the length of service within the bargaining unit, provided that
the following factors are considered:



      (1)   Seniority;



      (2)   Necessary qualifications;



      (3)   Ability to perform the work; and



      (4)   Physical fitness.



   (B)   When factors (2) and (3) are relatively equal, as determined
by the Utility Superintendent, length of service shall govern. On temporary
job vacancies, qualified employees with highest seniority will be assigned.
When temporary jobs are over, the employees will return to previously
assigned jobs.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-12)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.32  GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE AND PROCEDURE; ARBITRATION.



   The Union shall elect two committeemen from the membership employed by
the city and notify the employer of the names of the committee.



   (A)   If any employee has any grievance arising from the
administration of this agreement, an earnest effort shall be made to
eliminate the cause for grievance immediately. A grievance shall first be
taken up with the Department Manager by the aggrieved employee verbally for
settlement.



   (B)   If the grievance is not settled satisfactorily verbally, it
shall then be put in writing and the grievance discussed between the
committee and the Department Manager and a written answer made within three
working days.



   (C)   If this procedure fails to produce a satisfactory settlement;
the grievance shall be presented further between the Department Manager,
committeemen and the Business Agent of the Union.



   (D)   If the above does not produce a satisfactory settlement within
two business days, the grievance shall then be presented to the City Council
by committeemen and Business Agent of the Union for a decision at the next
regular meeting following the previous steps of the grievance procedure.



   (E)   (1)   If the above fails, it shall be submitted to
arbitration. Three arbitrators shall be selected as follows:



         (a)   One by the employer;



         (b)   One by the Union; and



         (c)   One by the arbitrators already selected in
accordance with (a) and (b) above.



      (2)   The arbitrators’ decision shall be final and binding
on all parties. The cost of arbitration shall be paid one-half by the Union
and one-half by the employer.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-13)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



§ 31.33  TERM OF AGREEMENT; AUTOMATIC RENEWAL; AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION.



   This agreement shall be effective until December 31, 1984, at which
time it shall automatically renew itself from year to year, unless either
party gives notice to the other, not less than 60 days prior to the
termination date, of its intention to modify or terminate this agreement.



(’85 Code, § 9-7-14)  (Ord. 12-1984, passed 12-14-1982)



CHAPTER 32:  CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section



   32.01   General enforcement policy



   32.02   Responsibility for enforcement; duty of Police Department



   32.03   Enforcement by other officials, boards, or commissions



   32.04   Procedure for issuance of citation; service in person



   32.05   Issuance and service of citation by mail



   32.06   Notice to appear; refusal to sign; security for release



   32.07   Conditional citation or offense with conditional penalties



   32.08   Warning instead of official citation



   32.09   Statute of limitations on issuance of citation



   32.10   Form of citation and summons; traffic offenses; other
offenses



   32.11   Administrative procedure on issuance of citation



   32.12   Procedure for fixing requested fine



   32.13   Compromise and settlement of complaint without trial



   32.14   Filing and prosecution of violation complaint



   32.15   Appearance for defendant and for the city



   32.16   Payment of fines, other costs, and prosecutor’s fee



   32.17   Records of conviction or compromise of violation



   32.18   Further or collateral actions for enforcement or recovery



   32.19   Allocation and deposit of receipted fines, fees, and costs



   32.20   Further rules and procedures for enforcement



§ 32.01  GENERAL ENFORCEMENT POLICY.



   Whenever any provision of this code requires or mandates any person to
perform some act or to bring about or maintain some circumstance or state of
affairs; or prohibits, restrains, or regulates the behavior of any person or
the commission of any act or the bringing about or maintaining of any
circumstance or state of affairs on the part of any person; and a penalty of
fine or some other procedure to compel compliance with the provision is
prescribed in this code, then the provision shall be considered an
enforcement provision.  Unless some different procedure is expressly set
forth and prescribed by the particular chapter, subchapter, or section of
this code containing the enforcement provision, the enforcement of any such
provision shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-1)



§ 32.02  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ENFORCEMENT; DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   Unless some other official, board, commission, or similar entity is
expressly designated as the primary enforcement officer or authority
responsible for the administration and enforcement of a particular
enforcement provision, it is the duty of the Police Department, acting
through its lawful police officers, to take all steps necessary for the
effective enforcement and bringing about of compliance with all enforcement
provisions.  Whenever a police officer, based upon his or her own vigilance
or upon the information or complaint of any other official or any citizen,
has probable cause to believe that a violation or failure to comply with any
enforcement provision has occurred or is occurring, he or she shall with due
diligence investigate the matter, ascertain the facts, and collect the
testimony, information, or other evidence as in his or her judgment may be
necessary to support the facts.  If, incident upon the investigation, the
police officer determines with a degree of certainty sustained by a
preponderance of the evidence that some known person has violated or failed
to comply with, or is violating or failing to comply with, any enforcement
provision, he or she shall issue and serve upon the alleged offender, in
person or by mail if so provided, a citation for the violation comprising a
complaint and summons to appear and answer to the charge of the violation as
hereafter prescribed in this chapter; or else he or she shall initiate or
cause to be initiated any other enforcement procedures as may alternatively
be prescribed in the event of a violation of the particular enforcement
provision.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-2)



§ 32.03  ENFORCEMENT BY OTHER OFFICIALS, BOARDS, OR COMMISSIONS.



   Whenever in this code any official, board, commission, or similar
entity is given responsibility instead of or concurrent with that of the
Police Department for the administration and enforcement of any enforcement
provision, he or she or they shall perform the same duties and functions with
respect to the enforcement of the provision as are prescribed for the Police
Department under § 32.02, and the term ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean and
include any other officials, boards, commissions, or similar entities or
their properly authorized agents.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-3)



§ 32.04  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CITATION; SERVICE IN PERSON.



   (A)   Whenever an enforcement officer issues a citation for
violation of any enforcement provision, the enforcement officer may, pursuant
to state law, detain the person for a sufficient time to:



      (1)   Inform the person of the allegation;



      (2)   Obtain the person’s name, address, and date of birth,
or driver’s license if in his or her possession, for purposes of
identification; and



      (3)   Allow the person to execute a notice to appear in court
to answer the charges of the violation, except as provided in § 32.07.



   (B)   If the person being charged refuses to provide the information
or driver’s license as required by division (A)(2) above, the enforcement
officer shall inform the person that the refusal constitutes a violation of
state law and commits a Class C misdemeanor pursuant to state law, and may
subject the person to arrest and further penalties as may be provided for the
offense.  If the person continues to refuse to provide the information or
driver’s license, the enforcement officer, if a duly constituted police
officer, may immediately  arrest the person on a charge of having committed
a Class C misdemeanor; if the enforcement officer is not a duly constituted
police officer authorized to exercise power of arrest, he or she shall
continue to detain the person for the period of time as is reasonably
necessary to summon the duly constituted police officer, who shall arrest the
person on a charge of having committed a Class C misdemeanor.  If the person
being charged with a violation is a corporation, partnership, company, or
other organization other than a natural person, the enforcement officer shall
serve the citation upon the resident agent for a service of process, a
director, principal, or principal officer of the corporation, company, or
other organization having the power and authority under the organizing
documents, charter, or rules of the corporation, company, or other
organization to accept  process and execute a notice to appear on behalf of
the organization.  If the offense charged is one arising out of the
condition or use of any real or personal property for which the person owning
or holding the property is made liable, and the property is owned or held by
more than one person in joint tenancy or partnership, it shall be sufficient
to issue and serve the citation on any one of the joint tenants or
partners.  If the person being charged with a violation is a minor child and
in the opinion of the enforcement officer, the child is of such young age or
immature character so as not to fully understand the significance of the
citation and notice to appear and his or her responsibilities and obligations
thereunder, the enforcement officer shall ascertain the name and address of a
parent or legal guardian of the child and shall serve the citation upon and
cause the parent or legal guardian to execute the notice to appear on behalf
of the child.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-4)



§ 32.05  ISSUANCE AND SERVICE OF CITATION BY MAIL.



   Whenever it is found by an enforcement officer that any identifiable
person has violated or is violating any enforcement provision, or is liable
and accountable for the violation, but the person cannot be conveniently
confronted and served in person with a citation as provided in § 32.04, then
it is permissible for the enforcement officer to issue the citation for
violation and cause it to be served by registered or certified mail with
return receipt of delivery to the last known address of the alleged
offender.  When a citation is served in this manner, the person upon whom it
is served is not required to execute a notice to appear nor to deposit any
security as guarantee for appearance as would or might otherwise be required
pursuant to § 32.06, but in addition to any other information and notices to
be included with the citation as hereafter provided, a citation served by
mail shall include a statement that failure to appear in court at the time
and place indicated to answer the charge or to compromise and settle the
complaint within the allotted time may subject the offender to further
proceeding and additional costs.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-5)



§ 32.06  NOTICE TO APPEAR; REFUSAL TO SIGN; SECURITY FOR RELEASE.



   (A)   Any person who is a resident of the state and is detained by
an enforcement officer for the purpose of issuing and serving a citation for
violation of an enforcement provision, and who provides the enforcement
officer with a satisfactory identification in accordance with § 32.04(A)(2)
and executes a signed notice to appear in court in accordance with §
32.04(A)(3), shall thereupon be released from the detention without other
bond or security for appearance.



   (B)   However, if the person is not a resident of the state and/or
refuses to sign a notice to appear in court, the following additional
procedures and requirements apply before the enforcement officer releases the
person from detention, as the appropriate case may be.



      (1)   If the person is a resident of the state and the offense
charged is violation of an enforcement provision constituting a moving
traffic offense or a nonmoving traffic offense required by law or regulation
to be reported to the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, and the person
refuses to sign the notice to appear, the enforcement officer before
releasing the person shall inform him or her that notwithstanding his or her
refusal to sign the notice, he or she is obliged by law to appear at the time
and place indicated in the citation or to previously compromise and settle
the complaint in the manner hereafter provided, and that failure to do so
will result in his or her arrest on warrant of the court and/or suspension of
his or her driver’s license in accordance with I.C. 9-30-4-6 and I.C.
9-30-4-9, respectively.



      (2)   If the person is a nonresident of the state and the
offense charged is violation of an enforcement provision constituting a
moving traffic offense or a nonmoving traffic offense required by law or
regulation to be reported to the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, the
enforcement officer shall, before releasing the person:



         (a)   Require the person to deposit a security for
appearance of the type described by state law, and in the manner prescribed
by state law, and also to execute a security deposit agreement as described
by state law, unless the person is exempt from the requirement under state
law; and if the person refuses to sign a notice to appear, the enforcement
officer shall also inform the person that notwithstanding his or her refusal
to sign the notice, he or she is obliged by law to appear at the time and
place indicated in the citation or to previously compromise and settle the
complaint in the manner hereafter provided, and that failure to do so will
result not only in the forfeiture of the security provided but will also
cause the court to notify the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of his or
her failure to appear which will result in the suspension of driving
privileges in the state and that a copy of the order of suspension will also
be sent to the equivalent authority of the person’s home state in
accordance with state law; or



         (b)   The enforcement officer shall accompany the
offender to the nearest United States Postal Service receptacle and see that
the offender mails to the Clerk of the County Court a copy of the citation
with a signed admission of guilt, and a check or money order in the amount of
fine requested, as determined pursuant to § 32.12, plus court costs, thus
compromising and settling the complaint in accordance with § 32.13(B).



      (3)   (a)   If the person is a nonresident of the state, or
is a resident of the state but refuses to sign a notice to appear in court,
and the offense charged is of a kind other than a moving traffic offense
required to be reported to the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, the
enforcement officer shall before releasing the person accompany the person to
the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, where the person shall be released upon
either:



            1.   Depositing with the Clerk-Treasurer a
security as guarantee for appearance, the security being a deposit of cash,
traveler’s checks, or other valuable securities or property acceptable to
the Clerk-Treasurer and at least equal in value to the amount of fine
requested in the complaint exclusive of costs which could be imposed by the
court were the person to appear and be convicted, for which security the
Clerk-Treasurer shall provide the person with a proper receipt and shall make
an understanding and agreement with the person that should he or she fail to
appear to answer the charge or fail to compromise and settle the complaint
before the appearance as hereafter provided, the security thus deposited will
be forfeited in favor of the city and in settlement of the complaint, but
will be fully refunded or restored to the person if he or she does appear at
the place and time prescribed or does previously compromise and settle the
complaint; or



            2.   Compromising and settling the complaint at
the time in the manner provided by § 32.13(A).



         (b)   However, if the office of the Clerk-Treasurer is
not open for business at the time the citation is served, the enforcement
officer, in lieu of the above procedure, shall accompany the person to the
nearest United States Postal Service receptacle and shall supply the person
with a stamped envelope addressed to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer, and
shall ascertain that the person deposits therein and mails either a security
for appearance and a signed security deposit agreement of the type described
in division (B)(2)(a) above, or else his or her copy of the citation and an
amount of payment necessary to compromise and settle the complaint in
accordance with § 32.13(A), and the enforcement officer shall thereupon
release the person from any further detention.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-6)



§ 32.07  CONDITIONAL CITATION OR OFFENSE WITH CONDITIONAL PENALTIES.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever any
enforcement provision of this code stipulates that a person cited for
violation of the enforcement provision is allowed some definite period of
time to correct the violation and comply with the enforcement provision
before being subject to any penalty; or the person cited for the violation is
entitled to an administrative appeal or investigatory hearing before any
administrative officer, board, or similar entity to determine whether the
citation is valid and justified, then the citation or a written notice
attached thereto shall, as the case may be, state the period of time
permitted for compliance or the procedure to be followed to exercise the
right to the administrative appeal or investigatory hearing, and the person
shall not be required to execute a notice to appear in court, nor shall the
complaint be filed with the Clerk of the Court, nor shall the time period
permitted for compromise and settlement of the complaint under § 32.13(A) of
this chapter commence until, as appropriate:



      (A)   The time period allowed for compliance has elapsed and
it is found that the person has not complied;



      (B)   The person has waived the right to administrative appeal
or investigatory hearing, or has failed to invoke and exercise that right
within any applicable time period; or



      (C)   The administrative appeal proceeding or investigatory
hearing has been conducted and has affirmed the citation.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-7)



§ 32.08  WARNING INSTEAD OF OFFICIAL CITATION.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 32.02, if any enforcement officer
has cause to believe that a person has violated or is violating an
enforcement provision of this code, but also has cause to believe that the
person is of law-abiding character and has not knowingly, wantonly, or
repeatedly violated the provision, and the violation is a minor violation not
posing imminent jeopardy to life, limb, property, or the public welfare, the
enforcement  officer at his or her discretion may issue a warning instead of
an official citation.  The warning shall inform the person that he or she is
in violation of an enforcement provision and the enforcement officer shall
order the person to forthwith cease or correct the violation.  At the
discretion of the enforcement officer, the warning may be either an informal
verbal warning or a formal written warning.  A formal written warning shall
be issued on the same form ordinarily used for an official citation of the
offense committed, but all copies thereof shall be clearly marked “Warning
Only.”  Issuance of a warning shall not require the offender to pay any
fine or compromise and settlement, nor to appear in court.  However, if a
formal written warning is issued, a copy shall be kept on file for at least
one year in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and the office of the
enforcement officer.  The issuance of a warning shall in no way bar the
subsequent issuance of an official citation for the same offense if it should
later be determined that the offender in fact did knowingly or wantonly
violate the enforcement provision, is a repeat offender, or has failed to
comply with the warning order.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-8)



§ 32.09  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF CITATION.



   Pursuant to the provisions of state law, no citation for the violation
of any enforcement provision of this code shall be issued and served if more
than one year has elapsed since the alleged violation has occurred.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-9)



§ 32.10  FORM OF CITATION AND SUMMONS; TRAFFIC OFFENSES; OTHER OFFENSES.



   (A)   The form of citation and summons used for an ordinance
violation shall be in accordance with this section, as appropriate to the
nature of the violation.



   (B)   (1)   In all cases where a citation is issued and served
for the violation of an ordinance constituting a moving traffic offense or a
nonmoving traffic offense required by law or regulation to be reported to the
State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, the form of complaint and summons
prescribed by state law shall be used for the purpose of issuing the
citation; provided, however, that the enforcement officer shall clearly
indicate in the space provided on the form that the violation charged is a
violation of a city ordinance and not of state law, and provided further that
in that section of the form dealing with “Court Action and Other Orders”
and in that subsection thereof concerning the finding of the court, the
enforcement officer shall delete the word “state” and substitute the word
“city” so that the form shall read “Judgment for the City” rather
than “Judgment for the State,” in the event that the form has not been
already so modified and preprinted.



      (2)   In all other cases where a citation is issued and served
for violation of an enforcement provision of this code, and in accordance
with state law, the form of complaint and summons prescribed by state law may
be used for the purpose of issuing the citation, subject to the same
stipulations and modifications as when the form is used for a traffic offense
as described above.  However, if the traffic citation form is not deemed
suitable and convenient for use with respect to any other enforcement
provision, the chief officer of the department or other agency responsible
for enforcement may prescribe an alternative form of complaint and summons to
be used for issuing the citation; provided that any such alternative form of
complaint and summons shall consist of at least four copies as required for
the administration of § 32.11, and that the form shall be examined and
approved by the City Attorney, who shall ascertain that it is of proper legal
form and satisfies all necessities for judicial processing in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the court for the filing of ordinance violation
complaints, and that it meets all administrative requirements as stipulated
in this chapter or in the particular enforcement provision to which it
pertains.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-10)



§ 32.11  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ON ISSUANCE OF CITATION.



   (A)   Whenever a citation is issued for violation of any enforcement
provision of this code, the enforcement officer issuing the citation shall
provide one copy thereof to the offender, including or accompanied by the
notices as prescribed in §§ 32.07 and 32.13, as appropriate; shall retain
one copy for the records of his or her own department or agency; and as soon
after issuance as possible shall deliver all other copies to the
Clerk-Treasurer for the purpose of administering the further provisions of
this section.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall examine each such citation so
received and shall determine from the records available whether or not the
person charged with the violation has previously been convicted of or has
admitted guilt to a violation of the same provision or of a substantially
similar provision of any ordinance in effect prior to the implementation of
this code, and shall note this information on the citation for the
information of the court, and shall accordingly fix or adjust, as may be
necessary, the amount of fine to be requested in the complaint pursuant to
state law, and in accordance with § 32.12, if the amount has not been
previously determined accurately and entered in the citation by the
enforcement officer issuing the same.  The amount of fine so determined
shall be entered on the complaint form by the enforcement officer or by the
Clerk-Treasurer in the space provided, if any, or else shall be clearly noted
and firmly attached to the copies of the complaint to be filed with the court
and kept by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   Thereupon:



      (1)   If the violation cited in the complaint is a violation
of any enforcement provision other than a moving traffic offense or a
nonmoving traffic offense required by a law or regulation to be reported to
the State Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, the Clerk-Treasurer shall retain
the citation for the period of time allowed for the offender to compromise
and settle the complaint as provided by § 32.13(A); and if the complaint is
not compromised and settled within the period of time, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall as soon as possible thereafter tender the complaint for prosecution in
accordance with § 32.14; or



      (2)   If the violation cited in the complaint is a violation
of an enforcement provision constituting a moving or nonmoving traffic
offense required by law or regulation to be reported to the State
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles, the Clerk-Treasurer shall forthwith tender
the complaint for filing with the court in accordance with § 32.14.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-11)



§ 32.12  PROCEDURE FOR FIXING REQUESTED FINE.



   (A)   When an enforcement officer issues and serves a citation,
other than a warning citation, for the violation of any enforcement
provision, he or she shall if practicable determine from the records
available the status of the person under this section and shall determine and
fix a fine to be requested in accordance with the provisions of this section,
and shall enter the amount of the fine on the copy of the citation given to
the offender or on a written attachment thereto and also on all other copies
of the citation.  However, if it is not practicable for the enforcement
officer to check the available records at the time, or if doing so would
require detaining the person cited for an unreasonable period of time, the
enforcement officer may inquire of the person being cited if he or she has
previously been convicted or has admitted guilt to the same offense being
charged (exclusive of similar offenses committed in other jurisdictions); and
the enforcement officer may rely on the response of the person for the
purpose of this section until the time as the available records can be
consulted by the enforcement officer or by the Clerk-Treasurer pursuant to §
32.11; however, should it subsequently prove that the person has given the
enforcement officer inaccurate information as to his or her previous
convictions or admissions of guilt, the enforcement officer or the
Clerk-Treasurer shall adjust the fine requested to accord with the provisions
of this section, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall mail to the offender written
notice of the adjustment.  The amount of fine to be requested in the
complaint shall be determined in the following manner:



      (1)   If any provision of this code establishes a fixed
penalty for violation of the provision or of a related provision, then the
amount of fine requested in the complaint shall be the fixed amount so
specified; however, if no fixed amount is specified but a minimum and maximum
penalty are provided, then;



      (2)   If the violation is a first offense against the
provision, the fine requested in the complaint shall be the minimum penalty
so established or $1, whichever is greater;



      (3)   If the violation is a second offense in violation of the
same provision, then the fine requested in the complaint shall be the minimum
penalty so established plus 50% of the difference between the maximum penalty
provided for violation of the provision and the minimum penalty; and



      (4)   If the violation is a third or subsequent offense in
violation of the same provision, then the fine requested in the complaint
shall be the maximum penalty provided for violation of the provision.



   (B)   However, should any person commit two or more separate
offenses against any one enforcement provision by virtue of any singular and
substantially simultaneous act or circumstance, and the singular and
simultaneous act or circumstance is the person’s first or second instance
of committing any offense against the particular provision, then each such
separate offense shall be severally treated as a first offense or as a second
offense, as the case may be, for purposes of fixing a requested fine for each
offense in accordance with this section, irrespective of the other offenses
concurrently committed.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-12)



§ 32.13  COMPROMISE AND SETTLEMENT OF COMPLAINT WITHOUT TRIAL.



   Any person who has been cited for violation of any enforcement
provision of this code, whether or not having signed a notice to appear in
court, shall have a right to compromise and settle the complaint without
trial or appearance in court in accordance with the following procedures.



   (A)   If the offense cited is other than a moving or nonmoving
traffic offense of the kind described in § 32.11(A), the offender may
compromise and settle the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the
following notice, which shall be imprinted on or attached to the copy of the
citation provided to the person cited:



   “You have a right to appear in court at the place and time indicated,
either in person or by attorney, to answer and be tried in the cause of the
violation cited in the complaint and summons.  However, if you do not wish
to appear in court and be tried, you may settle the complaint by either
delivering during regular business hours or mailing your copy of the citation
and payment of the stipulated fine to:  Office of the Clerk-Treasurer,
Greendale Municipal Utility Building, 510 Ridge Avenue, Lawrenceburg, IN
47025.  The amount of fine owing depends on the nature of the violation, and
may depend on whether or not you have previously been convicted or have
admitted guilt to the same offense, and is determined in accordance with §
32.12 of the Greendale Municipal Code, a copy of which is available for
public inspection at the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.  If the amount of
fine was not determined at the time the citation was served, this information
may be obtained by contacting the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.  Payment of
the fine must be received within five days, exclusive of weekends and legal
holidays, following the date of issuance and service of the citation; after
such time, the complaint will have been filed with the Clerk of the Court for
docketing and trial.  If paying in person, payment may be made in cash,
traveler’s checks, money order, or certified check; if paying by mail,
please remit only a money order or certified check payable to the City of
Greendale in the exact amount of the fine.  Settlement of the complaint and
payment of the fine according to this procedure constitutes a waiver of trial
and an admission of guilt having the same effect as an adverse judgment of a
court; however, no fees or costs in addition to the fine will be assessed
whereas if you choose to appear in court and are convicted, substantial fees
and court costs will be assessed by the court in addition to the fine
imposed.  Settlement of the complaint in this manner also discharges your
obligation under any notice to appear in court which you may have signed; and
if you were required to deposit any security as bond for appearance, such
security will be returned to you.”



   (B)   If the offense cited is a moving or nonmoving traffic offense
of the kind described in § 32.11(B), the offender may compromise and settle
the complaint in the manner prescribed by state law, and the following notice
and compromise execution form or a substantially similar notice and form
serving the same purpose as may be prescribed by the court or other competent
authority shall be imprinted on or attached to the copy of the citation
provided to the person cited:



   “You have a right to appear in court at the place and time indicated
to answer and be tried in the cause of the traffic ordinance violation
described in the citation.  Unless the court subsequently orders and
notifies you to make a personal appearance pursuant to state law, you may
make such appearance either in person or by attorney or, alternatively, if
you do not wish to appear in court and be tried you may instead of such
appearance and in accordance with state law settle the complaint any time
prior to the date of the scheduled court appearance by delivering or mailing
your copy of the citation and this notice, with a signed admission of guilt
as provided below and as required by law, accompanied by payment in the total
amount of fine, fees, and costs owing as hereafter indicated, to:  Dearborn
County Clerk, Dearborn County Courthouse, Lawrenceburg, Indiana, 47025.  If
paying in person, payment may be made in cash, traveler’s checks, money
order, or certified check; if paying by mail, please send only a money order
or certified check in the exact amount of fine and fees owing; money orders
or checks should be made payable to the “Clerk of the Dearborn County
Court.”  Please be advised that signature of the admission of guilt and
payment of the fine and costs constitutes a waiver of trial and has the same
effect as an adverse judgment of the Court were you to appear and be tried,
and that the Indiana Commissioner of Motor Vehicles (and the equivalent
authority of the state in which your driver’s license was issued if you are
not an Indiana resident) will be notified of your admission of guilt to the
violation.  Settlement of the complaint in the manner set forth in this
notice discharges your obligation under any notice to appear in court which
you may have signed, and if you have been required to deposit any security as
bond for appearance, such security will be returned to you.



   STATEMENT OF FINE AND COSTS



City of Greendale Traffic Citation No.    



Name/Address of Person to Whom Issued    



    



Offense Committed                                        
           



FINE (amount prescribed by ordinance)        $   



STATE DOCKET FEE                



COUNTY DOCKET FEE           



MUNICIPAL PROSECUTOR’S



    FEE                                 



MOTOR VEHICLE FEE           



JUDICIAL FEE                       



TOTAL FINE AND COSTS OWING               



   ADMISSION OF GUILT



   I the undersigned do hereby admit to have committed the offense
described and stipulated in the attached traffic citation:



   (sign full name)”



   (C)   The Clerk of the Court shall every month pay to the
Clerk-Treasurer the amount of fines and fees owing to the city and so
collected by the Clerk, in the same manner as other judgments of the court
entered in favor of the city for the violation of its ordinances, as
stipulated by § 32.16 and by law.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-13)



§ 32.14  FILING AND PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION COMPLAINT.



   When a citation has been issued for violation of an enforcement
provision of this code and the violation is a traffic offense as described in
§ 32.11(B), or is some other kind of offense and the time period allowed for
compromise and settlement of the complaint as provided by § 32.13(A) and §
32.07 has elapsed, the Clerk-Treasurer shall deliver a copy of the complaint
and summons to the City Attorney, who shall file the complaint in the name of
the city with the Clerk of the County Court, or other court of competent
jurisdiction, and prosecute the complaint in accordance with state law and
applicable rules of the court.  However, the City Attorney may prescribe a
different procedure for filing the complaint with respect to any class of
violation if he or she deems such an alternative procedure more suitable and
expedient.  For the services and functions of the City Attorney as provided
in this section, the court, upon conviction of the offender, shall assess as
part of the judgment in favor of the city, and in addition to any fine
imposed, a municipal prosecutor’s fee in the amount prescribed by state
law.  The prosecutor’s fee shall be assessed whether or not the City
Attorney actually makes a personal appearance at the trial of the cause of
the complaint.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-14)



§ 32.15  APPEARANCE FOR DEFENDANT AND FOR THE CITY.



   (A)   Unless the court pursuant to state law or other applicable law
orders otherwise, the defendant in the trial for violation of an enforcement
provision may appear in person or by attorney, and an appearance by attorney
satisfies any notice to appear signed by the defendant.  Appearance on
behalf of the city may be made by the City Attorney personally or, with his
or her consent and approval, any of the following persons shall be competent
to appear for and represent the city:



      (1)   Another attorney retained by the City Attorney for that
purpose, or who is retained as counsel by any board, commission, or similar
authority responsible for the enforcement of the enforcement provision;



      (2)   The enforcement officer originally issuing the citation
for the violation;



      (3)   The chief executive or other chief officer of the
department or other agency responsible for the enforcement; and



      (4)   A Member of the City Council.



   (B)   However, if any person described in divisions (A)(2), (A)(3),
or (A)(4) above is designated to appear for the city, the City Attorney, as
necessary, shall advise the person on the procedures of the court and the
evidence it will be necessary to present in order to sustain the charge of
the violation.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-15)



§ 32.16  PAYMENT OF FINES, OTHER COSTS, AND PROSECUTOR’S FEE.



   Whenever a court enters judgment in favor of the city in the trial of
an ordinance violation complaint, the court shall fine the violator in an
amount not exceeding the penalty requested in the complaint.  However, the
Judge of the Court shall have discretion to impose a lesser fine than that
requested if, in the judgment of the Court, there exist extenuating or
mitigating circumstances warranting a lesser penalty; but if the judgment is
entered by the Clerk of the Court upon waiver of trial and admission of guilt
by the defendant, the Clerk does not have discretion to impose a lesser
penalty unless so ordered by the Judge.  The court shall also tax and assess
as part of the judgment in favor of the city the municipal prosecutor’s fee
as prescribed by § 32.14 and by law, and any other costs incurred and
stipulated by the city in connection with the filing and prosecution of the
complaint and which are recoverable pursuant to any statute or ordinance. 
The Clerk of the Court shall regularly pay to the City Clerk-Treasurer all
fines, costs, and that portion of the municipal prosecutor’s fees owing to
the city and collected by the court on judgment in favor of the city, the
monies to be deposited in accordance with § 32.19.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-16)



§ 32.17  RECORDS OF CONVICTION OR COMPROMISE OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever a person is charged with the violation of an enforcement
provision and either compromises and settles the complaint pursuant to §
32.13, or is found guilty by a court in accordance with § 32.16, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall make and keep a record of the compromise or conviction,
organized for reference by name of the offender and according to any other
means of identification which the Clerk-Treasurer deems dispensable for the
purpose of administering § 32.12.  The record constitutes presumptive
evidence of guilt of any violation whether or not the offender has made any
admission to a violation for purposes of fixing a fine pursuant to § 32.12,
and no offender shall be permitted to plead for a lesser fine than any
subsequently requested on the advent of a repeat violation on the grounds
that he or she was not in fact guilty of any prior offense which he or she
has compromised or of which he or she has had judgment entered against him or
her by a court.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-17)



§ 32.18  FURTHER OR COLLATERAL ACTIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT OR RECOVERY.



   (A)   The compromise and settlement of a complaint for the violation
of any enforcement provision of this code pursuant to § 32.13, or an action
upon the complaint initiated and prosecuted pursuant to § 32.14, and any
fines, fees, or costs imposed and collected in connection therewith are in
consequence of the penal violation of the respective enforcement provision
per se, and the compromise and settlement of any such complaint or judgment
of a court in favor of the city does not prevent the city from initiating and
pursuing any or all of the following further or collateral civil actions:



      (1)   An action to recover costs incurred by the city to bring
any property or the use thereof into compliance with an enforcement provision
pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-2;



      (2)   An action seeking a civil injunction against a violator
to ensure current or future enforcement of and compliance with any
enforcement provision pursuant to I.C. 36-1-6-4;



      (3)   An action to recover damages to city property or any
other pecuniary loss to the city arising out of the violation of any
enforcement provision; and



      (4)   An action to recover stipulated costs incurred by the
city in any action described in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) above,
including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees and any filing fees paid by
the city in any such action.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney if so instructed by
the City Council to initiate and prosecute any further actions as the case
may warrant.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-18)



§ 32.19  ALLOCATION AND DEPOSIT OF RECEIPTED FINES, FEES, AND COSTS.



   When the Clerk-Treasurer for violation of an enforcement provision
receives payment of any fines, fees or costs pursuant to §§ 32.13, 32.16,
32.18(A)(1), or 32.18(A)(4), or possesses on behalf of the city any forfeited
security deposit as undischarged bond for appearance pursuant to § 32.18(A)
or (D), or receives payment of recovered damages or loss pursuant to §
32.18(A)(3) and to the extent that any such payment does not escheat to an
insurance company which has previously made compensatory payment to the city,
the monies or property so received shall be administered and allocated by the
Clerk-Treasurer in accordance with the following provisions of this section.



   (A)   In the case of monies paid as fines for penal violations of
any enforcement provisions, the monies shall be deposited in the General Fund
unless the particular enforcement provision stipulates that any fines be
deposited in some other designated fund.



   (B)   In the case of any forfeited security deposit, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall record the complaint as having been compromised and
settled upon taking possession thereof, and shall make disposition of the
possessed security as provided in this division (B), if the deposit has been
made and forfeited pursuant to § 32.06, and:



      (1)   The security is a deposit of cash or a directly
depositable cash instrument such as a traveler’s check or certified check,
then the Clerk-Treasurer shall allocate and deposit the possessed security as
though it were an ordinary payment of the fine owing, in the same manner as
provided in division (A) above, and notwithstanding the fact that the cash
value of the security deposit may exceed the amount of fine originally
requested in the complaint;



      (2)   The security deposit is a negotiable instrument such as
a bond, note, or debenture, having a convertible cash value but which is not
directly depositable, the Clerk-Treasurer shall proceed to convert the
instrument, or may sell the instrument on the securities market for the price
as it will bring, and the net proceeds from the conversion or sale after
deduction of any applicable sale commissions or transaction fees shall be
allocated and deposited as though they were an ordinary payment of the fine
owing, in the same manner as provided in division (A) above, and
notwithstanding the fact that the net proceeds may exceed the amount of fine
originally requested in the complaint; provided further, however, that if the
security is an investment instrument of the kind which it is lawful for the
city to own and hold as an investment of public funds pursuant to I.C.
5-13-9-1 et seq. or any other law authorizing the investment of public funds,
and the Clerk-Treasurer shall determine that it would be of greater financial
advantage and benefit to the city, the Clerk-Treasurer may keep the security
as an investment asset of the city instead of converting or selling the
security, and the principal amount thereof shall be allocated and credited to
the appropriate fund or funds to which a cash receipt would be allocated and
deposited pursuant to division (A) above, and the interest or other earnings
therefrom shall be allocated and deposited in the fund or funds as would
ordinarily be the case for other city investments; or



      (3)   The security deposit is any other valuable personal or
real property, the Clerk-Treasurer shall provide for the same to be offered
for sale as surplus property of the city in accordance with the provisions of
I.C. 36-1-11 et seq., and the net proceeds of the sale after deduction of the
costs of conducting the sale shall be allocated and deposited as though they
were an ordinary payment of the fine owing in the same manner as provided in
division (A) above, and notwithstanding the fact that the net proceeds of the
sale may exceed the amount of fine originally requested in the complaint.



   (C)   In the case of payment of an amount attributable to the
city’s portion of the municipal prosecutor’s fees owing and paid by the
Clerk of the Court pursuant to I.C. 33-37-7-8, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
deposit the amount in the General Fund.



   (D)   In the case of a payment of stipulated costs recovered
pursuant to §§ 32.16 and 32.18, the payments shall be allocated and
deposited to the fund or funds from which the stipulated costs themselves
were originally paid or obligated.



   (E)   In the case of a payment for recovery of damage or loss
occasioned by the violation of an enforcement provision pursuant to § 32.18,
any such payment shall be proportionally allocated to the fund or funds from
which:



      (1)   Payment will or has been made to repair or replace the
damaged property, or to the General Fund if  the property will not be
repaired or replaced; or



      (2)   Any other pecuniary loss  has occurred, has or will be
debited, or from which the loss has or will be made up, if the specific fund
or funds are identifiable; and if not, to the General Fund.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-19)



§ 32.20  FURTHER RULES AND PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   The Clerk-Treasurer, the City Attorney, the Police Chief, and the chief
officer of any other department, board, commission, or similar agency which
has been given responsibility for the administration and enforcement of any
enforcement provision of this code, may stipulate or prescribe any other
rules or procedures, not inconsistent with law, applicable state regulations,
court procedures, or the expressed provisions of this chapter, as they may
deem necessary or desirable to promote the orderly, efficient, and
expeditious carrying out of their respective enforcement duties; and the
rules and procedures so stipulated and prescribed by the officers shall have
the same effect and force as if they had been expressly adopted and made a
part of the provisions of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 1-3-20)



CHAPTER 33:  FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS



Section



Fire Department Operating Rules and Policies



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Purpose of Fire Department and membership



   33.03   Election of Fire Chief and Department officers



   33.04   Duties of Fire Chief



   33.05   Duties of full-paid firefighters



   33.06   Duties of partially-paid firefighters



   33.07   Duties of volunteer firefighters



   33.08   Work schedule; full- and partially-paid firefighters



   33.09   Compensation of firefighters; uniform and equipment
allowances; annual review by City Council



   33.10   Full-paid firefighters; vacation, sick leave, and holiday pay



   33.11   Status and seniority



   33.12   Retirement of firefighters; effect on compensation



Mutual Fire Aid Agreement and Fire Protection Contracts



   33.25   Definitions



   33.26   Agreement to effectuate mutual fire aid program



   33.27   Preparation of mutual aid program



   33.28   Obligation of city under mutual aid program



   33.29   Lawrenceburg Township Fire Protection Contract



   33.30   Other fire service outside city limits restricted



Police



   33.40   Extrajurisdictional law enforcement activities



   33.41   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners



Cross-reference:



   City Government, see Ch. 30




FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATING RULES AND POLICIES




§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FULL-PAID FIREFIGHTER.  A firefighter who is paid regularly by the
city and devotes his or her whole time to firefighting.



   PARTIALLY-PAID FIREFIGHTER.  A firefighter who is paid by the city for
part-time work.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER.  A firefighter who, of his or her own free
will, has volunteered to assist either without compensation or for nominal
compensation, in fighting all fires within the city or agency contracting for
fire protection.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-1)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.02  PURPOSE OF FIRE DEPARTMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.



   The purpose of the Fire Department shall be to prevent and fight all
fires occurring within the city and protect the lives and property of its
citizens or an agency contracting for fire protection.  The Fire Department
shall be made up of paid and volunteer firefighters.  Members shall be
residents of the city.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-2)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.03  ELECTION OF FIRE CHIEF AND DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.



   The Fire Chief shall be elected annually from the membership by the
paid and volunteer members of the Fire Department, and shall be subject to
the approval of the City Council.  All fire officers shall be elected
annually from the membership by the paid and volunteer members of the Fire
Department.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-3)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.04  DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The Fire Chief is responsible for the following functions and duties.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the morale and general
efficiency of the Department and shall be in sole and complete charge of the
Department, the personnel thereof, and all equipment; and shall answer to the
City Council for the operating of the Fire Department, the conduct of all
personnel, and for all equipment of the Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall test or cause to be tested all pumping
equipment annually, according to the Rating Bureau’s standards and report
on approved forms the results to the Insurance Service Office of Indiana. 
Duplicates of these forms to be kept on file at the Fire Department.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall test or cause to be tested all fire hoses
annually and record the date that the test was made on a form kept on file at
the Fire Department.  All hoses tested and found to be defective shall be
removed from service by order of the Fire Chief.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for and see to it that
drill sessions and practices be held on the first, fourth, and fifth Mondays
of each month, providing the Monday does not fall on a legal holiday.



   (E)   The Fire Chief shall cause all business places and public
buildings in the city to be inspected annually.  Reports of these
inspections shall be kept on file at the Fire Department.



   (F)   The Fire Chief shall see that all personnel of the Department
shall be instructed in the proper use of all personal safety equipment.



   (G)   The Fire Chief shall cause the state firefighting personnel
standards and education requirements for certification to be followed by all
Fire Department members.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-4)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.05  DUTIES OF FULL-PAID FIREFIGHTERS.



   A full-paid firefighter shall:



   (A)   Be capable of using each piece of firefighting equipment in an
efficient manner;



   (B)   Attend all drill sessions and practices of the Fire Department
unless excused by the Fire Chief or officer in charge;



   (C)   Respond with fire apparatus to the scene of the fire and
thereafter taking the position assigned to him or her and perform all duties
required of him or her, and stay at the fire scene until the fire apparatus
returns to the fire station or he or she is excused by the officer in charge;



   (D)   Keep clean all fire apparatus and firefighting equipment and
any other duties assigned to him or her by the Fire Chief;



   (E)   Maintain all firefighting equipment in working order and shall
report to the Fire Chief any equipment or apparatus that is not working
properly;



   (F)   Maintain the fire station and premises neat and clean at all
times and report to the Fire Chief any irregularity of the station’s
condition;



   (G)   Conduct tours of the fire station when requested by the
general public or special groups as long as it does not interfere with the
normal operation of the fire station or fire call; and



   (H)   Maintain records of fire calls, pumper tests, hose tests, fire
inspections, and any other records by order of the Fire Chief.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-5)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.06  DUTIES OF PARTIALLY-PAID FIREFIGHTERS.



   A partially-paid firefighter shall:



   (A)   Be capable of using each piece of firefighting equipment in an
efficient manner;



   (B)   Attend all drill or practice sessions of the Fire Department
unless excused by the Fire Chief or by notifying the person on duty at the
fire station before the drill or practice session;



   (C)   Respond with fire apparatus to the scene of the fire and
thereafter taking the position assigned to him or her and perform all duties
required of him or her, and stay at the fire scene until the fire apparatus
returns to the fire station or he or she is excused by the officer in charge;



   (D)   Keep clean all fire apparatus and firefighting equipment;



   (E)   Maintain all firefighting equipment in working order and shall
report to the Fire Chief any equipment or apparatus that is not working
properly; and



   (F)   Maintain the fire station and premises neat and clean at all
times and report any irregularity of the station’s condition to the Fire
Chief.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-6)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.07  DUTIES OF VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTERS.



   A volunteer firefighter shall:



   (A)   Fight all fires occurring within the corporate limits of the
city or agency which the Fire Department has contracted to provide fire
protection for no or nominal compensation;



   (B)   Respond to fire scenes and thereafter taking the position
assigned to him or her and perform all duties required of him or her, and
stay at the fire scene until the fire apparatus returns to the fire station
or he or she is excused by the officer in charge;



   (C)   Help clean all apparatus and equipment after each fire call;
and



   (D)   Attend all drill sessions and practices of the Fire Department
unless excused by the Fire Chief or officer in charge.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-7)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.08  WORK SCHEDULE; FULL- AND PARTIALLY-PAID FIREFIGHTERS.



   The regular work schedule for full- and partially-paid firefighters
shall be as follows.



   (A)   Full-paid firefighters. The regular workweek shall be five
days per week, 12 hours per day, 60 hours per week, Monday through Friday.



   (B)   Partially-paid firefighters. Duty hours will be from 6:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday.  Weekend duty hours will be two shifts,
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.  Holiday duty hours shall
be the same as weekend duty hours.  The partially-paid firefighters shall
select the shifts they wish to work.  However, holiday shifts shall be
assigned by the Fire Chief on a rotating basis.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-8)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.09  COMPENSATION OF FIREFIGHTERS; UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCES;
ANNUAL REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Firefighters shall be compensated as follows.



      (1)   Fire Chief.  If the Fire Chief is a full-paid
firefighter, his or her weekly salary shall be set by the City Council and he
or she shall also receive all benefits of a full-paid firefighter.  If the
Fire Chief is a partially-paid firefighter, his or her annual salary shall be
a fixed amount per year, as set by the City Council, and he or she shall
receive all benefits of a partially-paid firefighter.  If the Fire Chief is
a volunteer, his or her annual salary shall be a fixed amount per year, as
set by the City Council and he or she shall receive all benefits of a
volunteer firefighter.



      (2)   Full-paid firefighters.



         (a)   The salary for full-paid firefighters shall be set
annually by the City Council.  Full-paid firefighters shall receive:



            1.   A fixed weekly salary;



            2.   A fixed amount per fire call they respond to
after normal duty hours and a fixed amount per hour additional for fire calls
that run over one hour;



            3.   A fixed amount per practice or drill session
they attend during non-duty hours;



            4.   A number, as determined by the City Council,
of complete sets of uniforms per year (blue in color), to be ordered in
January, with laundering to be done by the firefighter; and



            5.   Reimbursement, upon receipt from the
firefighter, for one pair of approved safety shoes per year, a maximum amount
to be determined by the City Council.



         (b)   Compensation under divisions (A)(2)(a)2. and/or
(A)(2)(a)3. above is payable every six months.



      (3)   Partially-paid firefighters.



         (a)   The wages of partially-paid firefighters shall be
set annually by the City Council.  Partially-paid firefighters shall receive:



            1.   A fixed salary per year;



            2.   A fixed amount per duty shift;



            3.   A fixed amount per fire call they respond to
after normal duty hours and a fixed amount per hour additional for fire calls
that run over one hour;



            4.   A fixed amount per practice or drill session
they attend during non-duty hours; and



            5.   A fixed dollar clothing allowance per year,
paid out of the Fire Department supplies appropriation and approved by the
Fire Chief.



         (b)   Compensation under division (A)(3)(a)2. above is
payable monthly; compensation under divisions (A)(3)(a)3. and/or (A)(3)(a)4.
above is payable every six months.



      (4)   Volunteer firefighters. Compensation and allowances may
be set by the City Council in accordance with I.C. 36-8-12.



   (B)   Specific amounts of compensation or clothing allowances as
provided in this section shall be set each year in the city salary ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-9)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978; Ord. 14A-1984,
passed - -1984)



§ 33.10  FULL-PAID FIREFIGHTERS; VACATION, SICK LEAVE, AND HOLIDAY PAY.



   (A)   Vacation.



      (1)   In order to qualify for a vacation, a full-paid
firefighter must have had earnings in 26 pay periods during the 12 months
preceding his or her anniversary date.  The firefighter shall notify the
Fire Chief in writing on or before April 1, as to his or her vacation period
preference.  Vacations shall be scheduled in periods of not less than five
consecutive working days.  Full-paid firefighters shall receive paid
vacation in accordance with seniority as follows:



 


Seniority

 

Vacation/Year




At least:

 

but less than:






1 year

 

2 years

 

1 week




2 years

 

8 years

 

2 weeks




8 years

 

15 years

 

3 weeks




15 years

 

20 years

 

4 weeks*




20 years

 

–

 

5 weeks*



NOTES TO TABLE:

* - Three of the 4 or 5 weeks must be scheduled during summer.




 



      (2)   In the event a holiday occurs during a full-paid
firefighter’s vacation period, he or she shall be paid for the holiday in
addition to vacation pay.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-10)



   (B)   Sick leave.  Full-paid firefighters shall receive five days
sick leave every six months, which shall not exceed a total of 40 days.  The
firefighter must notify the Fire Chief by 8:00 a.m. of the sickness.  The
Fire Chief will be the sole judge if the firefighter is qualified for sick
leave benefits.  If, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, a firefighter has
abused the above rights and privileges, the firefighter shall be laid off for
a period of two weeks without pay, or be placed on a three days-without-pay
waiting period before sick leave benefits become effective.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-11)



   (C)   Holidays.  Full-paid firefighters who do not perform work on
the day before New Year’s Day, New Year’s Day, Ash Wednesday, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving
Day, the day before Christmas, Christmas Day, and birthday shall receive 12
hours pay at the regular rate of pay.  Full-paid firefighters who are
required or scheduled to work on any of the above holidays shall receive 12
hours holiday pay.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-12)



(Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.11  STATUS AND SENIORITY.



   (A)   Full-paid firefighters shall be considered as employees of the
city assigned to the Fire Department, and not as members of the Volunteer
Fire Department.



   (B)   Seniority will prevail as shown by the records of the Fire
Department for the period of service that the full-paid firefighter has
worked for the city.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-13)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)



§ 33.12  RETIREMENT OF FIREFIGHTERS; EFFECT ON COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Full-paid firefighters shall retire at age 65 or in accordance
with the Firefighters’ Pension Act of 1977.



   (B)   Partially-paid firefighters shall retire at age 65, and total
compensation shall be $60 per year.



   (C)   Volunteer firefighters who became members of the Fire
Department subsequent to 1-1-1953 shall automatically be transferred from
active to inactive membership, and total compensation shall be $60 per year,
at the age of 65.



(1985 Code, § 9-1-14)  (Ord. 18-1978, passed 12-26-1978)




MUTUAL FIRE AID AGREEMENT AND FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACTS




§ 33.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIDING AREA.  An area served by a participating fire company
furnishing fire equipment to a stricken area, or to another aiding area.



   FIRE COMPANY.  An organization formed for the purpose of providing
equipment and trained persons to fight and extinguish fires, whether the
organizations are part of a town, city, or township, or other municipal
corporation or private corporation.



   MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM.  A plan or program whereby the fire companies
participating in the program agree to come to one another’s assistance in
case of fire or other disaster too large for local equipment and personnel to
handle.



   PARTICIPATING MUNICIPALITY. A municipality that participates in the
mutual fire aid program by adopting an ordinance authorizing or approving the
program and entering into an appropriate agreement (substantially as provided
herein) with other participating municipalities and/or fire companies for
rendering and receiving aid in case of fire or other disaster.



   STRICKEN AREAS.  An area served by a participating fire company, in
which a fire or other disaster occurs that is of such magnitude that it
cannot be adequately coped with by local firefighting equipment and personnel.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-1)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 6-9-1981)



§ 33.26  AGREEMENT TO EFFECTUATE MUTUAL FIRE AID PROGRAM.



   The Fire Chief is authorized on behalf of the city to enter into (and
from time to time alter and amend) an agreement with any or all of the fire
companies in the mutual aid areas defining and putting into effect a mutual
aid program providing generally as follows.



   (A)   In the event that, in the judgment of the officer in charge of
the Fire Department of a stricken area, the available firefighting equipment
of that area is inadequate to effectively cope with a fire or other disaster
therein, the officer may call on a neighboring participating area to furnish
firefighting equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the
agreement) to the stricken area for use either:



      (1)   In combating the fire or other casualty; or



      (2)   As a standby reserve to meet other calls that may occur
before the local firefighting equipment is free to take care of them.



   (B)   Each aiding area furnishing firefighting equipment to a
stricken area shall have the right to call on another participating area for
firefighting equipment and personnel (to the extent specified in the
agreement) as a standby reserve to take the place, in part, of the equipment
furnished to the stricken area until the equipment shall be returned.



   (C)   On receipt of a call under divisions (A) or (B) above, the
aiding area called upon shall (to the extent provided in the agreement)
furnish the equipment and personnel called for by the stricken area, or by
the first aiding area, except that each aiding area may always be permitted
to retain sufficient firefighting equipment and personnel to fight any fire
or to meet any emergency within its own boundaries that may reasonably be
anticipated.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-2)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 6-9-1981)



§ 33.27  PREPARATION OF MUTUAL AID PROGRAM.



   The Chiefs of the Fire Departments participating in the mutual aid
shall prepare a mutual aid program which shall incorporate the necessary
provisions of § 33.26.  The mutual aid program shall, after approval by the
corporate authorities of the areas participating, be in full force and effect
and binding on the participating areas.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-3)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 6-9-1981)



§ 33.28  OBLIGATION OF CITY UNDER MUTUAL AID PROGRAM.



   The city shall furnish firefighting personnel and equipment for use by
its personnel outside its boundaries only as provided in the tentative mutual
fire aid program agreed to as provided herein, to any area that has agreed to
conform to the program and has assumed the obligations imposed upon it
thereby.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-4)  (Ord. 4-1981, passed 6-9-1981)



§ 33.29  LAWRENCEBURG TOWNSHIP FIRE PROTECTION CONTRACT.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-8-13-3(a)(2), the Trustees of Lawrenceburg
Township, Dearborn County, and the  City Council of Greendale may agree that
the city provide fire protection to portions of Lawrenceburg Township in the
manner hereafter provided.



      (1)   Area covered by agreement.  The following area or areas
of Lawrenceburg Township may be covered by this agreement:  that portion
which lies east of Tanners Creek and outside the corporate limits of the City
of Greendale and the City of Lawrenceburg.



      (2)   Term of agreement and annual payments.



         (a)   An agreement may be in effect for the indicated
terms and subject to payment by the township to the city of the indicated
annual amounts in consideration of the provision of the fire protection by
the city, as follows:



 

Term Period
 
Annual Payment


1-1-1991 through 12-31-2010
 
$10,500



 



         (b)   Annual payments as provided in this division
(A)(2) are payable one-half during the month of January and one-half during
the month of July of each year of a term as provided above.  However, it is
understood and agreed that in the event that any fire protection agreement is
upset by action of the State Insurance Services Office, the payments for the
services shall be prorated on a monthly basis for the services then rendered
and paid accordingly; and the payments due under any agreement shall be
subject to the final approval of the annual appropriations therefore by the
State Tax Board.



      (3)   Character of fire service.  Fire protection shall be
provided by the use of a minimum of one pumper, equipped with a minimum of a
500-gallon booster tank and a minimum of a 750-gallon per minute pump and
utility truck manned by six firefighters for daylight fires and ten
firefighters at night fires which truck is equipped with a 500-gallon booster
tank and a 750-gallon per minute pump.



      (4)   Termination of agreement; notice requirement.  The
parties may agree that if the fire protection service under the terms of this
agreement is to be terminated, that written notice will be given to the
I.S.O. Commercial Risk Services, 8125 Knue Road, Indianapolis, Indiana,
46250, of the termination at least 60 days in advance of the date for
termination.



      (5)   Extension or amendment of agreement; procedure.  The
term of any agreement may be extended from year to year, or for other terms,
by amending division (A)(2) above, as the parties may agree, to add the term
of extension and determine the amount of annual payment applicable thereto. 
Other terms and stipulations of the agreement may also be amended from time
to time, with the mutual consent of the parties and subject to any
notification or approval as may be required by the State Insurance Services
Office, through amendments to this section adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   The City Council will enact any ordinances or resolutions and
execute any contracts or other documents as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this section.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-5)  (Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 2-1991, passed
7-9-1991)



§ 33.30  OTHER FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS RESTRICTED.



   Except in accordance with a mutual aid agreement or fire protection
contract duly entered into and approved by the City Council, it is deemed
necessary to prohibit the provision of fire protection by the city and its
Fire Department, or the use of its equipment, beyond the limits of the city,
excepting public buildings located beyond the limits or except as absolutely
necessary to save human life.



(1985 Code, § 9-2-6)  (Res. passed 1-12-1960; Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984)



POLICE



§ 33.40  EXTRAJURISDICTIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Authority.  This section is adopted under and pursuant to the
general powers of the municipality under I.C. 36-1-3 et seq.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITY.  Any activity which is officially
authorized, sanctioned, or sponsored by any governmental entity and directed
at the enforcement of the statutes, ordinances, or regulations under the
jurisdiction of the governmental entity or to otherwise exercise its police
powers.  The term includes making arrests; issuing criminal or civil
citations; searching or seizing persons or property; or stopping,
interrogating, or conducting active or passive surveillance or other
investigations of any sort with respect to person or property for the purpose
of determining if any person has violated or probably intends or conspires to
violate any such statutes, ordinances, or regulations of the governmental
entity.



      LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any person, whether compensated or
uncompensated, who is employed, engaged, or otherwise authorized by a
governmental entity to perform law enforcement activities on behalf of the
governmental entity.  The term includes officers and agents of general
police agencies, but also includes officers, agents, or investigators acting
for special governmental authorities such as (but not limited to) revenue,
excise, and tax authorities, fish and game authorities, agricultural control
authorities, public health authorities, and the like.



   (C)   Conduct restricted. Except as provided under division (D)
below, it shall be unlawful for any law enforcement officer of any
governmental entity other than this municipality to conduct or engage in law
enforcement activities within the corporate limits of the municipality
without first notifying, in person, and obtaining the consent and approval of
the Police Chief, another officer of the City Police Department authorized by
the Police Chief to give the consent and approval, or the municipal
executive.  The consent and approval shall not be granted to engage in
surveillance of any nature of activity which is lawful under the laws of the
state or the city, but which is prohibited or restricted by laws relating to
crimes or taxation enacted and enforced by a state or political subdivision
thereof, other than the state.  The granting or denial of the consent and
approval shall be purely discretionary on the part of the above-described
officials, and, pursuant to state law, shall not entail any liability on the
part of the municipality or its officers or employees for any direct or
indirect harm to any person which may arise out of the granting or denial. 
Any person who conducts or engages in law enforcement activities in violation
of the requirements of this section may be cited therefor and upon conviction
shall be liable to a penal fine as set forth in § 10.99.



   (D)   Activities exempted. The following law enforcement officers
and activities are not subject to the requirements of division (C) above:



      (1)   Law enforcement officers of the federal government
enforcing federal statutes and regulations;



      (2)   Law enforcement officers of the state and its agencies
(including prosecuting attorneys of state judicial circuits) enforcing state
statutes or regulations or federal statutes or regulations within their
enforcement jurisdiction;



      (3)   County law enforcement officers enforcing state or
federal statutes or regulations, or county ordinances or regulations,
respecting which they have exclusive or concurrent enforcement jurisdiction
within the corporate limits of the municipality;



      (4)   Any law enforcement officer of the state or its
political subdivisions who has cause to make an arrest when authorized under
state law;



      (5)   Any law enforcement officer executing a warrant or other
process as directed by a federal court or any court of record having
jurisdiction in the state, or otherwise serving process in any manner
required by law, including, but not limited to, demands or warrants of the
Governor pursuant to the Uniform Criminal Extradition Act (I.C. 35-33-10-3)
and writs of attachment directed to Sheriffs pursuant to state law;



      (6)   Any person who is a law enforcement officer of this
state or another state or their agencies and political subdivisions, who
acting purely as a private individual, arrests a person for causes and in the
manner provided by I.C. 35-33-1-4 (i.e., “citizen’s arrest”); or



      (7)   Any law enforcement officer acting in any respect
expressly authorized by a federal or state statute, an interstate compact
between the state and another state or its political subdivision, or in
accordance with an interlocal agreement or “visiting police officers”
arrangement between the municipality and another governmental entity entered
into pursuant to I.C. 36-1-7 et seq., including provisions applicable under
the Uniform Act on Fresh Pursuit (I.C. 35-33-3-1).



(Ord. passed 12-2-1985)



§ 33.41  BOARD OF METROPOLITAN POLICE COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   There is established a Board of Metropolitan Police
Commissioners for the city, to consist of three members to be appointed by
the City Council.  The Commissioners so appointed shall be of good moral
character, legal residents of the city, and not more than two shall be of the
same political party.



(1985 Code, § 9-3-2)



   (B)   Three Commissioners shall be appointed in January, 1969, one
to serve one year, one to serve two years, and one to serve three years. 
Thereafter, on January 1 of each year, one Commissioner shall be appointed to
serve for a term of three years.



(1985 Code, § 9-3-3)



   (C)   The salary of members of the Board of Metropolitan Police
Commissioners shall be fixed annually by the City Council in the city salary
ordinance payable monthly out of the treasury of the city.



(1985 Code, § 9-3-4)



(Ord. 5-1968, passed 12-10-1968; Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCES



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   Authority to invest city monies; depository designation



   34.02   Organization memberships and subscriptions



   34.03   Mileage allowance; official use of private vehicles



   34.04   Purchasing rules and policies



   34.05   Payment of claims prior to Board of Public Works and Safety
approval



Funds



   34.15   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (Cigarette Tax)



   34.16   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (Property Tax)



   34.17   Cumulative Capital Development Fund



   34.18   Revenue Sharing Trust Fund



   34.19   Landfill Reserve Fund



   34.20   Fire Department funds



   34.21   Emergency Rescue Support Fund



   34.22   Police Department funds



   34.23   Riverboat cumulative non-reverting funds



   34.24   Cash Reserve Fund



   34.25   Board of Parks and Recreation Non-Reverting Fund



   34.26   Rainy Day Fund



   34.27   Criminal Investigation Fund



Cross-reference:



   Business Regulations, see Title XI



   City Government, see Ch. 30




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  AUTHORITY TO INVEST CITY MONIES; DEPOSITORY DESIGNATION.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer may invest surplus monies of, or on
deposit with, the city and not required for immediate expenditure. 
Investments may be made in any security or investment instrument authorized
by statute, but subject to any public depository distribution requirements as
provided by statute, if applicable to the investment.



   (B)   Investment shall be made in instruments having sufficient
liquidity to permit the city to meet its expenditure requirements in a timely
manner, and shall not be made in any security maturing in more than one year
from the date of the investment unless the Clerk-Treasurer determines on a
reasonable basis that all monies so invested are not likely to be required
for a longer period of time.  The Clerk-Treasurer may sell or otherwise
liquidate an investment if the investment monies should prove to be needed to
pay the expenses of the city, in order to make a more advantageous
investment, or to forestall principal devaluation.  Unless otherwise
provided by law, applicable state or federal administrative regulations, or
city ordinance, investments shall be made from total monies on deposit rather
than by specific fund, and all earnings or amounts of capital gain realized
from the investment shall accrue to the General Fund, and only the amount of
original principal shall be returned to the fund of origin.  To the extent
not inconsistent with the foregoing requirements of this section, monies from
different funds may be combined and put in a single investment if a financial
advantage to the city would result.  When any investment is made in
accordance with this section and applicable laws, the Clerk-Treasurer shall
not be held personally liable for any loss of principal which may
incidentally result from the making or necessary sale or liquidation of the
investment.



   (C)   Funds of the city are authorized for deposit by the
Clerk-Treasurer in the designated depository of the branch or office located
within the city of the Star Bank and/or the American State Bank.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-5)  (Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 34.02  ORGANIZATION MEMBERSHIPS AND SUBSCRIPTIONS.



   (A)   The City Council, at its discretion, may make annual
appropriations of city monies for the following purposes:



      (1)   To pay membership dues for the city or its several
officers or employees, as appropriate, in local, state, regional, national,
or international organizations of a governmental, civic, or educational
nature whose purpose and functions are related to the betterment of the city
government;



      (2)   To pay fees and costs, including reasonable expenses of
travel, lodging, and sustenance, for the several officers or employees to
attend meetings or programs conducted by organizations described in division
(A)(1) above; and



      (3)   To purchase or subscribe to publications, technical
assistance services, and similar services offered by organizations described
in division (A)(1) above which are related to the betterment of the city
government and improvement of its operations.



   (B)   The appropriate officers of the city may include the amounts
of anticipated expense as line items in the annual budget estimate, and the
City Council may accordingly appropriate funds therefor as other monies are
appropriated.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-6)  (Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 34.03  MILEAGE ALLOWANCE; OFFICIAL USE OF PRIVATE VEHICLES.



   (A)   To request mileage reimbursement, a city official shall
calculate, by odometer readings, the number of miles he or she travels in his
or her own automobile in pursuit of city business and submit to the
Clerk-Treasurer in claim form.



   (B)   Employees shall be reimbursed for use of their personal cars
at a rate of reimbursement being established by prevailing federal standards,
and upon compliance with all regulations set forth by the State Board of
Accounts.



(Ord. 5-1983, passed 9-13-1983; Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 2000-10,
passed 9-13-2000)



§ 34.04  PURCHASING RULES AND POLICIES.



   (A)   The following are the required purchasing rules for the city.



   (B)   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified
for all city purchases and shall be purchased unless the city determines that:



      (1)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States
in reasonably available quantities;



      (2)   The price of the supplies manufactured in the United
States exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and
comparable supplies manufactured elsewhere;



      (3)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United
States is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; or



      (4)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United
States is not in the public interest.



(Ord. 2000-6, passed 4-12-2000)



§ 34.05  PAYMENT OF CLAIMS PRIOR TO BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY
APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to make claim payments in
advance of Board of Public Works and Safety members approval for the
following types of expenses:



      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from:



         (a)   The United States government; or



         (b)   An agency or a political subdivision of the United
States government.



      (2)   License fees or permit fees;



      (3)   Insurance premiums;



      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges;



      (5)   Federal grant programs if:



         (a)   Advance funding is not prohibited; and



         (b)   The contracting party provides sufficient security
for the amount advanced.



      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute;



      (7)   Maintenance agreements or service agreements;



      (8)   Lease agreements or rental agreements;



      (9)   Principal and interest payments on bonds;



      (10)   Payroll and all payroll-related expenses, including,
but not limited to, pension contributions, credit union contributions,
savings bond payments, deferred compensation contributions, FOP dues, and
garnishments;



      (11)   State and federal taxes;



      (12)   Expenses that must be paid because of emergency
circumstances; and



      (13)   Expenses described in an ordinance.



   (B)   Each payment of expenses must be supported by a fully itemized
invoice or bill with certification of the Clerk-Treasurer.  The Board of
Public Works and Safety shall review and allow the claim at the next regular
or special meeting following the preapproved payment of the expense.



(Ord. 2000-8, passed 9-13-2000)



FUNDS



§ 34.15  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND (CIGARETTE TAX).



   In accordance with state statutes, there is hereby created a special
fund to be known as the Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund of the city into
which the cigarette taxes allotted to the city shall be deposited.  The Fund
shall be a cumulative fund and all of the monies deposited into the Fund
shall be appropriated and used solely for capital improvements as hereinafter
defined and none of the monies shall revert to the General Fund or be used
for any purpose other than capital improvements.  However, any or all monies
on deposit in the Fund may at any time be transferred to the General Fund
upon resolution of the City Council and the transferred monies may be
appropriated and expended for any purpose for which General Fund monies may
be lawfully appropriated and expended.  The term CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT means
the purchase of buildings, land, easements, or rights-of-way; construction or
improvement of any property owned by the city, including, but not limited to,
streets, thoroughfares, and sewers; and the retirement of general obligation
bonds of the city issued and the proceeds used for any of the foregoing
purposes.  The term CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT shall not include salaries of public
officials or employees except those which are directly chargeable to a
capital improvement.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-1)  (Ord. 3-1965, passed 7-13-1965; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 34.16  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND (PROPERTY TAX).



   Whereas notice of a proposed levy to provide funds for the Cumulative
Capital Improvement Fund has been given to taxpayers of the city by
publishing in two local newspapers for two consecutive weeks, on 8-1-1968 and
8-8-1968, and there were no remonstrances and no objects presented at the
hearing held before the City Council, at the City Hall, on 8-13-1968, at 7:30
p.m., upon the establishment of a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund
pursuant to I.C. 36-9-16 et seq., the City Council does hereby create and
establish a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-2)  (Res. passed 8-13-1968; Ord. 13-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 34.17  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (A)   A Cumulative Capital Development Fund shall be established for
the purpose of capital improvements for other purposes to protect the public
health, welfare, and safety in an emergency situation.



   (B)   The Board will adhere to the provisions of I.C. 36-9-15.5. 
The proposed fund will not exceed $0.15 on each $100 of assessed valuation.
This tax rate will be levied beginning with taxes 2000, payable 2001.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-2.5)  (Res. 1988- , passed 5-10-1988; Ord. 1992-4, passed
- -1992; Ord. 1996-11, passed 7-29-1996; Ord. 2000-4, passed 4-12-2000)



Statutory reference:



   Fund established and maintained, provisions, see I.C. 36-9-15.5et seq.



§ 34.18  REVENUE SHARING TRUST FUND.



   There is hereby created and established a Revenue Sharing Trust Fund. 
All funds received from and through the Revenue Sharing Act shall be placed
in the Trust Fund.  The funds may from time to time be appropriated from
necessary or desirable expenditures of the city in accordance with
appropriation procedures established by the U.S. Department of the Treasury
and the State Board of Accounts for revenue sharing funds, so long as the
funds are appropriated only for purposes for which the city may appropriate
its own locally derived tax monies and operating revenues.  The
Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to invest the funds from time to time, as other
municipal funds are so invested, until the times as the funds are required to
be expended.  However, the Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain adequate memoranda
accounts of the investments showing which investments or portion thereof
derive from revenue sharing trust funds attributable to each federal
allocation period, and all earnings or capital gains from the investments
shall accrue back to the Revenue Sharing Trust Fund, and shall be
proportionally allocated to and deemed a part of the total funds received
during each allocation period.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-4)  (Ord. 4-1972, passed 12-28-1972; Ord. 13-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 34.19  LANDFILL RESERVE FUND.



   A Landfill Reserve Fund shall be established and maintained into which
all funds received in payment of charges assessed by the city and/or the
Utility Department for trash or refuse collection, pickup, delivery,
transport, or other service shall be deposited.  All funds received and
deposited into the account shall be used for the operation of the landfill of
the city and the operating expenses, equipment, repairs, and other costs
incidental thereto.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-8)  (Ord. passed 12-15-1992)



§ 34.20  FIRE DEPARTMENT FUNDS.



   (A)   Whereas the amount of $10,000 has been budgeted in the General
Fund toward fire equipment in the 1983 budget and will be transferred to a
Fire Equipment Non-Reverting Fund in 1983; and the amount of $10,000 has been
budgeted in the General Fund toward fire equipment in the 1984 budget and
will be transferred to a Fire Equipment Non-Reverting Fund in 1984; and
certain money has been appropriated out of the Thatcher Annexation Fund
toward fire equipment in Ordinance 8-1983 and will be transferred to a Fire
Equipment Non-Reverting Fund when money is released by Thatcher Glass
Corporation, according to their letter dated 11-22-1983, and appears upon the
minutes of 11-25-1983, page 37 of the Minute Book; a Fire Equipment
Non-Reverting Fund is hereby established for the purpose of either rebuilding
or purchasing a fire truck.  The money collected in this Non-Reverting Fund
shall be used solely for this purpose.  When this Non-Reverting Fund becomes
dormant, the leftover money shall be transferred to the General Fund
according to law.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-3)



   (B)   There is hereby created and established a Fire Department
Non-Reverting Operating Fund.  All funds received as contribution by or on
behalf of the Fire Department shall be placed in the Fund.  The money
received into the Fund shall be cumulative, non-reverting, and appropriated
only for the use and maintenance of the Fire Department.  In the event the
Fund purpose ceases or becomes dormant, any balance shall be transferred to
the General Fund according to law.



(Ord. 9-1983, passed 12-13-1983; Ord. 1998-6, passed 11-12-1998)



§ 34.21  EMERGENCY RESCUE SUPPORT FUND.



   Household and business membership for Greendale Emergency Rescue, Inc.
shall be furthered by means of the collection of $1 per month noted on the
monthly utility statements issued by the Utility Department and the funds
received shall be deposited to the Emergency Rescue Support Fund and
transferred therefrom to Greendale Rescue, Inc. on a regular basis.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-9)  (Ord. 1995-8, passed  11-14-1995)



§ 34.22  POLICE DEPARTMENT FUNDS.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Police Department
K-9 Unit Non-Reverting Operating Fund.  All funds received as contributions
by or on behalf of the City K-9 Unit shall be placed in the Fund.  The money
received into the fund shall be cumulative, non-reverting, and appropriated
only for the use and maintenance of the K-9 unit.  In the event the Fund
purpose ceases or it becomes dormant, any balance shall be transferred to the
General Fund according to law.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-10)



   (B)   There is hereby created and established a Police Department
Motorcycle Unit Non-Reverting Operating Fund.  All funds received as
contributions by or on behalf of the City Motorcycle Unit shall be placed in
the Fund.  The money received into the Fund shall be cumulative,
non-reverting, and appropriated only for the use and maintenance of the
Motorcycle Unit.  In the event the Fund purpose ceases or becomes dormant,
any balance shall be transferred to the General Fund according to law.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-12)



   (C)   There is hereby created and established a Law Enforcement
Non-Reverting Fund.  All funds received as contributions by or on behalf of
the Police Department shall be placed in the Fund.  The money received into
the Fund shall be cumulative, non-reverting, and appropriated only in
furtherance of law enforcement.  In the event the Fund purpose ceases or
becomes dormant, any balance shall be transferred to the General Fund
according to law.



(Ord. 1996-2, passed  3-5-1996; Ord. 1998-1, passed - -1998; Ord. 2001-1,
passed 3-14-2001)



§ 34.23  RIVERBOAT CUMULATIVE NON-REVERTING FUNDS.



   There are hereby created and established cumulative non-reverting funds
into which all monies received from the City of Rising Sun, the City of
Lawrenceburg, Dearborn County, or other entity arising or resulting from
riverboat gaming activities shall be deposited, administered, and expended in
the following manner.



   (A)   The Riverboat Capital Improvement Fund shall receive  25% of
the monies for expenditures only for the purchase of buildings, land,
easements, or rights-of-way or the construction or improvement of any
property owned by the city and which thereafter will not likely require tax
revenue funding within the near future.



   (B)   The Riverboat Special Improvement Fund shall receive  75% of
the monies for expenditures only for property or projects which will result
in special extraordinary benefits to the city and/or citizens that would not
otherwise be available from tax revenue.



(1985 Code, § 9-8-11)  (Ord. 1997-9, passed - -1997; Ord. 2000-2, passed
3-8-2000)



§ 34.24  CASH RESERVE FUND.



   (A)   Cash Reserve Fund. There is established as a part of the
General Fund the Cash Reserve Fund.  The Cash Reserve Fund shall be funded
by transferring all interest amounts of the city utilities accrued on
investments and checking accounts.  However, the amounts of money may be
transferred only if any obligations binding on the city utilities are not
imperiled by the transfers.



   (B)   Utility Cash Reserve Fund.



      (1)   Separate cash reserve funds pursuant to I.C.
8-1.5-3-11(b) shall be established and maintained for the municipal electric
utility, the municipal water utility, and the municipal sewer utility.  The
governing board of each utility shall determine the amount of monthly
contributions or transfers, if any, to the respective Cash Reserve Fund from
the surplus earnings of the municipal electric utility, the municipal water
utility or the municipal sewer utility, as appropriate, and subject to the
provisions of I.C. 8-1.5-3-11(c).



      (2)   SURPLUS EARNINGS are defined as those cash earnings
remaining after provisions have been made to take care of current
obligations, including those for operating expenses, depreciation or
replacement funds, sinking fund, bond and interest retirement funds, or any
other priority fund requirements fixed by ordinance or by law.



      (3)   There shall be transferred to the Electric Utility Cash
Reserve Fund surplus earnings of the utility.  The transfers shall be made
as voted on by the Utilities Board, but transfers shall be made on no more
than a monthly basis.



   (C)   Transfer of Cash Reserve Fund balance to General Fund.



      (1)   The Board may include in the annual General Fund budget,
as a revenue in lieu of taxes, an amount equal to, but not in excess of, the
actual balance in the Utility Cash Reserve Fund as of July 31 of the current
year, and this Utility Cash Reserve Fund balance available shall be
transferred to the General Fund only during the calendar year for which the
budget is adopted, and no transfer shall be made from any utility funds to
the General Fund other than from the Utility Cash Reserve Fund.



      (2)   If at any time after the final approval of the budget an
emergency shall arise for further appropriations, in the manner now provided
by law from the General Fund of the city, the Board may, by ordinance,
transfer additional funds from the Utility Cash Reserve Fund to the General
Fund to provide for these additional appropriations, and this transfer shall
be limited to the accretion to the Utility Cash Reserve Fund since the
preceding July 31.



(Ord. 1-1985, passed 2-12-1985; Ord. 1-1987, passed - -1987; Ord. 6-1995,
passed 8-15-1995)



§ 34.25  BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION NON-REVERTING FUND.



   There is hereby created and established a Board of Parks and Recreation
Non-Reverting Fund.  All funds received as contributions by or on behalf of
the Board of Parks and Recreation shall be placed in the Fund.  The money
received into the Fund shall be cumulative, non-reverting, and appropriated
only in furtherance of the purpose for which it was received or, if no
purpose is indicated, only for the benefit of the parks.  In the event the
Fund purpose ceases or becomes dormant, any balance shall be transferred to
the General Fund according to law.



(Ord. 2001-15B, passed 12-12-2001)



§ 34.26  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund.  There is hereby established a
Rainy Day Fund to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised
by a general or special tax levy on taxable property within the city whenever
the purpose of the tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered
balance remains.



   (B)   Purposes of the Fund.  The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day
Fund may be used for the operation of the city and its various departments,
when the city does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay the costs,
including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services,
supplies, equipment, capital improvements, repairs, and similar expenditures.



   (C)   Transfer to Fund.  On or before December 31 of each year, the
City Council shall determine the amount, if any, of the unused and
unencumbered funds available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which
transfer may not exceed more than 10% of the city’s total budget for that
fiscal year.



   (D)   Appropriations.  The City Council may authorize the
expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the
same manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon
making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the
intent of the Fund.



(Ord. 2004-8, passed 8-11-2004)



§ 34.27  CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Criminal Investigation Fund to be
expended by the Chief or Assistant Chief of the City Police Department in
accordance with the provisions, limitations, and conditions of this
section.  The monies deposited in the Criminal Investigation Fund shall not
be commingled with, nor shall they be a part of, the General Fund of the
city.  The Criminal Investigation Fund shall be a non-reverting fund.



   (B)   The source of funds to be placed in the Criminal Investigation
Fund shall be funds from the public sale of seized property sold in
accordance with the provisions of all applicable state law regulations, and
funds derived from the sale of seized property disposed of in accordance with
the United States Department of Justice seizure policy, and any other
applicable state and federal grant funds available for the specific uses of
the Fund.  Any funds from either of these sources shall immediately be paid
over and deposited into the Criminal Investigation Fund by the
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   Authorized expenditures from the Criminal Investigation Fund
shall be utilized solely for law enforcement purposes and may include,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, things such as:



      (1)   Purchase of vehicles and equipment needed for law
enforcement functions;



      (2)   Purchase of weapons and protective equipment;



      (3)   Purchase of investigation communications equipment;



      (4)   Payment of unbudgeted salaries and overtime for law
enforcement officers;



      (5)   Purchase of automated data processing and computer
equipment and software to be used in support of law enforcement purposes;



      (6)   Payment of expense for training of law enforcement
officers;



      (7)   Payment of expenses for travel and salaries for law
enforcement personnel;



      (8)   Use as reward money or expenses in the funding of a
“sting” operation;



      (9)   Money used to make “buys” in connection with
anticipated arrests;



      (10)   Costs associated with the construction, expansion,
improvement, or operation of detention facilities;



      (11)   Costs associated with public education on drug
awareness, alcohol abuses, or other issues related to prevention of illegal
or criminal activity; and



      (12)   Trade or exchange of vehicles and equipment with
another person or business in compliance with I.C. 36-1-11-9.



   (D)   Requests for expenditures from the Criminal Investigation Fund
shall be made only by the Police Chief or Assistant Chief subject to formal
claim approval by the City Council.



   (E)   There shall be no reversion of the Criminal Investigation Fund
or any monies paid into the Criminal Investigation Fund of the city.  Funds
from the sale of seized property may accumulate in the Criminal Investigation
Fund as a non-reverting fund and is to be used exclusively for law
enforcement purposes.



(Ord. 2005-6, passed 9-14-2005)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   ELECTRIC UTILITY



      52.   SOLID WASTE



      53.   SEWERS



      54.   WATER



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Utility Board



   50.02   Investment of utility funds authorized



   50.03   Cash Reserve Fund for electric utility



   50.04   Utility Sinking Fund Account



   50.05   East side interceptor sewer construction bonds



   50.06   Provision of municipal services to unincorporated areas



§ 50.01  UTILITY BOARD.



   The municipal utilities of the city shall be governed by a Utility
Board consisting of the Members of the City Council, as described by I.C.
8-1.5-3-3(a)(2).  Any action heretofore taken by any body acting as a
governing board of the municipal utilities, and so constituted as provided in
this section or otherwise lawfully constituted at the time, is hereby fully
confirmed, ratified, and legalized in accordance with the powers of the City
Council under I.C. 36-1-4-16.



(1985 Code, § 6-3-1)  (Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 50.02  INVESTMENT OF UTILITY FUNDS AUTHORIZED.



   In accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-13, the Clerk-Treasurer is hereby
authorized to invest the surplus monies on deposit in any of the funds of the
municipally-owned utilities, and to sell or liquidate the investments as
monies are required or for the purpose of reinvestment.  Investments shall
be made, and earnings or capital gains deposited, in the same manner as
prescribed for investment of other city monies, except that any interest
earnings attributable to invested monies from any utility bond sinking fund
shall accrue to and be deposited in the sinking fund rather than in the City
General Fund.  Notwithstanding any other provision, the Clerk-Treasurer for
the purposes of this section may issue a check on any utility fund, including
a sinking fund, to make or purchase the investment and to pay any associated
transaction fees or other necessary charges deriving from the making,
purchase, sale, or liquidation of the investment.



(1985 Code, § 6-3-2)  (Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 50.03  CASH RESERVE FUND FOR ELECTRIC UTILITY.



   There is hereby established a Cash Reserve Fund pursuant to I.C.
8-1.5-3-11(b) for the municipal electric utility.  The governing board of
the utility shall determine the amount of monthly contributions or transfers
to the Cash Reserve Fund from the surplus earnings of the electric utility,
subject to the provisions of I.C. 8-1.5-3-11(c).



(1985 Code, § 6-3-3)  (Res. passed 6-30-1966; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 50.04  UTILITY SINKING FUND ACCOUNT.



   There is hereby created a Utility Sinking Fund Account in the Utility
Department of the city for the purpose of paying all outstanding bonds and
interest against the water and electric utilities for the city.  No checks
may be issued against the Utility Sinking Fund Account for any purpose other
than payment of outstanding bonds and interest against the water and electric
utilities of the city.



(1985 Code, § 6-3-4)  (Ord. passed 8-11-1947)



§ 50.05  EAST SIDE INTERCEPTOR SEWER CONSTRUCTION BONDS.



   (A)   The sum of $125,000 is hereby appropriated for construction of
the east side interceptor sewer as proposed in the City Master Plan on file
in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.  To finance the appropriation,
indebtedness shall be incurred by the issuance of revenue bonds in the amount
of $125,000 pursuant to the provisions of I.C. 36-7-12 et seq. and all acts
amendatory and supplemental thereto.  The bonds will be issued in
denominations of $1,000 each and serially numbered from one to 125 inclusive,
and shall bear interest coupons at the rate of 6% per annum payable
quarterly.  The bonds shall be issued as of 7-1-1978, and shall mature not
later than 12-31-1991; and, at the option of the city, shall be redeemable,
in whole or in part, on any interest payment date in their inverse numerical
order, at face value, without premium, and upon notice to the holder thereof
of not less than 30 days.



(1985 Code, § 6-3-11)



   (B)   Bonds issued pursuant to division (A) above shall not
constitute an indebtedness of the city within the meaning and provisions of
the State Constitution, and the city shall not be obligated to pay the bonds,
or the interest thereon, except from the special fund provided from the new
revenues of the system.  There is hereby established a sinking fund to which
the net revenues of the system are applied, the net revenues being defined as
gross revenues after deduction only for the payment of reasonable expenses of
operation, maintenance, and repair of the system, and the city irrevocably
pledges the entire net revenues of the system to the payment of the principal
and interest of the bonds authorized in division (A) above.



(1985 Code, § 6-3-12)



(Ord. 6-1978, passed 5-31-1978)



§ 50.06  PROVISION OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES TO UNINCORPORATED AREAS.



   (A)   This section shall apply to requests for water, electric,
and/or sewer service to be provided by the city to any proposed real estate
development where any portion of the boundary of the proposed development
lies within one-fourth mile of the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Before the city will agree to provide water, electric, or
sewer service to any proposed development where the request is subject to
this section, the City Council must have first determined that the proposed
plan of development will not have an adverse impact on property, property
uses, and property owners within the corporate limits of the city and that
the proposed development is consistent with and not in conflict with the
city’s Zoning Ordinance and/or comprehensive plan applicable to the areas
in the vicinity of the proposed development that are within the corporate
limits of the city.



(Ord. 2006-11, passed 11-28-2006)



CHAPTER 51:  ELECTRIC UTILITY



Section



Rates and Charges



   51.01   Classification and definition of electric service



   51.02   Basic rates and charges



   51.03   Rate adjustments



   51.04   Billing rules; deposit; deferred payment; test and
reconnection charges



   51.05   Responsibility for rates and charges



Creation and Joinder with Indiana Municipal Power Agency (IMPA)



   51.25   Authorization



   51.26   Creation of agency



   51.27   Membership of joint agency



   51.28   Board of Commissioners



   51.29   Annual budget



   51.30   Amendments



   51.31   Agreement to purchase power from IMPA



Emergency Curtailment of Electric Service



   51.45   Definitions



   51.46   Utility load reduction



   51.47   Customer voluntary load reduction



   51.48   Mandatory load reduction



   51.49   Mandatory curtailment procedure



   51.50   Emergency curtailment without regard to priority



   51.51   Noncompliance



   51.52   Applicability of provisions




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 51.01  CLASSIFICATION AND DEFINITION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE.



   The following classes of electric service are designated to be
available from the municipal electric utility.



   (A)   Residential service.  This class of service is available for
all residential purposes, including lighting, cooking, refrigeration, water
heating, and electric space heating, to individual residential customers in
an individual residence or apartment and for single phase farm service, when
supplied through the farm residence meter, located on the distribution lines
of the utility.  The character of the service is alternating current, 60 Hz,
single phase, at a voltage of approximately 120 volts two-wire or 120/240
volts three-wire.



   (B)   Commercial service.  This class of service is available for
commercial electric service through one meter for lighting, incidental
appliance, cooking, heating, refrigeration, and power for individual motors
not exceeding five horsepower, and to the combined name-plate rating of
motors of not more than 25 horsepower, to customers, whose demand does not
exceed 20 KW, located on the distribution lines of the utility.  The
character of the service is alternating current, 60 Hz, single phase, at a
voltage of approximately 120/240 volts and three-phase at a voltage of
approximately 120/240 volts four-wire, or 120/208 volts four-wire.



   (C)   General service.  This class of service is available through
one meter for electric light and power service to where the customer’s
demand exceeds 20 KW and/or the customer’s connected horsepower load
exceeds 25 HP, located on the distribution lines of the utility.  The
character of the service is standard single phase and/or polyphase
alternating current, 60 Hz, at one standard voltage or at a utility voltage,
if available and requested by the customer.



   (D)   Industrial power service. This class of service is available
through one meter for any customer contracting for a specified capacity of
not less than 100 kilowatts amperes. Applicant must agree to a one-year term
of service and must be located adjacent to an electric transmission or
distribution line of the utility that is adequate and suitable for supplying
the service required. The character of the service is alternating current, 60
HZ, three phase at a voltage which is standard with the utility in the area
served.



   (E)   Municipal street lighting service.  This service is available
for street lighting to the city.



   (F)   Outdoor lighting service.  This service is available only for
continuous year round service for outdoor lighting to customers located
within the service area of the utility.  The service provides dusk-to-dawn
outdoor lighting for each lamp with luminaire controlled by a photoelectric
relay when mounted on an existing utility pole and including one span of
secondary conductors.



(1985 Code, § 6-11-1)  (Ord. 1-1982, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 1993-5, passed -
-1993; Ord. 1993-6, passed  12-13-1993; Ord. 1998-5, passed 10-15-1998)



§ 51.02  BASIC RATES AND CHARGES.



   Subject to adjustments as applicable and stipulated in § 51.03, the
following rates and charges apply to the indicated classes of electric
service.



   (A)   Residential service.



      (1)   Customer charge -  $5.50 per meter per month.



      (2)   Energy charge:



 

Use per Month
 
Rate/KWH


First  500 KWH
 
$.06468


Next  1,000 KWH
 
$.05913


Over 1,500 KWH
 
$.05268



 



      (3)   Minimum charge shall be the customer charge.



   (B)   Commercial service.



      (1)   Customer charge - $7.50 per meter per month.



      (2)   Energy charge:



 

Use per Month
 
Rate/KWH


First  500 KWH
 
$.06496


Next 2,000 KWH
 
$.05763


Over 2,500 KWH
 
$.05162



 



      (3)   Minimum charge shall be the customer charge.



   (C)   General service.



      (1)   Customer charge - $10.50 per meter per month.



      (2)   Maximum load charge - $5 per KW for all KW.



      (3)   Energy charge - $ 0.0329 per KWH for  all KWH.



      (4) Minimum charge shall be the customer charge plus the maximum
load charge.



      (5)   Determination of maximum load and measurement of
energy:  maximum load in KW shall be measured by suitable instruments
provided by the utility and in any month the maximum load in KW shall be
measured by suitable instruments provided by the utility and in any month the
maximum load shall be the average number of kilowatts in the recorded 30-
minute interval during which energy metered is greater than in any other
30-minute interval in such month. Energy shall be measured by suitable
integrating instruments provided by the utility. For billing purposes, the
billing maximum load shall be the greater of the maximum load occurring
during the month or twenty (20) KW.



   (D)   Industrial power service.



      (1)   Maximum load charge - $12.34 per KVA of billing maximum
load.



      (2)   Energy charge.



 

Use per Month
 
Rate/KWH


All
 
$.016631



 



      (3)   Minimum charge.  The monthly minimum charge shall be
the maximum load charge.



      (4)   Measurement of maximum load and energy. Maximum load
shall be measured by suitable instruments provided by the utility, and in any
month the maximum load expressed n kilovolt-amperes shall be the average
number of kilowatts in the 30-minute interval in such month during which the
energy metered is greater than in any other 30-minute interval in such month,
divided by the average lagging power factor (expressed as a decimal)
calculated for the month. Energy shall be measured by suitable integrating
instruments provided by the utility.



      (5)   Billing maximum load. The billing maximum load for any
month shall be the maximum load for the month, but in no month shall the
billing maximum load be less than 100 kilovolt-amperes.



      (6)   Metering adjustment. When the measurement of energy is
made at the primary voltage of the transmission or distribution line used to
supply  the customer, the maximum load and energy measurements shall be
multiplied by 98% to convert  such measurements to the equivalent of
metering at the utility’s secondary voltage.



      (7)   Equipment supplied by customer. When customer furnishes
and maintains the complete substation equipment, including any and all
transformers, and/or switches and/or the equipment necessary to take his
entire service at the primary voltage of the transmission or distribution
line from which it is received, a credit of $.25 per KVA of billing maximum
load will be applied to each month’s net bill.



   (E)   Municipal street lighting service.



      (1)   Rate.



 

Type of Lamp
 
Rate per Lamp/Month


250-watt mercury vapor
 
$12.40


400-watt mercury vapor
 
$15.79


100-watt sodium vapor
 
$7.72


250-watt sodium vapor
 
$11.15



 



      (2)   Hours of lighting. All lamps shall burn approximately
one-half hour after sunset until approximately one-half hour before sunrise
each day in the year, approximately 4000 hours per annum.



      (3)   Facilities. All facilities necessary for the service
hereunder, including all poles, fixtures, street lighting circuits,
transformers, lamps, and other necessary facilities will be furnished and
maintained by the utility.



   (F)   Outdoor lighting service.



      (1)   Rates. The rate for each lamp is as follows:



 

Type of Lamp
 
Rate per Lamp/Month


175-watt mercury vapor
 
$7.39


400-watt mercury vapor
 
$12.25


250-watt sodium vapor
 
$9.13


400-watt sodium vapor
 
$11.75



 



      (2)   Ownership of system. All facilities installed by the
utility for service hereunder including all fixtures, controls, poles,
transformers, secondary lines, lamps and other equipment shall be owned and
maintained by the utility. All service and necessary maintenance will be
performed only during regularly scheduled working hours of the utility.
Non-operative lamps will normally be restored to service within two working
days after notification by customer.



      (3)   Additional facilities. When facilities not provided for
in the above charges are required for the installation of lamp, customer will
pay in advance of installation the cost of such facilities required to supply
service from the most suitable existing pole of utility to the point
designated by customer for the installation of lamp.



      (4)   Hours of lighting. All amps shall burn approximately
one-half hour after sunset until approximately one-half hour before sunrise
each day in the year, approximately 4000 hours per annum.



(1985 Code, § 6-11-2)  (Ord. 1-1982, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 1992-2, passed -
-1992; Ord. 1993-5, passed - -1993; Ord. 1993-6, passed 12-13-1993; Ord.
1998-5, passed 10-15-1998)



§ 51.03  RATE ADJUSTMENTS.



   The following adjustments are applicable to the rates and charges set
forth in § 51.02 with respect to the several classes of electric service, as
indicated.



   (A)   Rate adjustments.  The rate adjustments shall be on the basis
of a purchase power cost adjustment tracking factor occasioned solely by
changes in the cost of purchased power and energy, in accordance with the
order of the State Utility Regulatory Commission, approved 12-13-1989, in
Cause No. 36835-S3, as follows:  rate adjustments applicable to the below
listed rate schedules are as follows:



 

Residential (Rate RS)
 
$.001961 per KWH


Commercial (Rate CS)
 
$.001729 per KWH


General (Rate GS)
 
$.001767 per KWH


Industrial (Rate IPS)
 
$.001664 per KWH


Flat rates (Rates SL & OL)
 
$.001596 per KWH



 



   (B)   Peak management program credits. This division (B) applies to
residential and/or commercial customers who participate in the “Peak
Management Program” in accordance with the rules and provisions thereof and
have a “Peak Management switch” installed on a central air conditioner
and/or electric water heater.  A copy of the rules and provisions for
participation may be requested from the utility office.



      (1)   Credits for participation in the Peak Management Program
will be as follows:



         (a)   Electric water heater - $1 per switch per month,
January through December; and



         (b)   Central air conditioner - $2 per switch per month,
June through September.



      (2)   These credits will be included on participating
customer’s monthly bills.  A customer participating in the program may
withdraw at any time upon notifying the utility.  Credits will stop with the
first bill following customer withdrawal from the Peak Management Program,
the termination of the utility’s participation in the program, or the
program’s termination by IMPA.



(1985 Code, § 6-11-3)  (Ord. 1-1982, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 1993-6, passed
12-13-1993; Ord. 1995-2, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 1996-15, passed 8-14-1996;
Ord. 1998-5, passed 10-15-1998)



§ 51.04  BILLING RULES; DEPOSIT; DEFERRED PAYMENT; TEST AND RECONNECTION
CHARGES.



   The following charges are applicable to the rates and charges set forth
in § 51.02 with respect to the several classes of electric service as
indicated.



   (A)   Advance deposit. All residential and commercial classes of
service shall pay an advance deposit of $450.



   (B)   Collection and deferred payment charge.  This division (B)
applies to residential, commercial, primary power, and municipal electric
service rate schedules.  Bills shall be rendered and due monthly.  If paid
within 15 days of the due date thereof, as stated in the bill, the net bill
shall be the amount paid.  If not paid within 15 days from the due date
thereof, as stated in the bill, the gross bill, which includes the collection
charge, shall be the amount to be paid.  When the fifteenth day falls on
Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, the first business day thereafter shall
be added to the 15-day period.  The collection charge shall be 10% on the
first $3 or less of net billing, plus 3% on the excess of $3 of net billing.



   (C)   Service charge for dishonored checks.  This division (C)
applies to residential, commercial, primary power, and municipal electric
service rate schedules.  Each check, draft, or order on a credit institution
issued or delivered to the city or any of its utilities for the payment of
money which the drawee refuses to pay or dishonors for any reason shall be
subject to a service charge of $25, payable by the person who issues or
delivers the check, draft, or order.



   (D)   Meter test charge. This division (D) applies to residential,
commercial, primary power, and municipal electric service rate schedules. 
When a test meter is requested by a customer, a charge of $15 shall be made
for all tests.  If a meter shows the customer’s meter to be off plus or
minus 2%, the $15 charge will be voided.



   (E)   Reconnection charge.  This division (E) applies to
residential and commercial service rate schedules.  When the service is
turned off for non-payment of bills, or whenever for any reason beyond the
control of the utility a re-establishment of service is required by any one
customer, a charge of $20 will be made by the utility to cover a part of the
cost of discontinuance and re-establishment of service.



(1985 Code, § 6-11-4)  (Ord. 1-1982, passed 2-8-1982; Ord. 1992-2, passed -
-1992; Ord. 1993-5, passed - -1993; Ord. 1993-6, passed 12-13-1993; Ord.
1998-5, passed 10-15-1998; Ord. 2009-11, passed 10-14-2009)



§ 51.05  RESPONSIBILITY FOR RATES AND CHARGES.



   All rates and charges are payable by the owner of each lot, parcel of
real property, or building that:



   (A)   Is connected with the electric utility by or through any part
of the electric utility works; or



   (B)   Uses or is served by the electric utility works.



(Ord. 2009-1, passed 4-8-2009)




CREATION AND JOINDER WITH INDIANA MUNICIPAL POWER AGENCY (IMPA)




§ 51.25  AUTHORIZATION.



   The city is authorized to enter into a contract substantially in the
form set forth in §§ 51.26 through 51.30 for the creation of a joint agency
with one or more of the municipalities herein named, and with the other
municipalities subsequently becoming a member of the joint agency pursuant to
the contract.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-1)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.26  CREATION OF AGENCY.



   Pursuant to I.C. 8-1-2.2 et seq. (the Act), there is hereby created a
joint agency under the provisions of the Act which shall be a body corporate
and politic and a political subdivision of the state, to exercise thereunder
a part of the sovereign powers of the state.  The name of the joint agency
created by this contract shall be State Municipal Power Agency (the
“Municipal Power Agency”).  Except as specifically provided to the
contrary in this contract or in the Municipal Power Agency’s bylaws as the
same may be amended from time to time, the Municipal Power Agency shall
conduct its affairs in accordance with the Act for the purposes authorized
therein and to that end shall be empowered to exercise all powers granted by
the Act.  The Municipal Power Agency shall have the bylaws as shall be
adopted by a unanimous vote of all Commissioners.  The bylaws shall be
amended in the manner specified therein which may be less than by a unanimous
vote.  For purposes of voting upon adoption and amendment of the bylaws,
each Commissioner shall have one vote.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-2)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.27  MEMBERSHIP OF JOINT AGENCY.



   (A)   Generally.  The cities and town which have initially approved
this contract and are the initial members of the Municipal Power Agency are:



      (1)   Anderson, Indiana;



      (2)   Crawfordsville, Indiana;



      (3)   Flora, Indiana;



      (4)   Greendale, Indiana;



      (5)   Greenfield, Indiana;



      (6)   Lawrenceburg, Indiana;



      (7)   Lebanon, Indiana;



      (8)   Logansport, Indiana;



      (9)   Peru, Indiana;



      (10)   Richmond, Indiana; and



      (11)   Tipton, Indiana.



   (B)   Additional members.  Any city or town qualified under the Act
which desires to join the Municipal Power Agency subsequent to its creation
pursuant to this contract shall indicate its desire by depositing with the
Chairperson of the Municipal Power Agency a supplement to this contract
executed by the city or town and an acceptable resolution or ordinance of the
governing body of the city or town authorizing the execution.  A city or
town shall become a member of the Municipal Power Agency upon approval of its
executed supplement to this contract by a vote of the majority of all the
Municipal Power Agency’s Board of Commissioners.  The Board of
Commissioners may condition the approval upon payment of the amount by new
members as it shall determine is equitable taking into account assessments
previously imposed or members and expended in a manner which will benefit a
new member and upon the other matters as it deems appropriate.  The new
member’s membership shall become effective upon the approval and compliance
with the conditions, if any, established by the Board of Commissioners.  For
purposes of voting upon approval of the addition of new members, each
Commissioner shall have one vote.



   (C)   Withdrawal of members.  Any member may withdraw from the
Municipal Power Agency upon 30 days’ written notice to the Municipal Power
Agency; provided, however, withdrawal from the Municipal Power Agency shall
not relieve a member of its obligation for amounts owed under the Municipal
Power Agency’s current annual assessment budget or under any contract
between the withdrawing member and the Municipal Power Agency.  Withdrawal
shall not become effective until the withdrawing member has discharged all of
its duties and obligations to the Municipal Power Agency up to the date of
withdrawal.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-3)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.28  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   The Board of Commissioners of the Municipal Power Agency shall be
comprised of one Commissioner appointed by the governing body of each
member.  Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this contract as
the same may be amended from time to time, the voting procedures of the Board
of Commissioners of the Municipal Power Agency shall be as specified in the
bylaws of the Municipal Power Agency.  The Board of Commissioners may
designate an Executive Committee.  The membership, powers, and operating
procedures of the Executive Committee shall be as specified in the bylaws of
the Municipal Power Agency.  The Municipal Power Agency shall have officers
as specified in the bylaws of the Municipal Power Agency.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-4)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.29  ANNUAL BUDGET.



   Not less than 70 days prior to each fiscal year of the Municipal Power
Agency, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt an annual assessment budget
for the fiscal year which shall specify those expenditures which are to be
paid from assessments of the members.  The annual assessment budget will
also specify a schedule of assessments or method for determining the
assessment of each member.  Not less than 60 days prior to each fiscal year
of the Municipal Power Agency, the Board of Commissioners shall submit the
annual assessment budget to each member.  Any member which does not agree to
be bound by the schedule of assessments or method for determining the
assessment of each member specified in the annual assessment budget shall
give notice of withdrawal as provided in § 51.27(C) prior to the
commencement of the fiscal year of the Municipal Power Agency to which the
annual assessment budget relates.  Any member which does not so withdraw
shall be bound to pay the assessments set forth in or determined pursuant to
the method established by the annual assessment budget.  Any time the Board
of Commissioners determines that the annual assessment budget no longer
properly reflects the expenditures which are to be incurred within the fiscal
year, the Board of Commissioners may vote to amend the budget and the
schedule of assessments or method for determining the assessment of each
member specified therein.  No more than ten days following any such
amendment, the Board of Commissioners shall give notice thereof to each
member.  Any member which does not agree to be bound by the amended schedule
of assessments or method for determining the assessment of each member shall
give notice of withdrawal as provided in § 51.27(C) not more than 30 days
following the date of the notice of the amendment to the annual assessment
budget.  Any member which does not so withdraw shall be bound to pay the
assessments set forth in or determined pursuant to the method established by
the amended annual assessment budget.  All assessments shall be payable
solely from the revenues derived from the ownership and operation of the
member’s electric system, and assessments may not constitute legal or
equitable pledges, charges, liens, or encumbrances upon any property of the
member or upon any of its income, receipts, or revenues, except the revenues
of the member’s electric system, and neither the faith and credit nor the
taxing power of the member may be pledged for the payment of any
assessments.  However, this section shall not prevent the adoption of
operating budgets and budgets relating to expenses or bond proceeds or other
budgets which relate to monies other than monies raised via assessments.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-5)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.30  AMENDMENTS.



   This contract may be amended by the execution of an amendment by all
members which has been:



   (A)   Approved by a unanimous vote of all Commissioners, each
casting one vote; and



   (B)   Approved and concurred in by a resolution or ordinance adopted
by the governing body of each member.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-6)  (Ord. 1-1980, passed 5-13-1980)



§ 51.31  AGREEMENT TO PURCHASE POWER FROM IMPA.



   The city may enter into a contract so that the city may provide its
customers with an adequate, reliable, and economical supply of electric power
and energy, and join with other members of the Municipal Power Agency for the
purpose of the Agency providing the planning, financing, locating, and
building of needed new facilities for generation and transmission, and for
other purposes contemplated in the contract.  The electric utility of the
city electric power and energy from the Agency under and pursuant to the
terms of the contract.  The Agency shall have full responsibility for
planning and obtaining an adequate supply of power and energy for the city
pursuant to the contract.  The President of the City Council is hereby
authorized and directed to execute and deliver, and the Clerk-Treasurer is
hereby authorized to attest and seal, the contract with any modifications
therein as they shall approve by their execution thereof.



(1985 Code, § 6-9-7)  (Ord. 3-1982, passed 3-9-1982)



EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT OF ELECTRIC SERVICE



§ 51.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE MONTHLY CONSUMPTION.  The customer’s average billing month
usage based upon the three-month period in the prior 12 months which
corresponds to the billing month being curtailed and the immediately
preceding and succeeding months.  Adjustments may be made for customers with
changed circumstances that have caused the prior year’s usage during the
period to be nonrepresentative of current usage during the period.



   COMMERCIAL CUSTOMERS.  Customers engaged primarily in wholesale or
retail trade and services including clubs, institutions, and local, state and
federal governmental agencies, except educational institutions.



   DISPENSABLE USES.  The following and similar types of uses of electric
energy shall be considered dispensable uses:



      (1)   Outdoor flood and advertising lighting except for the
minimum level necessary to protect life and property and a single illuminated
sign identifying commercial facilities that are open after dark;



      (2)   General lighting levels in stores and offices greater
than minimum functional levels;



      (3)   Show window and display lighting;



      (4)   Greater number of elevators operating in office
buildings during nonpeak hours than is necessary;



      (5)   Parking lot lighting above minimum functional levels;



      (6)   Energy use greater than that necessary to maintain a
temperature of no less than 78°F during operation of cooling equipment and
no more than 65°F during operation of heating equipment;



      (7)   Greater than minimum work schedules, as for building
cleaning and maintenance, restocking, and the like, which would require
office or industrial facilities to be illuminated, cooled, or heated beyond
normal working hours;



      (8)   Nighttime sports and recreational activities; and



      (9)   Public museums, art galleries, and historic buildings
requiring illumination, cooling, or heating.



   HUMAN NEEDS CUSTOMERS.  Human needs customers shall include hospitals,
medical centers, nursing homes, and customers where curtailment would
adversely affect public health and safety such as municipal fire departments,
police departments, civil defense, and emergency Red Cross services, and any
other facility whose use of electric energy is vital to public health and
safety as determined by the utility.



   INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMERS.  Industrial customers shall be customers who are
engaged primarily in a process that creates or changes raw or unfinished
materials into another form or product.



   LIVING QUARTERS.  Living quarters as used in Service Priority Class II
shall mean hotels, motels, dormitories, and similar dwelling places.



   RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS.  Customers living in residential dwellings,
mobile homes, apartments, or condominiums.



   SERVICE OBLIGATION.  The largest metered



demand (peak demand for customers served on industrial and commercial rates)
in the previous 12 months.  If no demand information is available, an
estimate will be used determined by dividing the KWH in the maximum usage
month in the previous 12 months by 200 hours.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-1)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.46  UTILITY LOAD REDUCTION.



   This step will be taken by the utility when its fuel supplies are
decreasing and the remaining fuel supplies are sufficient in its opinion for
not more than approximately 50 days’ operation of its generation
facilities.  Utility use of electric energy will be reduced in any way that
will not jeopardize essential operations.  Fuel supply levels at the
utility’s generating stations will become a determinant in economic
dispatch decisions in the effort to maintain a reasonable supply of fuel at
all generating stations.  The utility will partially or fully terminate the
availability of electric energy under the surplus capacity provisions of
rates for industrial and commercial power service.  This shall not apply to
cooperative or municipal utilities with generation.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-2)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.47  CUSTOMER VOLUNTARY LOAD REDUCTION.



   If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the utility’s remaining
fuel supply is sufficient in its opinion for not more than 50 days’
operation of its generating facilities, appeals to users will be made for the
voluntary curtailment of load.  Efforts should be made to obtain a decrease
in usage of approximately 25%, except that a lesser amount would be the goal
for specific customers if the 25% reduction would result in situations where
health and safety is not adequately protected.  Public appeals will be made
by the utility through appropriate news media asking customers to reduce
their use of electric energy by approximately 25% because of the impending
fuel shortage.  Direct appeals will be made by the utility to major
industrial and commercial customers and to wholesale customers requesting
them to shut off nonessential loads, and curtail usage in an effort to obtain
a 25% reduction.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-3)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.48  MANDATORY LOAD REDUCTION.



   (A)   If fuel supplies continue to decrease and the utility’s
remaining fuel supply is sufficient in its opinion for not more than 40
days’ operation of its generating facilities, mandatory curtailment will
commence in accordance with procedures hereafter provided.  When fuel
supplies are sufficient for not more than 40 days’ operation of the
utility’s generating facilities or when for any reason sufficient amounts
of electric power, in the judgment of the utility, are not available to meet
all existing and reasonably anticipated demands for service or to protect the
integrity and stability of the system, the utility shall have the right to
restrict, limit, or curtail electric service within any of its systems so
affected in accordance with any of the provisions of this subchapter. 
Priority of service, in the event of mandatory curtailment, shall be as set
forth below.



   (B)   The highest priority is Service Priority Class I and the
lowest priority of service is Service Priority Class V:



      (1)   Service Priority Class I - Human needs;



      (2)   Service Priority Class II - Residential and living
quarters;



      (3)   Service Priority Class III - Commercial and industrial
customers;



      (4)   Service Priority Class IV - Schools, colleges,
universities, and other educational institutions; and



      (5)   Service Priority Class V - Dispensable uses and surplus
capacity power.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-4)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.49  MANDATORY CURTAILMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Except as provided by § 51.50, curtailment shall begin with
Service Priority Class V and continue as necessary through Service Priority
Classes IV, III, II, and I as follows.



      (1)   Forty-day fuel supply.  When the utility’s fuel
supply reaches 40 days, public notice shall be given by press release to:



         (a)   Service Priority Class V customers to fully (100%)
curtail the service; however, any dispensable use shall be provided the
minimum amount of electricity to protect and maintain the dispensable use
facilities;



         (b)   To Service Priority Class IV to curtail service to
a service level of not more than 50% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the utility;



         (c)   To Service Priority Class III to curtail service
to a service level of not more than 75% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the utility; and



         (d)   To Service Priority Class II to curtail service to
a service level of not more than 85% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the utility.



      (2)   Thirty-day fuel supply.  When the utility’s fuel
supply reaches 30 days, public notice shall be given to:



         (a)   Service Priority Class IV to curtail service fully
to a service level that is necessary to protect and maintain Service Priority
Class IV facilities;



         (b)   To Service Priority Class III to curtail service
to a service level of not more than 50% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the utility; and



         (c)   To Service Priority Class II to curtail service to
a service level of not more than 75% of service obligation or base monthly
consumption, whichever is applicable as determined by the utility.



      (3)   Further need for reduction.  After Service Priority
Classes IV, III, and II are curtailed to a level of not more than indicated
in division (A)(2) above of service obligation or base monthly consumption,
Service Priority Classes IV through II, both inclusive, will be further
curtailed by equal percentages until full (100%) curtailment occurs.  After
Service Priority Classes IV, III and II are in full (100%) curtailment,
curtailment shall commence in service Priority Class I as necessary.



      (4)   Short term service interruption.  In the event
mandatory curtailment is imposed, as above provided, the utility in addition
may employ, for not more than two hours’ duration at any one time,
selective short term service interruptions by operation on a rotational basis
of distribution switching equipment to effect the necessary curtailment in
one or more Service Priority Classes.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(1) above, the utility will
give notice of curtailment in the most effective manner possible and as much
in advance as possible with regard to the exigencies and the number of
customers to be notified.  The curtailment shall be effective as of the time
and date specified in the notice.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-5)



   (C)   Service shall be restored in the reverse order of the original
curtailment.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-6)



(Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.50  EMERGENCY CURTAILMENT WITHOUT REGARD TO PRIORITY.



   The utility reserves the right to order electric service curtailment
without regard to the priority of service when in its judgment the
curtailment is required to forestall imminent and irreparable injury to life,
property, or the electric system.  Curtailment may include interruption of
selected circuits.  A curtailment pursuant to this section shall not exceed
72 consecutive hours without approval of the State Public Service Commission.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-7)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.51  NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Customers failing to comply with the specified curtailment for more
than seven days will be subject to disconnection for the duration of the
emergency.  Energy use by industrial and large commercial customers in
excess of that permitted under curtailment shall be subject to a $.10 per KWH
penalty, in addition to normal billing charges, for all electric energy taken
in excess of mandatory curtailment limitations.  Penalty charges collected
hereunder shall be segregated in a separate account, and shall be applied to
reduce the fuel cost adjustment charges of industrial and large commercial
customers who, during the existence of a fuel emergency, have not used
electric energy in excess of mandatory curtailment limitations.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-8)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



§ 51.52  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.



   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall control notwithstanding
any terms and provisions of rate schedules on general rules and regulations
of the utility, or any contract or agreement between the utility and any
customer to the contrary.



(1985 Code, § 6-10-9)  (Ord. 2-1978, passed 2-14-1978)



CHAPTER 52:  SOLID WASTE



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Residential solid waste collection service; fee



   52.03   Container requirements



   52.04   Newspaper, cardboard boxes, glass, plastic, aluminum, brush
and tree trimmings; leaves



   52.05   Heavy and special trash pick-up



   52.06   Alternative disposal methods



   52.07   Enforcement



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Those putrescible wastes resulting from the growing,
handling, storage, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   HEAVY/SPECIAL TRASH.  Any form or type of garbage, solid wastes, junk,
or other disposable refuse which, because of size, weight, unusual quantity,
character, or source of generation cannot be properly placed in containers,
bundled, or otherwise prepared, or which is otherwise ineligible for
collection under the city’s normal trash collection service as provided
under §§ 52.02 through 52.04.



   POLYETHYLENE DISPOSAL BAGS.  Garbage container liners of the type,
gauge, strength, and size specified by the city.



   SOLID WASTES.  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, and
shall include dead animals, industrial and construction wastes, ashes, cans,
metalware, broken glass, crockery, dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass,
weeds, or litter of any kind.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-1)  (Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed
10-8-2008)



§ 52.02  RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE; FEE.



   The city shall provide for the pick-up, transportation, and disposal of
garbage and solid wastes arising from the use of each residence and placed
for collection as provided herein.  Each  residence shall be charged a fee
for the normal collection of garbage and solid wastes of $20 per month.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-2)  (Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed
10-8-2008)



§ 52.03  CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.



   All residences or establishments requiring garbage pick-up shall supply
and maintain suitable 30-gallon containers lined with approved polyethylene
liners.  A maximum of four containers per customer will be permitted. All
producers of garbage shall be required to tie each bag with approved tie
prior to bi-weekly collections.  All ashes, sod, dirt, rocks, or manure
shall be placed in suitable rigid containers not to exceed 20 gallons nor
smaller than two and one-half gallons in size.  Polyethylene bags shall be
of appropriate strength and thickness as specified by the City Sanitation
Department.  Containers exceeding 50 pounds in weight each will not be
picked up.  Such wastes shall be reduced to lower weights for safe handling.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-3)  (Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed
10-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.04  NEWSPAPER, CARDBOARD BOXES, GLASS, PLASTIC, ALUMINUM, BRUSH AND
TREE TRIMMINGS; LEAVES.



   (A)   The recycling of newspaper, cardboard boxes, glass, plastic
and aluminum is encouraged. A city recycling center exists at the Rand Avenue
City Garage for the convenience of the residents. No illegal dumping of other
materials is permitted.



   (B)   Glass and aluminum cans are picked up at the curb on the first
and third Wednesday of each month. Containers should be clean and free of
plastic caps. Glass and aluminum should be placed in separate bags for ease
of handling.



   (C)   All brush and yard waste shall be cut in lengths not to exceed
six feet nor smaller than two and one-half feet. All small brush or chips
shall be placed in unlined containers at the curb. All tree removals or large
trimming accumulations shall be placed at the front property line for
removal; however, where tree removals or large trimming accumulations result
from the work of private contractors, such contractors shall be required to
dispose of their own accumulations of brush and trash.



   (D)   Yard waste will be picked up for the north end of town (Cook
North) on Tuesdays. For the south end (Tebbs South) will be picked up on
Thursdays.



   (E)   All leaves shall be placed for collection from October 1 to
December 1, leaves at the curb for weekly collection in open piles free of
vines and limbs.



(Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed 10-8-2008)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 52.05  HEAVY AND SPECIAL TRASH PICK-UP.



   (A)   The city, at its discretion and to the extent it deems
feasible in consideration of available equipment, personnel, and disposal
facilities, shall provide pick-up and disposal of heavy and special trash for
premises within the city, provided that the procedures, terms, and conditions
of this section are complied with, as follows.



      (1)   Requests for heavy or special trash pick-up.  Heavy or
special trash as defined under § 52.01 will be picked up only by special
arrangement and upon request submitted to and approved by the City Manager or
his or her designee.  The request must specify the type and quantity of
heavy or special trash for which collection is sought, and should be
submitted at least three working days in advance of the proposed time of
collection.



      (2)   Time of pick-up.  An approximate time for heavy or
special pick-up shall be arranged and agreed upon between the requestor and
the City Manager or his or her designee when the request is submitted and
approved.  Ordinarily, pick-up will be provided only during normal working
hours of Sanitation Department employees.  The requestor shall be
responsible for having all items or materials properly placed and available
for pick-up at the indicated time, and upon failure to do so shall
nevertheless be liable for payment of applicable fees as hereafter provided
unless specific notice to cancel the pick-up is given to the City Manager or
his or her designee prior to the time that a truck is dispatched to make the
pick-up.



      (3)   Placement for pick-up.  Items or materials to be
collected under this section shall be placed at the curb or in any other
location as directed by the City Manager or his or her designee.  Heavy or
special trash items or materials shall not be placed for pick-up along with
regular collection service refuse unless specifically so authorized by the
Superintendent.



      (4)   Service charges.



         (a)   For collection and disposal of heavy or special
trash, the requestor must pay to the city the following service charges:



            1.   For junk stoves, refrigerators, freezers,
water heaters, washers, dryers, or equivalent heavy appliances - all
refrigerators and freezers shall be free of freon - $10 per item;



            2.   For brush, shrubbery, tree limbs, dirt,
gravel, and similar materials - $25 per truckload or fraction thereof;



            3.   For other items or materials requiring
special pick-up under this section - $75 per truckload or fraction thereof
subject also to any additional charges as may be applicable under division
(A)(5) below;



            4.   For collection from each business or other
commercial site which operates under a wholesale or retail sale permit and is
not an industrial site, a monthly minimum charge shall be the following:



 


Dumpster Rates




2 cubic yards

 

$25 month




3 cubic yards

 

$45 month




4 cubic yards

 

$60 month




6 cubic yards

 

$65 month




8 cubic yards

 

$105 month



If more than one pickup per week is required, the customer shall pay the
calculated fee for multiple collections



 



            5.   For collection from an industrial site, fees
shall be determined as appropriate for the type and volume of waste.



         (b)   Charges owing under this division (A)(4) or under
division (A)(5) below shall be paid prior to collection unless otherwise
authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee, and shall be deposited
in the General Fund.



      (5)   Hazardous materials or special handling.  The City
Manager or his or her designee may, in his or her full discretion, refuse to
provide pick-up service for heavy or special trash which includes any
hazardous materials which would require special equipment or personnel in
excess of the normal crew complement of a collection truck, which must be
made other than during normal working hours, or which would otherwise require
any special handling or disposal methods.  Alternatively, the City Manager
or his or her designee may accept the items or materials, but as a condition
shall require the requestor to pay any additional costs so incurred by the
city over and above the charges applicable under division (A)(4) above.



      (6)   Regular heavy or special trash service; contracts.  In
the case of any business, industry, construction contractor, institution or
other person who would require heavy or special trash pick-up on a more or
less regular or long-term basis, the City Council may enter into a contract
with the person to have the service rendered by the city.  The contract may
stipulate requirements, procedures, charges, or other special provisions
which differ from or are supplementary to those otherwise set forth in and
applicable under this section, and any such stipulations of the contract
shall prevail over any conflicting provisions of this section.



   (B)   The implementation and continuation of the heavy and special
trash pick-up program as provided in this section shall be at such time as
determined and directed by the City Council, and the service may be suspended
or discontinued by order of the City Council whenever it considers it in the
best interests of the city to do so.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-7)  (Ord. 14G-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 1993-1, passed -
-1993; Ord. 1994-8, passed  7-12-1994; Ord. 2008-7, passed 10-8-2008) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.06  ALTERNATIVE DISPOSAL METHODS.



   Any other method of solid waste disposal not covered by these rules
shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his or her designee for the purpose
of evaluating and establishing a proper method of handling special disposal
methods.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-8)  (Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed
10-8-2008)



§ 52.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the City Manager or his or
her designee.



(1985 Code, § 6-2-9)  (Ord. 2-1971, passed - -1971; Ord. 2008-7, passed
10-8-2008)



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   General regulations; sewer connection required



   53.03   Private sewage disposal systems



Connection, Use, and Discharge of Wastes



   53.15   Connection permit and fee; costs of installation;
indemnification of city



   53.16   Building sewer design and construction requirements



   53.17   Discharges limited to storm/combined sewers



   53.18   Prohibited discharges



   53.19   Regulation of discharges; powers of Superintendent



   53.20   Exercise of Superintendent’s discretionary powers;
procedure



   53.21   Measurement and testing of industrial wastes



   53.22   Managing wastewater flows; existing customers and wholesale
customers



   53.23   Capacity certificates



Rates and Charges



   53.35   Definitions



   53.36   Rates based on volumetric water usage; minimum charge



   53.37   Special contract services



   53.38   Use of water not discharged to sewage system; rate adjustment



   53.39   Residential users summer sprinkling credit



   53.40   Billing procedure



   53.41   Annual rate review



   53.42   Bylaws and regulations



Administration and Enforcement



   53.55   Authority to inspect sewer installations; property access;
indemnity



   53.56   Special agreement to accept prohibited or regulated wastes



   53.57   Enforcement procedure; violations



   53.58   Interlocal agreements



   53.59   Preservation of existing agreements with private sewer users




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   B.O.D.(BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.  The liquid
waste or liquid-borne waste resulting from any commercial, manufacturing, or
industrial operation or process.



   INSPECTOR.  The person or persons duly authorized by the city, through
its City Council, to inspect and approve the installation of building sewers
and their connection to the public sewer system.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in the public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch
in any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of
the sanitary drainage system inside the walls of any building, which receives
the discharge from soil or waste stacks and branches and conveys the same to
a point three feet outside the building walls where it connects with its
respective building sewer.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  The waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories,
sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, basement drains, garage floor
drains, bars, soda fountains, cuspidors, refrigerator drips, drinking
fountains, stable floor drains, and all other water-carried wastes except
industrial wastes.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with any ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN (STORM SEWER).  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of the municipal sewage works of
the city or his or her authorized deputy, agent, or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-1)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 53.02  GENERAL REGULATIONS; SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste; or to discharge to any
natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.  The owner of all houses, buildings, or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or
right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly
with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that
the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.  Where a public
sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of this
section, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of § 53.03.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-2)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Definitions.  Terms as used in this section have the same
meanings as those ascribed to the terms as defined in § 53.01.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-1)



   (B)   Connection to private system in absence of public sewer. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provision of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-2)



   (C)   Construction permit required; fee; inspection of work. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent.  The
application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other
information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent.  A permit and
inspection fee of $25 shall be paid to the city at the time the application
is filed.  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent.  He or she shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before
any underground portions are covered.  The inspection shall be made within
24 hours of the receipt of notice by the Superintendent.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-3)



   (D)   Design and layout requirements.  The type, capacities,
location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with
all recommendations of the State Board of Health.  No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities unless written approval by the county Health Officer or authorized
assistant is filed with the Superintendent.  No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-4)



   (E)   Abandonment of private system.  At such time as a public
sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system as provided in this chapter, a direct connection of the building sewer
shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean
bank-run gravel or dirt.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-5)



   (F)   Maintenance of private system.  The owner shall operate and
maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times, at no expense to the city.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-6)



   (G)   Additional powers of Health Officer.  No statement contained
in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-7)



   (H)   Violations; notice to abate.  Any person found to be
violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City Council
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.  For the purposes of administering this section, the
Superintendent, the Inspector, or a police officer shall promptly submit to
the City Council a report of any person or activity which they believe to be
in violation of this chapter, including a statement of the facts and
circumstances necessary to substantiate the allegation.  The City Council
shall direct the Superintendent, Inspector, or police officer, within 48
hours following the expiration of the compliance period stated in the notice,
to inspect or otherwise investigate the matter to determine that the
violation has been corrected and has ceased.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-8)



   (I)   Penal liability.  If the City Council  finds that any person
has continued any violation beyond the time limit provided for in the notice,
the City Council shall issue or cause to be issued and served upon the
violator a citation for violation of this chapter.  Any violator on
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount as set forth in § 10.99. 
Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.  In addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the city by reason of the violation.



(1985 Code, § 4-1-9)



(Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984,
passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99




CONNECTION, USE, AND DISCHARGE OF WASTES




§ 53.15  CONNECTION PERMIT AND FEE; COSTS OF INSTALLATION; INDEMNIFICATION
OF CITY.



   (A)   No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with
or opening into, use alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Clerk-Treasurer. 
The owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city.  The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Inspector.



   (B)   There shall be six classes of building sewer permits based
upon the size of metered water service.  All charges shall be paid by the
owner within the city to the Clerk-Treasurer at the time the application is
filed.  The charges paid by all owners within the city and out of the city
shall be as follows:



 


Meter Size

 

City

 

Out of City



5/8-inch to 3/4-inch water meter
 

$775

 

$3,500



1-inch water meter
 

$1,937

 

$4,500



1 and 1/2-inch water meter
 

$4,417

 

$6,980



2-inch water meter
 

$7,750

 

$10,313



3-inch water meter
 

$17,825

 

$20,388



All water meter sizes greater than 3 inches will be negotiated, but not less
than
 

$17,825

 

$20,388




 



   (C)   Where the premises will discharge sewage in addition to its
metered water service or from a source other than a metered water service,
the building permit fee shall be the same as for a water meter size which
generally produces a comparable volume and rate of discharge.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-3)



   (D)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.  The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-4)



(Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 8-1996,
passed 5-15-1996; Ord. 2003-12, passed 12-29-2003; Ord. 2004-11, passed
11-10-2004; Ord. 2006-2, passed 8-30-2006; Ord. 2008-5, passed 12-10-2008) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.16  BUILDING SEWER DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Building sewers must be designed, constructed, and installed in
accordance with the following regulations.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Inspector,
to meet all requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of other applicable rules and regulations of the city.  In the
absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and
W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.



   (D)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an evaluation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (E)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (F)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of other applicable rules and regulations
of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9.  All the connections
shall be made gastight and watertight.  Any deviation from the prescribed
procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before
installation.



   (G)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer.  The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Inspector or his or her representative.



   (H)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.



   (I)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.  All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



   (J)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   (K)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control manhole together with the necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.  The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent.  The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-5)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.17  DISCHARGES LIMITED TO STORM/COMBINED SEWERS.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer.  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
sewers specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.  Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged with the approval of the
Superintendent to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-6)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.18  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:



   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to interfere with or injure any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the treatment plant;



   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; and/or



   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of the size,
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
flesh, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-7)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.19  REGULATION OF DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that the wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; would have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream; can endanger life, limb, or public property;
or constitute a nuisance.  In forming his or her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to
the factors as quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and 
velocities in the sewers; the nature of the sewage treatment process capacity
of the treatment plant, and the degree of treatability of the wastes in the
plant; and other pertinent factors.



   (B)   The substances which may be prohibited, restricted, or
regulated at the discretion of the Superintendent are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F
and 150°F (0°C and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (garbage
grinders of three-fourths hp or more are subject to inspection and approval
by the Superintendent);



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or
not;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor-producing substances, in concentrations exceeding limits established
by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of state, federal, or other public agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharges to the receiving waters;



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the half-life or
concentration exceeding the limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (9)   Any materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids,
such as, but not limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues, or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate;



         (b)   Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution;



         (c)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or
chlorine requirement in the quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the treatment works; and/or



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs as defined in § 53.01.



      (10)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the treatment process employed, or are
treatable only to the degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet
the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over the receiving waters.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-8)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.20  EXERCISE OF SUPERINTENDENT’S DISCRETIONARY POWERS; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   If the Superintendent discovers or determines that any waters
or wastes are being discharged, are proposed to be discharged, or are likely
to be discharged by any individual sewer use, or by any identifiable class of
sewer users, or by any and all sewer users in general and in the aggregate,
and the waters or wastes contain the substances, possess the characteristics,
or are being or will be discharged in such quantities as enumerated in §
53.19, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent do or may have any of
the deleterious effects described in § 53.19, he or she shall issue and
cause to be served or promulgated a written order to the individual user,
class of users, or all users in general, as he or she may deem most suitable
to alleviate or prevent the problem, in the manner hereafter provided.  In
the order, the Superintendent may:



      (1)   Prohibit the continued, proposed, or anticipated
discharge of the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition, or a
means of controlling and equalizing quantities and rates of discharge, as a
requisite for permitting further or future discharge of the waste, and
providing also that design and installation of equipment to accomplish these
purposes be subject to his or her review and approval; and/or



      (3)   Prohibit or restrict the further or future discharge of
the wastes, subject to such deadlines as he or she may deem necessary and
fair, pending the execution of an agreement between the user and the City
Council providing for the payment by the user of extra fees or charges to
cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes to the extent that
the same are not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, as provided by
§§ 53.35 through 53.42.



   (B)   A written order issued pursuant to this section shall state or
indicate the individual users or class of users to which it is intended to
apply, or that it applies to all users generally; the specific substance,
character, or quantity of discharge to which the order applies; the specific
nature of the restriction or regulation being imposed by the order; the date
and time when the order shall take effect, which shall allow a reasonable
time for compliance unless any continuation of the discharge would pose an
imminent and substantial risk of harm to persons, property, or the
environment; and that the order is issued by the Superintendent under
authority of this section and failure to comply will result in penalties or
other costs as provided in this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-9)



   (C)   A written order issued pursuant to this section shall not be
effective upon any sewer user until it is served or promulgated, which may be
done in any of the following manners as is most expeditious in the particular
case.  The order may be served or promulgated by:



      (1)   A copy of the order being delivered by the
Superintendent to the user or his or her agent in person;



      (2)   A copy of the order being sent by registered mail with
return certificate of delivery, which certificate shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the order was received by the user or his or her
agent;



      (3)   A copy of the order being enclosed with the next sewer
charge billing sent to all users to whom the order applies, payment of the
bill being presumptive evidence that the order was received;



      (4)   Publication at least one time in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city of either a public notice setting forth the
order, or a news story which includes all of the substantive information
contained in the order as previously described, the publication in either
form being deemed evidence that the issuance and character of the order are
matters of common public knowledge;



      (5)   Whenever application is made for a new sewer connection
permit as provided in § 53.15, the Inspector, prior to approving and signing
the application, shall attach thereto copies of any orders issued pursuant to
this section which would apply to the use of the public sewer by the
applicant, and the subsequent execution and filing of the application shall
be presumptive evidence that the order was received by the user or his or her
agent; and/or



      (6)   Serving specific notice of violation upon the user in
the manner provided by § 53.57.



   (D)   When an order has been issued by the Superintendent, and has
been served or promulgated in the manner herein provided, any person to whom
the order applies and who discharges or continues to discharge any sewage to
the public sewer in contravention of the order shall be considered in
violation of this chapter, and subject to immediate citation and prosecution
therefor, whether or not the notice procedure prescribed by § 53.57 has been
invoked.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-10)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 53.21  MEASUREMENT AND TESTING OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   All measures, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole.  In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted
methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.  The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises is appropriate, or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-11)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 53.22  MANAGING WASTEWATER FLOWS; EXISTING CUSTOMERS AND WHOLESALE
CUSTOMERS.



   (A)   No customer of the city’s sewer utility shall undertake any
activity that would serve to permanently increase by more than 150 gallons
per day the anticipated wastewater flow to the city’s sewage works over and
above the level of wastewater flow from the customer as it existed on
1-1-2006, without first obtaining approval from the city.  Intermittent
fluctuations in a customer’s wastewater flow do not constitute activities
producing a permanent increase in wastewater flow.



   (B)   No person shall construct or allow to be constructed any
mains, laterals, valves, or other SEWAGE WORKS as that term is defined in
I.C. 36-9-1-8 (collectively “sewage works”) that will result in an
increase in wastewater flows to the city system by more than 150 gallons per
day without first obtaining approval from the city.



   (C)   Permission shall not be granted pursuant to divisions (A) and
(B) above unless the customer first pays to the city the standard city system
development charge per equivalent dwelling unit or portion thereof
established pursuant to § 53.15(B) for the proposed new flow.



   (D)   Absent a written and currently effective wholesale contract
between the wholesale customer and the city, the city will not accept the
wastewater from any customer of a wholesale customer except under either of
the following conditions:



      (1)   Unless the customer was already connected to the
wholesale customer and already contributing wastewater to the city system as
of 9-1-2006; or



      (2)   Unless the connection is between the wholesale customer
and a single-family residence abutting the wholesale customer’s sewer main
which main has been duly permitted and constructed as of 9-1-2006, and the
city is informed of the connection and is paid its standard system
development charge per equivalent dwelling unit or portion thereof
established pursuant to § 53.15(B) for the new flow.



   (E)   In the event of a contract between a wholesale customer and
the city, the term of which expires after the date of this section, the city
will not accept the wastewater from any customer of a wholesale customer
unless the customer was already connected to the wholesale customer and
already contributing wastewater to the city system as of the expiration of
the term of the agreement.



   (F)   The city will not enter a wholesale contract with any entity
that would utilize the city’s capacity in the South Dearborn Treatment
Plant unless the contract assures that the city will collect its full system
development charge per equivalent dwelling unit for all of the capacity
subject to the agreement.



   (G)   The city will not enter wholesale contracts with any entity
unless the city is satisfied that the collection system of the wholesale
customer has been designed and constructed so as to prevent spills or
overflows of untreated wastewater into the city under reasonably foreseeable
circumstances.



(Ord. 2006-3, passed 8-30-2006; Ord. 2006-8, passed 9-19-2006)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 53.23  CAPACITY CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   A capacity certificate pursuant to 327 I.A.C. 3-6-4(c) shall
not be issued unless the person seeking a permit to construct sewage works
has first executed a contract with the city pertaining to the proposed sewage
works.



   (B)   A copy of the contract referenced in division (A) above must
be recorded with the County Recorder with respect to all property to be
served by the proposed sewage works prior to the issuance of the capacity
certificate.



   (C)   The contract provided in division (A) above must include terms
obligating that no customer will be connected to the proposed facilities
unless the proposed customer first pays to the city its standard system
development charge per equivalent dwelling unit calculated pursuant to §
53.15(B).



   (D)   A certificate shall not be issued unless the City Civil
Engineer has determined that the proposed sewage works for which a
certificate is sought will not cause overflowing or bypassing in the
collection system through which the wastewater will flow and will not
increase the frequency or degree of introduction of foreign substances into
the city.



   (E)   The construction of any sewage works for which a permit is
required from IDEM and from which wastewater will flow through the city
collection system and utilize the city’s defined capacity at the South
Dearborn Treatment Plant requires a certificate from the city pursuant to 327
I.A.C. 3-6-4(c).



   (F)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
construct sewage works for which a certificate from the city is required as
set forth in this section without first obtaining the certificate.



   (G)   Any person connecting or allowing to be connected any
properties to sewage works constructed in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine of $2,500 per day for each day each property remains
connected.



   (H)   The city is hereby authorized to seek any injunctive relief as
may be necessary to ensure the disconnection of sewage works constructed in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 2006-4, passed 8-30-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 53.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  The liquid waste resulting from any commercial,
manufacturing, or industrial operation or process.



   SANITARY WASTE.  Waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks,
bathtubs, showers, household laundries, basement drains, garage floor drains,
bars, soda fountains, refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, and all other
water-carried drains and wastes, except industrial wastes.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-1)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 53.36  RATES BASED ON VOLUMETRIC WATER USAGE; MINIMUM CHARGE.



   (A)   Rates and charges shall be collected for the use of and
services rendered by the municipal sewage works from the owners of each lot,
parcel of land, or building that is connected with and uses the works by or
through any part of the sewerage system of the city, or otherwise discharges
sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water, or other liquids, either directly
or indirectly, into the sanitary sewerage system of the city.  Rates and
charges shall be in an amount determinable as follows.



      (1)   Sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity
of water used on or in the property or premises as measured by the water
meter there in use, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.  Sewage
service rates for all users within the city, out of the city but in the
state, and out of the state shall be as follows:



 

Quantity of Water Used per Month
 
City Rate per 1,000 Gallons
 
Out of City, but in State, Rate per 1,000 Gallons
 
Out of State Rate per 1,000 Gallons


First 2,000 gallons
 
$4.37
 
$6.56
 
$8.20


Next 8,000 gallons
 
$3.15
 
$4.73
 
$5.91


Quantity of Water Used per Month
 
City Rate per 1,000 Gallons
 
Out of City, but in State, Rate per 1,000 Gallons
 
Out of State Rate per 1,000 Gallons


Next 10,000 gallons
 
$2.92
 
$4.38
 
$5.48


Over 20,000 gallons
 
$2.18
 
$3.27
 
$4.09



 



      (2)   However, the minimum charge for sewage treatment service
for any user, whether a metered water consumer, a flat rate consumer, or not
a water customer, shall be not less than $8.74 per month for all users within
the city, not less than $13.12 for all users out of the city but in the
state, and not less than $16.40 for all users out of the state.



      (3)   For those users whose wastewater has a greater strength
of toxicity than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the
normal user charge, will be collected.  Any wastewater that has a
biochemical oxygen demand (hereinafter “B.O.D.”) or suspended solids
(hereinafter “SS”) over 250 milligrams per liter (hereinafter “mg/l”)
is considered excessive.  Any wastewater with a pH below 5.5 standard units
(hereinafter “SU”) and above 9.5 SU is considered toxic.



         (a)   1.   The following surcharge rates shall apply
to each user inside the city that has received permission from the municipal
sewage works to contribute excessive strength sewage:



 

Wastewater
 
Surcharge Rate


B.O.D.
 
$0.25 per pound


SS
 
$0.10 per pound


pH
 
$685.00 per day



 



            2.   The surcharge rates for all users out of the
city but in the state that have received permission from the municipal sewage
works to contribute excessive strength sewage shall be 150% of the above
charges.  The surcharge rate for all users out of the state that have
received permission from the municipal sewage works to contribute excessive
strength sewage shall be 125% of the surcharge rate for all users out of the
city but in the state.



         (b)   1.   The excessive strength surcharge will be
based on the following formula, with the total applied to the monthly bill of
the affected user:



         A(C-250) + B(D-250) x .00834 x E - Surcharge Payment
($/month)



            2.   Where formula components are as follows:



               a.   A = Surcharge rate for B.O.D., in
$/pound;



               b.   B = Surcharge rate of SS, in $/pound;



               c.   C = User’s average B.O.D.
concentration in mg/l;



               d.   D = User’s average SS concentration
in mg/l; and



               e.   E = User’s monthly flow to sewage
works per 1,000 gallons.



         (c)   No reduction in sewage service charges, fees, or
taxes shall be permitted because of the fact that certain wastes discharged
into the sewage works contain less than 250 mg/l of B.O.D. or less than 250
mg/l of SS.



         (d)   A toxicity surcharge will based on a flat fee of
$500 per day for each daily pH violation for all users within the city, 150%
of the amount for all users out of the city but in the state, and 125% of the
amount for all users out of the city but in the state for all users out of
the state.  Discharge flow with a pH below 5.5 SU and above 9.5 SU is
considered a violation.



            1.   The toxicity surcharge shall be based on the
following formula, with the total applied to the monthly bill of the affected
user:



         F x G - Surcharge Payment ($/month)



            2.   Where formula components are as follows:



               a.   F = Number of days of pH violation; and



               b.   G = Surcharge rate of pH violation.



      (4)   The municipal sewage works shall maintain financial
records to accurately account for expenditures for operation and maintenance
of the sewer system, including normal replacement costs.  The municipal
sewage works shall review not less than annually the sewage works, debt
service obligations, and sewer service charges to accomplish the following:



         (a)   Generate sufficient revenues to offset costs
associated with the proper operation and maintenance of the sewage system and
to meet debt service requirements;



         (b)   Maintain an equitable distribution of operation
and maintenance costs among users of the treatment system;



         (c)   Adjust billings to reflect charges such as, but
not limited to, administrative costs of monitoring flow and laboratory cost
for analysis; and



         (d)   Adjust billings to reflect costs of equipment or
facilities required to correct ordinance violations.  These costs may be
billed to parties responsible for the violations in a lump sum or assessed as
a monthly surcharge.



   (B)   The quantity of water obtained from sources other than the
water utility serving the city and discharged into the public sanitary
sewerage system may be determined by the city in the manner as the proper
officers of the city shall elect, and the sewage services may be billed at
the above rates.  In the event a lot, parcel of land, or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste, water, or other liquids either
directly or indirectly into the city’s sanitary sewage system is a user of
water supplied by the water utility serving the city, and in addition uses
water obtained from another source, or is not a user of water supplied by the
water utility serving the city, and the water used thereon or therein is not
measured by a meter or is measured by a meter unacceptable to the city, then
the amount of water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the
city in order to ascertain the rates of charge; or the owner or other
interested party, at his or her expense, may install and maintain meters,
weirs, volumetric measuring devices, or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the city for determination of the sewage discharge.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-2)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 1-1992, passed -
-1992; Ord. 1994-4, passed  3-28-1994; Ord. 1997-12, passed - -1997; Ord.
2000-12, passed 11-8-2000; Ord. 2003-12, passed 12-29-2003; Ord. 2008-5,
passed 12-10-2008)



§ 53.37  SPECIAL CONTRACT SERVICES.



   Municipal sewage collection and treatment services shall be provided in
accordance with the rate schedule subject to the terms of the written
contract as shall be first approved by resolution of the Board of Public
Works and Safety and ordinance of the City Council  authorizing the Mayor to
execute, on behalf of the city and the municipal sewage works, which, after
execution by all parties, shall be ratified by City Council and two  copies
maintained by the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection as follows: Valley
Rural Utility Company for a period of four years providing special terms and
conditions for rate changes, metering, billing, collection and other matters
notwithstanding provisions of this code.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-3)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 13-1981, passed
12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 1997-12, passed - -1997)



§ 53.38  USE OF WATER NOT DISCHARGED TO SEWAGE SYSTEM; RATE ADJUSTMENT.



   In the event a lot, parcel of land, or building discharges sanitary
sewage, industrial waste, or other liquids into the city’s sanitary sewage
system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in excess of 50,000
gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the city that a
portion of water as measured by the water meter does not and cannot enter the
sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other interested party shall
install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring devices, or any
adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the city for the
determination of sewage discharge.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-4)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.39  RESIDENTIAL USERS SUMMER SPRINKLING CREDIT.



   Residential users will be billed for sewage service in accordance with
the rates set out in § 53.36, except that bills rendered during the months
of May through September shall be determined using the average water
consumption for the preceding period of October through April.  However,
where it is shown to the satisfaction of the City Council that the consumers
have not used more metered water during the months of May through September
for sprinkling purposes, the sewer users shall not be eligible for the
sprinkling credit, but rather will be billed on actual metered water used.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-5)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 53.40  BILLING PROCEDURE.



   The rates and charges shall be prepared and billed by the city and
shall be collected in the manner provided by law and ordinance.  The rates
and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants occupying the property
served upon request by the owner(s) in writing, but the billing shall in no
way relieve any owner from liability in the event the payment is not made
as  required.  The owner(s) of properties served which are occupied by
tenants shall have the right to examine the collection records of the city
for the purpose of determining whether the rates and charges have been paid
by the tenants, provided that the examination shall be made at the office in
which the records are kept and during the hours that the office is open for
business.  Billing for sewage rates and charges shall be made monthly and
the rates and charges, except as hereinbefore provided, shall be based upon
the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises as the same is
measured by the water meter there in use, and the metered water usage shall
be determined from the meter readings as furnished by the water utility
serving the city.  All sewer utility customers not also a customer of the
city’s electric utility shall pay at the time of establishing service an
advance deposit of:  $125 for a five-eighths inch to three-fourths inch
water meter; an amount equivalent to two times the actual or expected average
monthly bill for sewer utility service but not less than $125 for all meters
larger than three- fourths inch.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-6)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984; Ord.
2009-13, passed 11-12-2009)



§ 53.41  ANNUAL RATE REVIEW.



   Prior to May 1 of each year, the Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare and
present to the Board of Public Works and Safety and the City Council
accounting of operation and maintenance expenses and debt service of the
sewage system for the immediately preceding calendar year, and the City
Council shall upon receiving the accounting effect any change in the monthly
sewer rates and charges necessary to produce revenues proportionate to costs
of each user.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-7)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 53.42  BYLAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   The proper officers of the city shall make and enforce such bylaws and
regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and
efficient management of the city’s sewage system, including the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewer system and
for the regulation, collecting, rebating, and refunding of rates and charges.



(1985 Code, § 6-8-8)  (Ord. 2-1962, passed 2-26-1962; Ord. 5-1977, passed
6-14-1977; Ord. 13-1981, passed 12-8-1981; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 53.55  AUTHORITY TO INSPECT SEWER INSTALLATIONS; PROPERTY ACCESS;
INDEMNITY.



   (A)   The Superintendent, Inspector, or other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.  However, the Superintendent or his or her
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any industrial
processes beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers, or waterways, or facilities for waste treatment. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above,
the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to a city employee, and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property
by city employees and against liability claims and demands for the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-12)



   (B)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement.  All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-13)



(Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 53.56  SPECIAL AGREEMENT TO ACCEPT PROHIBITED OR REGULATED WASTES.



   No regulation contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor, by the industrial concern.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-14)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 53.57  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE; VIOLATIONS.



   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be
served by the City Council with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
the notice, permanently cease all violations.  For the purposes of
administering this section, the Superintendent or the Inspector shall
promptly submit to the City Council a report of any person or activity and
circumstances necessary to substantiate the allegation.  The notice of
violation provided for in this section shall not be required to be issued by
the City Council when the violation is a violation of an order which has been
previously issued by the Superintendent and has been otherwise served or
promulgated pursuant to § 53.20.  The City Council shall direct the
Superintendent or the Inspector, within 48 hours following the expiration of
the compliance period stated in the notice, to inspect or otherwise
investigate the matter to determine that the violation has been corrected and
has ceased.  If the City Council finds that any person has continued any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in the notice, or has violated
an order of the Superintendent previously served or promulgated pursuant to
§ 53.20, the City Council shall issue or cause to be issued and served upon
the violator a citation for violation of this chapter.  Any violator on
conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with § 10.99.  Each day in
which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  In
addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
city by reason of the violation.



(1985 Code, § 6-7-15)  (Ord. 5-1973, passed 11-13-1973; Ord. 9-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.58  INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS.



   The provisions of that contract entered into between the city and the
Cities of Aurora and Lawrenceburg and the South Dearborn Regional Sewer
District pursuant to Ordinance 11-1971 of the city, subject to any amendments
in the agreement thereafter made with the mutual consent of the parties, are
hereby reaffirmed, continued, and incorporated by reference into this
section.  Two copies of the agreement shall be on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer and available for public inspection.



(1985 Code, § 6-6-2)  (Ord. 11-1971, passed 12-29-1971)



§ 53.59  PRESERVATION OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS WITH PRIVATE SEWER USERS.



   The provisions of any agreements in effect between the city and any
private person or corporation respecting the availability of sewer service,
acceptance and treatment of sewage, debt service obligations, or similar
matters related to the city’s sewer system are hereby re-affirmed,
continued, and incorporated by reference into this section.  Two copies of
any such agreements shall be on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and
available for public inspection.



(1985 Code, § 6-6-3)



CHAPTER 54:  WATER



Section



Rules and Regulations



   54.01   Regulations and rates to be posted in utility office and
filed with Public Service Commission



   54.02   Initiation of water service; deposit



   54.03   Consumer’s water system design requirements and operating
regulations



   54.04   Billing procedure; discontinuance for nonpayment



   54.05   Inaccessible or inaccurate meters



   54.06   Multi-family residences



   54.07   Nonmetered water



   54.08   Discontinuance of service



   54.09   Rights granted to North Dearborn Water Corporation



Rates and Charges



   54.20   Obligation to impose rates and charges



   54.21   Water rates and charges; to provide reasonable return on
investment



   54.22   Schedule of rates and charges



   54.23   Overdue bills; collection charge



   54.24   Rates and charges to be sufficient in lieu of taxes and to
provide reasonable return on investment



   54.25   Responsibility for rates and charges



Cross-reference:



   Electric Utility, see Ch. 51



   Sewers, see Ch. 53



   Solid Waste, see Ch. 52




RULES AND REGULATIONS




§ 54.01  REGULATIONS AND RATES TO BE POSTED IN UTILITY OFFICE AND FILED
WITH PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION.



   A copy of all rates, rules, regulations, and policies under which water
service will be supplied by the municipal water utility shall be filed and
posted in the office of the municipal water utility of the city, and with the
State Public Service Commission.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-1)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)



§ 54.02  INITIATION OF WATER SERVICE; DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Persons desiring water service may make application therefor
as follows.



      (1)   Where no main extension required.  Persons desiring
water service which does not require an extension to the distribution system
of the municipal water utility shall make application for the service on
forms prescribed by the City Council available in the office of the water
utility.  Deposits as hereinafter provided may accompany the application.



      (2)   Where main extension is required.  Persons desiring
water service which requires an extension to the distribution system of the
water utility must petition the City Council for the service, and file the
petition in the office of the water utility.  The City Council shall take
action on the petition in accordance with the rules as hereinafter provided,
and notify the petitioner of the action taken.



         (a)   A petitioner for water main extensions shall enter
into an agreement with the city, acting by and through its City Council, and
deposit with the water utility the estimated cost of the main extensions
before the water utility will proceed with the installation of the
extension.  The estimated cost shall include all pipe, pipe fittings, and
valves.



         (b)   The water utility shall install the main.  When
the actual cost of the work has been determined, the water utility shall
refund to the petitioner the difference between the estimated cost and the
actual cost, if the former is greater.  If the actual cost is greater than
the deposit, the petitioner shall deposit the difference with the utility.



         (c)   No free main extensions may be provided by the
water utility, nor may any expenditures be made therefor from the Special
Waterworks Utility Fund which would cause the balance in the Fund to fall
below $25,000, for so long as the waterworks improvement bonds issued
pursuant to § 50.05 remain outstanding.



         (d)   The mains constructed to the water utility
distribution system shall become the property of the utility upon
installation.



   (B)   The water utility will locate the point to which service
connection will be made, and will furnish and run service pipe to the curb
line, inside line of sidewalk, or the customer’s property line, whichever
in the judgment of the utility will provide the most convenient, safest, and
satisfactory location for curb stop and service box.  The water utility
shall require from all applicants for service a cash deposit, equal to the
billing for the estimated amount of service to be used by the applicant for a
period of 60 days, as a guarantee against the nonpayment of bills for
service.  However, if the applicant is the owner of real property whose
credit is approved by the water utility, the water utility shall waive the
cash deposit.  The cash deposit minus any unpaid amounts for service
rendered the customer shall be returned upon the discontinuance of service.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-2)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)



§ 54.03  CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND OPERATING
REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Connection to and use of the water utility’s supply and
distribution system is governed by the following requirements and regulations.



      (1)   Shut-off valve required.  Each applicant for water
service shall furnish and have a shut-off valve installed inside each
building or tenement to control the flow of water inside the building in case
repairs are to be made on the plumbing of the building or tenement.



      (2)   Boilers; back-pressure valves.  In all cases where
services are connected directly to boilers or other hot water fixtures likely
to cause a back-pressure, a check valve must be placed in the service pipes,
and all damage done to meters by back-pressure from hot water shall be paid
by the customer.



      (3)   Auxiliary water supplies.  Whenever the utility water
supply is in any manner connected to an auxiliary water supply, water tank,
fire protection sprinkler system, or any other pipes or tanks not under
direct supervision of the utility or its personal representative, the
connection shall be made in accordance with all regulations governing same as
set out by the State Board of Health, and shall be subject to written
approval by the water utility.  The water utility shall have authority to
enforce State Board of Health regulations by disconnecting water service to
customers who do not comply fully with the rules and regulations.



      (4)   Obstruction or tampering with distribution system
prohibited.  No person may cover up or in any way interfere with any curb
box, valve box, or hydrant, and will be held responsible for any damages
done.  Consumers are positively forbidden from turning the water on or off
at any service pipe at the curb stop.  Water utility personnel shall furnish
turn-on and turn-off service to all customers as requested but the water
utility shall charge a fee for the service where circumstances warrant.  No
person other than an authorized waterworks employee shall at any time operate
any valves on the water distribution system of the water utility.  The
service shall be furnished by water utility personnel.



      (5)   Access to premises for inspection required.  A
representative delegated for the purpose by the water utility must have free
access at all reasonable hours to all parts of the premises to which water is
delivered for the purpose of inspection and examination of all pipes and
fixtures.



   (B)   The municipal water utility shall not be liable for damages
caused by defective piping and appliances on the customer’s premises.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-3)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)



§ 54.04  BILLING PROCEDURE; DISCONTINUANCE FOR NONPAYMENT.



   Bills shall be rendered monthly and/or quarterly and must be paid at
the office of the water utility during business  hours.  If a bill is not
paid within 15 days from due date thereof as stated in the bill, the customer
shall be considered delinquent in payment, and the water utility may at any
time thereafter and prior to the payment thereof, after serving notice, cut
off and discontinue service.  Failure to receive a bill shall not entitle
the customer to net bill if he or she fails to make payment within the 15-day
period, nor shall it affect the right of the water utility to cut off and
discontinue service for nonpayment as above provided.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-4)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)



§ 54.05  INACCESSIBLE OR INACCURATE METERS.



   (A)   The water utility reserves the right to  render estimated
monthly and/or quarterly water bills to any and all customers based on the
average monthly use of the customers, when, after reasonable effort has been
made to gain access to the water meter for the purpose of reading same to
ascertain the water service charge on the meter, the meter reading could not
be obtained.  Payment of the estimated water bills does not in any way
restrict the right of the water utility to render corrected water bills
covering the period of time included in the estimated bills and to collect
the proper amounts as shown by a subsequent reading of the meters, less the
amount paid on the estimated bills by the customer.  If the amount paid on
estimated bills exceeds the proper amount as computed from a subsequent
reading of the meter or by negotiation, then a proper credit or refund shall
be given the customer involved.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-5)



   (B)   Whenever it is discovered that a meter is not recording
correctly, adjustment shall be made covering the inaccuracy in accordance
with applicable rules and standards of the Public Service Commission as may
be in force and effect from time to time.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-6)



(Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed - -1959)



§ 54.06  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES.



   The water utility may require that customers in apartment houses,
duplex flats, or double houses be metered separately in cases where a meter
is presently installed and consumption is less than combined minimums for all
customers.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-7)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)



§ 54.07  NONMETERED WATER.



   No persons, except those authorized by the Superintendent, shall take
water from any public or private hydrant, street washer, faucet, hose-pipe,
or fountain, except for fire purposes and for the use of the Fire Department
in case of fire; or in any way use or take water for private use which is
supplied by the water utility without first paying for the same and receiving
a water utility receipt therefor.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-8)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed -
-1959)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 54.08  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Consumers vacating premises must give notice at the water
utility office in order that the water may be turned off.  Customers will be
held responsible for all water charges until the notice is given.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-9)



   (B)   The water utility reserves the right to shut off the supply of
water, without notice, for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   For repair;



      (2)   For want of supply;



      (3)   For interference with any of the water utility’s
meters, equipment, or connections;



      (4)   For failure to comply with the terms of the contract;



      (5)   For violation of any of the rules and regulations
applicable to the service;



      (6)   For nonpayment of a bill when due; or



      (7)   For any other lawful reason.



   (C)   The water utility shall not be liable for damage because of
any interruption of the supply of water, nor shall the water utility be
responsible in damages for failure to supply water or for interruption of the
failure, if interruption is without willful default or negligence on its
part.  The water utility shall have the right to enforce any contract
notwithstanding any such discontinuance of service.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-10)  (Ord. 1-1959, passed 2-9-1959; Ord. 1A-1959, passed
- -1959)



§ 54.09  RIGHTS GRANTED TO NORTH DEARBORN WATER CORPORATION.



   The North Dearborn Water Corporation is granted permission to make all
necessary cuts in the streets in the city for the purpose of constructing and
maintaining a water distribution system as set forth in the plans prepared by
Sieco, Inc., and approved by the Farmers’ Home Administration, upon
condition that the North Dearborn Water Corporation furnish a location map of
the approximate location of the water system within the city, and that the
city also be furnished evidence by the contractor that the contracting firm
is insured by a public liability policy and that they further complete a
performance bond insuring the completion of their contract in a workmanlike
manner.



(1985 Code, § 6-4-11)  (Res. passed 12-7-1964; Ord. 9-1984, passed - -1984)




RATES AND CHARGES




§ 54.20  OBLIGATION TO IMPOSE RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The city shall establish, maintain, and collect reasonable and
just rates and charges for the facilities and service afforded and rendered
by its waterworks, in accordance with I.C. 8-1.5-3-8.



   (B)   So long as any of the bonds authorized under § 50.05 remain
outstanding, none of the facilities or services afforded or rendered by the
waterworks shall be furnished without a reasonable and just charge being made
therefor.



   (C)   The rates or charges so established shall apply to all
consumers of the service provided by the waterworks system, including service
rendered by the system to the city, and all revenues collected pursuant to
this section shall be deemed to be revenues of the waterworks.



(1985 Code, § 6-5-1)  (Ord. 100, passed 5-9-1955)



§ 54.21  WATER RATES AND CHARGES; TO PROVIDE REASONABLE RETURN ON
INVESTMENT.



   The rates herein approved shall provide for a reasonable return on the
water utility plant of the city, as provided for in I.C. 8-1.5-3-8(e).



(Ord. 2006-1, passed 7-12-2006)



§ 54.22  SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.



   There is hereby established for the use and service rendered by the
municipal waterworks system of the city a schedule of rates and charges as
follows.



   (A)   Metered usage.



 

Quantity per Month
 
Rate/1,000 Gallons


First 2,000 gallons
 
$4.374
 
$4.505
 
$4.640
 
$4.779


Next 8,000 gallons
 
$3.472
 
$3.576
 
$3.683
 
$3.793


Next 10,000 gallons
 
$2.628
 
$2.707
 
$2.788
 
$2.872


Next 30,000 gallons
 
$2.177
 
$2.242
 
$2.309
 
$2.378


Next 50,000 gallons
 
$1.746
 
$1.798
 
$1.852
 
$1.908


Over 100,000 gallons
 
$1.274
 
$1.312
 
$1.351
 
$1.392



 



   (B)   Minimum charge per month.  Each user shall pay a minimum
charge in accordance with the following applicable size of meter installed,
for which the user will be entitled to the quantity of water set out in the
above schedule of rates:



 

Size of Meter
 
Gallons Allowed /Month
 
Charge/Month


5/8-inch
 
2,000
 
$8.75
 
$9.01
 
$9.28
 
$9.56




3/4-inch
 
3,040
 
$12.36
 
$12.73
 
$13.11
 
$13.50


1-inch
 
5,670
 
$21.49
 
$22.13
 
$22.80
 
$23.48


1–1/2 inch
 
15,270
 
$50.37
 
$51.88
 
$53.44
 
$55.04


2-inch
 
32,160
 
$89.28
 
$91.95
 
$94.70
 
$97.54


3-inch
 
89,260
 
$196.66
 
$202.54
 
$208.60
 
$214.87


4-inch
 
200,060
 
$342.89
 
$353.13
 
$363.68
 
$374.65


6-inch
 
558,880
 
$800.03
 
$823.90
 
$848.44
 
$874.12




 



   (C)   Service outside of municipality.  Service shall be provided
outside of the city to users upon such terms, conditions, and rates as
negotiated and agreed in writing which shall provide a cost which in no event
may be less than charged to a municipal user or result in any negative
impact, cost, expense, or other effect to the utility and/or city.



   (D)   Fire protection.  Service under this rate shall consist of
standby service for fire emergencies, and all water taken through the
connections shall be restricted to fire emergencies only.  The utility
reserves the right to install flow detectors from time to time to see that
the service is restricted to firefighting purposes.



      (1)   Sprinklers.



 

Size of Connection
 
Rate per Connection/Year


6-inch
 
$640.58
 
$659.80
 
$679.59
 
$699.98


8-inch
 
$1,137.78
 
$1,171.91
 
$1,207.07
 
$1,243.28



 



      (2)   Hydrant rental.



 

Type of Hydrant
 
Rate/Year


Public
 
$640.58
 
$659.80
 
$679.59
 
$699.98


Private
 
$640.58
 
$659.80
 
$679.59
 
$699.98



 



   (E)   Valley Rural Utility Corporation.  A settlement agreement was
signed on 10-31-2005.  The rates are effective on November 1 of the year
listed to October 31 of the next year.  The term of the agreement ends
10-31-2009.



 

Metered Rates
(per 1,000 gallons) per Month
 
2006
 
2007
 
2008
 
2009


First 9,000,000 gallons
 
$1.08
 
$1.11
 
$1.15
 
–


Over 9,000,000 gallons
 
$5.832
 
$5.832
 
$5.832
 
–



 



   (F)   Temporary users.  Water furnished to temporary users, such as
contractors, circuses, and the like, shall be charged on the basis of the
above schedule of rates as estimated by the City Manager.



   (G)   Tapping and turn-on fees.



      (1)   Each user, at the time application is filed for
connection with the waterworks system, shall pay a charge to cover the cost
of tapping the main, furnishing and laying service pipe, corporation and stop
cocks, service and meter box, and installing the meter determined by the size
of meter tap as follows:



 

Size of Meter Tap
 
Fee


5/8-inch
 
$500


3/4-inch
 
$500


1-inch
 
$700


1–1/2 inch
 
$900



 



      (2)   Connections two inches and larger will be billed at cost
of labor and materials with a minimum charge of $900.



   (H)   Advance deposit.  All water utility customers not also a
customer of the city’s electric utility shall pay at the time of
establishing service an advance deposit of the greater of:  $125; or an
amount equivalent of two times the actual or expected average monthly bill
for water utility service.



(Ord. 2006-1, passed 7-12-2006; Ord. 2009-12, passed 11-12-2009)



§ 54.23  OVERDUE BILLS; COLLECTION CHARGE.



   (A)   All bills for water service not paid within ten days from the
due date thereof, as stated in the bills, shall be subject to a collection or
deferred payment charge of 10% on the first $3, and 3% on the excess over $3.



   (B)   After any water service is disconnected to any property served
by the water utility for any reason, whether at the request of the consumer
or because of failure to pay sewer or water bills, there shall be imposed a
fee of $5 for turning on the water service.



(Ord. 2006-1, passed 7-12-2006)



§ 54.24  RATES AND CHARGES TO BE SUFFICIENT IN LIEU OF TAXES AND TO PROVIDE
REASONABLE RETURN ON INVESTMENT.



   The rates and charges set forth in this chapter are approved by the
City Council to the extent that the rates and charges are sufficient to
compensate the city for taxes due the city would be paid on the water utility
property were it privately owned, and to the extent that the rates and
charges provide a reasonable return on the water utility plant of the city as
determined by the City Council.



(Ord. 2006-1, passed 7-12-2006)



§ 54.25  RESPONSIBILITY FOR RATES AND CHARGES.



   All rates and charges are payable by the owner of each lot, parcel of
real property, or building that:



   (A)   Is connected with the water utility by or through any part of
the water utility works; or



   (B)   Uses or is served by the water utility works.



(Ord. 2009-2, passed 4-8-2009)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      75.   GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Motor vehicle inspection; fees; Firearms Training Program
Fund



   70.02   Erection and maintenance of signs or signals



   70.03   Failing to stop or yield at signed intersection



   70.04   Speed limits



   70.05   Vehicle operation



   70.06   Enforcement



   70.07   Engine brake retarders prohibited



§ 70.01  MOTOR VEHICLE INSPECTION; FEES; FIREARMS TRAINING PROGRAM FUND.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer of the city conducts a vehicle
inspection as provided by I.C. 9-29-4-2, a fee shall be collected in the
amount of $1.



(1985 Code, § 7-6-1)



   (B)   Upon conducting an inspection and payment of the fee as
provided in division (A) above, the police officer shall issue a receipt,
General Form 352, for each fee collected.  All monies received from the fees
shall be remitted to the Clerk-Treasurer at least once every two weeks by the
Police Department.  The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue an official receipt for
the remittances, specifying the number of general receipts (Forms 352)
included therein.



(1985 Code, § 7-6-2)



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall receipt fees remitted under division
(B) above to a fund to be entitled the Firearms Training Program Fund which
shall be used for the various expenditures concerned with firearms training
for the Police Department.  All expenditures from the Fund must be processed
in the same manner as other claims of the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-6-3)



(Ord. 6-1984, passed 4-15-1984)



§ 70.02  ERECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS OR SIGNALS.



   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or other officer so directed
by the City Council to erect and maintain standard traffic-control signs,
signals, or devices in accordance with the State Uniform Traffic Control
Manual as necessary for the enforcement of the intersection controls as set
forth in this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 7-5-4)  (Ord. 10B-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 70.03  FAILING TO STOP OR YIELD AT SIGNED INTERSECTION.



   Any person who fails to stop or yield right-of-way at any intersection
as required in this title when a lawful traffic-control sign or signal is
properly erected and maintained shall be cited for a city ordinance
violation, and upon conviction shall be liable to a fine as set forth in §
10.99.



(1985 Code, § 7-5-3)  (Ord. 10B-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 70.04  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   This section and Chapter 73, Schedule III, apply to all public
streets, alleys, and other vehicular thoroughfares under the jurisdiction of
the city.  These provisions do not apply to state highways or
state-maintained routes which are under the jurisdiction of the State
Department of Highways; nor to privately owned and maintained vehicular
thoroughfares, excepting only those governed by a contract wherein the city
is granted power by the owner or make and enforce speed limit regulations.



(1985 Code, § 7-9-1)



   (B)   Except as hereafter provided in this title, the presumptive
(prima facie) urban district speed limit of 30 mph as established by statute
shall be deemed to apply and shall be enforced with respect to all
thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city to which this chapter
applies, irrespective of whether or not specific signs are erected. 
However, the city may, for the purpose of informing motorists and better
securing observance and enforcement, cause appropriate signs to be erected
reflecting the speed limit referred to under this section, where applicable,
as the City Council deems necessary.  Persons who violate the speed limit
shall be cited and prosecuted for a state violation.



(1985 Code, § 7-9-2)



(Ord. C3-1985, passed - -1985; Ord. 1-1995, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 1996-18,
passed 10-9-1996; Ord. 1997-10, passed - -1997)



Statutory reference:



   Contract enforcement, see I.C. 9-21-18



   Presumptive speed limit, see I.C. 9-21-5-2



   Prosecution of state violation, see I.C. 9-21-5-13



   Setting urban speed limits, see I.C. 9-21-5-6



§ 70.05  VEHICLE OPERATION.



   (A)   No multi-axle motor vehicle or truck may travel on Ridge
Avenue in a direct or “thru” manner from one terminus to the other
terminus of the municipal boundaries.



   (B)   Signs indicating the above operation restrictions shall be
erected and maintained in accordance with the State Uniform Traffic Control
Manual.  Any person who violates the restrictions established by this
section when the required signs have been erected shall be subject to §
10.99.



(1985 Code, § 7-9-4)  (Ord. 1-1995, passed 2-14-1995)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 70.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Citation and a proceeding to enforce an ordinance shall be
brought in the name of the city, and any fine or expense paid upon judgment
shall be remitted to the City General Fund.



   (B)   In the event prosecution of a violation is brought by the City
Attorney or another attorney designated by the city as the Municipal
Prosecutor, the city shall be entitled upon trial to recover reasonable
attorney fees therefore in addition to any fines or costs as otherwise
provided.



(1985 Code, § 7-9-5)  (Ord. 1-1995, passed 2-14-1995)



§ 70.07  ENGINE BRAKE RETARDERS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No multi-axle motor vehicle or truck may use engine brake
retarders upon any road within or adjacent to a Residential A or Residential
B zone.



   (B)   Signs indicating the above restriction shall be erected and
maintained in accordance with the State Uniform Traffic Control Manual.  Any
person who violates the restrictions established by this section when the
required signs have been erected shall be subject to § 10.99.



(Ord. 2005-7, passed 9-14-2005; Ord. 2005-9, passed 10-12-2005)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Definitions



   71.02   Parking in prohibited area



   71.03   Commercial and recreational vehicles; on-street parking
restrictions



   71.04   Working on parked vehicles



   71.05   Long-term parking on streets restricted



   71.06   Removal of parked vehicles during snow emergency



   71.07   Modification of parking limits or restrictions



   71.08   Enforcement procedure; parking citations; settlement of
penalty



§ 71.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE.  A portion of the paved surface of the
street of sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk or curb to
accommodate a vehicle to be parked as may be specified and marked off by the
Police Chief.



   NO PARKING SIGNS and LIMITED PARKING SIGNS.  A metal sign indicating
thereon in red letters and white background (18 inches by 12 inches), that
this is a no parking zone, or the curbs shall be painted yellow with a yellow
traffic paint.  A metal sign indicating thereon in green letters on white
background (18 inches by 12 inches), that this is a Limited Time Zone and the
length of time a vehicle can be parked without being moved.  All signs shall
be six and one-half feet to seven feet above the ground or sidewalk.



   PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle upon a street or highway, whether
the vehicle is occupied or not by an operator, for a period of time in excess
of one minute.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property may
be transported upon a public highway.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-1)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 71.02  PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREA.



   All parking is prohibited in any space where signs are installed which
display or show that this is a “no parking” zone or the sign displayed
shows the length of time a vehicle may be parked.  The fact that a vehicle
is parked in any of these marked areas or longer than the displayed sign
shows shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of the
vehicle by its owner and/or operator.  It shall be unlawful and a violation
of the provisions of this chapter for any person to cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by, the person to
be parked in a no parking zone or parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking zone herein described. 
However, commercial trucks may park in the no parking zone or limited time
parking zones to load or unload merchandise only.  Should the truck be
parked longer than 30 minutes, the owner or operator shall be in violation of
this chapter unless he or she has obtained the special permission of the
Police Chief.  The giving of this permission shall be within reason and at
the discretion of the Police Chief.  Any vehicle parked in a no parking
zone, or any vehicle parked in a limited time parking zone for a longer
period of time than specified, may be moved by the city police officers and
all towing and expense charges must be paid by the owner or operator to the
party who was ordered to move the vehicle.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-4)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES; ON-STREET PARKING
RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any truck, bus, school bus, private
bus, any form of tractor, or any form of trailer, as defined under I.C.
9-13-2-31.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A motor home, camper, camper-trailer,
house trailer, similar vehicles or attachments commonly known as “RVs”,
and trailers designed or used for hauling boats or small watercraft. 
However, the parking restrictions as hereafter provided in this section do
not apply to small integrated vehicles such as pick-up trucks, minibuses,
vans, or small motor homes or campers, consisting of parts permanently
mounted on a single chassis, and which vehicles commonly may be used for
ordinary purposes of private transportation as well as for commercial or
recreational purposes and do not exceed 18 feet in length nor seven feet in
width; nor to commercial vehicles which are stopped or parked for a period of
time reasonably necessary for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or
passengers when no suitable off-street parking or loading facility is
available for that purpose.



   (B)   Except as hereinbefore permitted, it shall be unlawful and a
parking violation under this chapter for any person to park any commercial
vehicle at any time, or park any recreational vehicle during the months of
October through March, on the right-of-way of any public street, alley, or
thoroughfare (exclusive of a state highway or state-maintained route) within
the city.  If any vehicle is found parked in violation of this section in
any area where signs are posted indicating the applicable parking
restrictions hereunder, the enforcement officer shall immediately cite the
vehicle for a parking violation in the manner provided by § 71.08. 
However, if signs are not posted, the officer shall first serve upon the
registered owner of the vehicle, in person if possible or by attaching same
to the vehicle if personal service is not possible, a notice of a form to be
prescribed by the Police Chief stating that the vehicle is in violation of
this section and must within 24 hours be removed from the public streets and
lawfully parked on private premises (not merely moved to a different public
parking space) or the owner shall be liable for a penal parking citation; and
if the vehicle is not then so removed, the vehicle shall be cited for a
violation in the manner provided by § 71.08.  Any vehicle which becomes
subject to citation for unlawful parking under this section may also be towed
under the provisions of § 71.02.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-4.5)  (Ord. 14B-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 71.04  WORKING ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   No person shall work on or overhaul any vehicle on the streets of the
city, except in the case of an emergency.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-5)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  LONG-TERM PARKING ON STREETS RESTRICTED.



   Any vehicle parked on any street in the city longer than seven days
without being moved may be moved by the city police officers, and all towing
and expenses charges must be paid by the owner or operator to the party who
was ordered to move the vehicle.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-6)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  REMOVAL OF PARKED VEHICLES DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.



   A snow emergency shall be presumed to exist whenever snow has
accumulated on the ground to a depth of four inches or more.  During a snow
emergency, it shall be unlawful to leave any vehicle parked on the streets,
irrespective of whether the parking may be lawful at other times, so that the
efforts of the city to clear the streets of snow are impeded by the parked
vehicles.  If the City Manager finds that the presence of parked vehicles
does so impede snow removal on any street, he or she shall cause three blasts
of a fire siren to be sounded within each affected block of the street as a
signal to persons to remove all  parked vehicles within one hour of the
sounding of the signal.  The City Manager may additionally employ any other
available means to notify the public.  Any vehicle which is not removed from
the street within one hour from the time that a siren is sounded within the
block as herein provided may be towed away and stored at the owner’s
expense, subject to the same towing and storage charges as provided under a
contract and schedule adopted under § 90.04.  When a presumptive snow
emergency exists as herein defined, failure of a person to hear or understand
a further signal or other notice does not relieve the person from liability
for towing and storage costs.



(1985 Code, § 7-8-1)  (Ord. 1-1985, passed - -1985)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  MODIFICATION OF PARKING LIMITS OR RESTRICTIONS.



   The restricted parking areas may be altered by enlargement or
curtailment, or changed by the City Council at any regular meeting, upon
written request or petition of the President of the Council, Police Chief, or
any ten resident voters of the city.  Any alteration, curtailment,
additions, or changes shall be by amendment to Chapter 74, Schedules I and II.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-9)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 71.08  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE; PARKING CITATIONS; SETTLEMENT OF PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city,
acting in accordance with the instructions of the Police Chief, to report:



      (1)   The street which will indicate the area or space that
the vehicle occupying, and, or has been parking in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   The state license number of the vehicle;



      (3)   The maker of the vehicle;



      (4)   The time during which the vehicle is parked in violation
of any of the provisions of this traffic code; and



      (5)   Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.



   (B)   Each police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice
to the owner or operator thereof that the vehicle has been parked in
violation of a provision of this chapter and instructing the owner or
operator to report to the police station in regard to the violation.  Each
owner or operator may, within 48 hours of the time when the notice was
attached to the vehicle, pay to the police, as a penalty for and in full
satisfaction of the violation, the sum of $2.  The failure of the owner or
operator to make the payment, within 48 hours, shall render the owner or
operator subject to the penalties hereinafter provided for violation of the
provisions of this chapter.  The Board of Commissioners of the City Police
Department may appoint as many persons as necessary to collect the money
whenever a person wishes to pay the minimum penalty for any parking
violation.  At the end of the month, the Police Chief shall deliver all
money collected from violators to the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(1985 Code, § 7-3-7)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 72:  BICYCLES AND MOTORIZED BICYCLES



Section



Bicycles



   72.01   License, registration with Police Department required



   72.02   License fee



   72.03   Transfer of bicycles



   72.04   Bicycle operating regulations



Motorized Bicycles



   72.15   Definitions



   72.16   License required



   72.17   License certificate and sticker, tag, or plate



   72.18   Term of license; renewal; suspension or revocation



   72.19   Sale or transfer requirements



   72.20   Regulations for operation




BICYCLES




§ 72.01  LICENSE, REGISTRATION WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT REQUIRED.



   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or public
highway in the city without having first obtained and attached to the bicycle
a proper license as provided herein.  Every bicycle shall be registered with
the Police Department before a license is issued.  Application for a license
to own and operate a bicycle shall be made to the Police Department upon a
form to be approved by the City Council.  The license shall be renewed every
two years before July 1.  The city shall furnish a proper tag or sticker for
each bicycle licensed, to be attached to the bicycle by the Police
Department.  The removal of any such tag or sticker, except by proper
authority, shall be a violation of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 7-1-1)  (Ord. 2-1976, passed 5-11-1976; Ord. 3-1977, passed
7-12-1977; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see 10.99



§ 72.02  LICENSE FEE.



   A fee of $1 shall be charged for a bicycle license and for each
renewal.  The Police Department shall keep a correct report of all fees
collected, and on the last day of each month shall turn the fees over to the
Clerk-Treasurer to be placed in the General Fund.



(1985 Code, § 7-1-2)  (Ord. 2-1976, passed 5-11-1976; Ord. 3-1977, passed
7-12-1977; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 72.03  TRANSFER OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   Any transfer of a bicycle from one person to another shall be
made by the Police Department and a transfer fee of $.50 shall be charged.



   (B)   Transfers of bicycles shall be reported as follows.



      (1)   Any dealer or person engaged in the business of buying
secondhand bicycles shall report to the Police Department the name and
address from whom the bicycle was purchased, the description of the bicycle,
the number of the license thereon, and any other pertinent or identifying
features of the bicycle.



      (2)   Any dealer or persons engaged in the selling of new or
used bicycles shall report to the Police Department the name and address of
the person to whom the bicycle was sold, the description of the bicycle, the
number of the license thereon, if any, and any other pertinent identifying
features of the bicycle.



      (3)   (a)   It shall be the duty of every person who sells
or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report the sale or transfer by
returning the registration card of the bicycle to the Police Department
within ten days of sale or transfer.



         (b)   It shall be the duty of the purchaser or
transferee of any bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration within ten
days of the purchase.



(1985 Code, § 7-1-3)  (Ord. 2-1976, passed 5-11-1976; Ord. 3-1977, passed
7-12-1977; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 72.04  BICYCLE OPERATING REGULATIONS.



   Every license granted shall be deemed to be granted subject to the
following conditions.



   (A)   Every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the
safety of the operator and any persons or vehicles upon the streets and
public highways of the city.



   (B)   All persons riding or propelling bicycles shall observe all
traffic signs and lights and all traffic rules and regulations in the same
manner as other vehicles using the streets or public highways.



   (C)   No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or
public highway of the city abreast of any other bicycle.



(1985 Code, § 7-1-4)  (Ord. 2-1976, passed 5-11-1976; Ord. 3-1977, passed
7-12-1977; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)




MOTORIZED BICYCLES




§ 72.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEALER.  Any person engaged in buying, selling, or trading in
motorized bicycles, either new or used, as a regular and normal part of his
or her business enterprise.



   MOTORIZED BICYCLE.  Any vehicle having two or more wheels in contact
with the ground, and of a type described by I.C. 9-13-2-109, exclusive of a
self-propelled wheelchair intended to be used by handicapped persons. 
Commonly known as a MOPED.



   OWNER.  Any person, other than a dealer in connection with his or her
business, who has formal title to or who exercises possessory control over a
motorized bicycle by virtue of purchase, lease, exchange, gift, or otherwise.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-1)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 72.16  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person may be the owner of a motorized bicycle and keep, maintain,
or operate the motorized bicycle within the corporate limits of the city
without registering the same with the Police Department and obtaining a
license therefor.  Application for the license may be made to the Police
Department on a form to be prescribed by the Police Chief and approved by the
City Council.  The Police Chief may require in the form any information
which he or she deems pertinent to the administration and enforcement of this
act or any other related laws, ordinances, or regulations.  No person shall
be eligible to apply for a motorized bicycle license unless he or she can
show to the satisfaction of the Police Department that he or she is at least
15 years of age.  The applicant shall pay to the city a license and
registration fee of $5, which may be collected by the Police Department and
receipted to the Clerk-Treasurer in the same manner as fees provided for a
bicycle license.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-2)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see 10.99



§ 72.17  LICENSE CERTIFICATE AND STICKER, TAG, OR PLATE.



   When proper application is made and fee paid as provided in § 72.16,
the Police Department shall provide the applicant with a license certificate
and a numbered license sticker, tag, or plate.  The form of the certificate
and license sticker, tag, or plate shall be as prescribed by the Police
Chief, and the sticker, tag, or plate shall be affixed to the motorized
bicycle in a place and manner as the Police Chief determines to be most
suitable.  It shall be unlawful to affix any such sticker, tag, or plate to
any motorized bicycle other than that described in the license application
and license certificate; and, once affixed, it shall also be unlawful for any
person to remove, alter, or deface same unless and until such time as the
license expires or the motorized bicycle permanently ceases to be kept or
operated in the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-3)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.18  TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWAL; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   A license issued pursuant to § 72.16 shall be valid for a period of
two years commencing from the last day of the month in which it is issued,
unless sooner revoked or annulled as hereafter provided.  The license may be
renewed for any number of successive two-year periods upon payment of an
additional license fee as provided in § 72.16 in the amount then in effect
for an original license at the time of the renewal.  However, in the event
that any licensed motorized bicycle is the subject of any violation of the
applicable operating rules or regulations as set forth in § 72.20, the
Police Chief or a court, at their discretion, may upon notice to the licensee
suspend the license for any determinate period not to exceed 60 days; or, if
the motorized bicycle is the subject of three or more such violations
accumulated during any two-year license term, the Police Chief or court may
permanently revoke the motorized bicycle’s license and the same shall not
be eligible for relicensure for a period of at least one year thereafter,
notwithstanding any expiration of the original license period, while
remaining under the ownership of the same licensee.  The owner of any
motorized bicycle whose license has been revoked as provided above shall also
be ineligible to obtain a new license for or to renew the license of any
other motorized bicycle until one year following the date of revocation. 
The suspension or revocation of a license under this section shall be in
addition to any civil penalties incurred as hereafter provided.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-4)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 72.19  SALE OR TRANSFER REQUIREMENTS.



   Any person who sells or transfers ownership of a motorized bicycle must
comply with this section.



   (A)   Any dealer located in the city who acquires a licensed
motorized bicycle by purchase or trade for purposes of resale shall report
the transaction to the Police Department within 48 hours, giving the name and
address of the person from whom acquired, the license number, and an
identifying description of the motorized bicycle.  When the notice is
received, the Police Department shall cancel and annul the license on its
records, and the same may not be transferred to a new owner who may
subsequently acquire the motorized bicycle from a dealer.



   (B)   Any dealer located in the city who sells a motorized bicycle
to any resident of the city shall report the sale, along with the name and
address of the purchaser, to the Police Department within 48 hours.  In the
event that the purchaser does not register and obtain a license for the
motorized bicycle within ten days of the purchase, the Police Department
shall send the purchaser a warning notice of failure to comply with the
requirements of § 72.16.



   (C)   Dealers located outside of the city may be requested to
cooperate and comply with the provisions of divisions (A) or (B) above, but
shall not be obliged to do so.  In the case of a cooperating nonresident
dealer, the Police Department shall follow the same procedures as in the case
of a resident dealer.



   (D)   Any owner of a motorized bicycle which has an unexpired
license, shall, upon directly selling or otherwise transferring ownership
thereof to any other person except a dealer located in the city, report the
transaction to the Police Department within 48 hours, and shall surrender to
the Police Department his or her owner’s copy of the license certificate. 
The new owner, if he or she wishes to maintain the license in effect, must
apply to the Police Department for a license transfer and pay a transfer fee
of $2.50.  The transfer shall be executed by the Police Department if the
new owner is otherwise eligible for a motorized bicycle license.  However,
the new owner shall also have the option of applying and paying the fee for a
new license, in which case the Police Department shall cancel and annul the
previous license.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-5)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.20  REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION.



   (A)   The following regulations apply to the use and operation of
motorized bicycles on public streets, highways, and other public ways and
places within the corporate limits of the city, and apply irrespective of
whether a motorized bicycle is being operated by its owner or another person
or whether it has been properly licensed in accordance with § 72.16. 
However, the provisions of divisions (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
(A)(6)(b), and (A)(6)(c) below shall not apply to operation of a motorized
bicycle upon the right-of-way of any state highway or state-maintained route
within the city.



      (1)   No owner shall knowingly or negligently permit any
person under the age of 15 years to operate his or her motorized bicycle in
any public place.  It shall be the duty of the owner to exercise reasonable
and prudent care and supervision over the use and operation of his or her
motorized bicycle, and the owner shall be presumed to have knowingly or
negligently permitted the operation if a person under 15 years of age is
found to be operating the motorized bicycle, unless the owner can show that
it was stolen or otherwise outside of his or her reasonable custody and
control at the time of the violation.



      (2)   No person may operate any motorized bicycle which has
not been duly licensed pursuant to § 72.16, does not have a current license
sticker or tag properly affixed thereto, or has had its license suspended or
revoked.



      (3)   No person may operate a motorized bicycle in a crosswalk
or pedestrian pathway except in the necessary act of crossing; nor in any
other public place other than in or along a roadway intended for vehicular
travel unless otherwise expressly so authorized by the appropriate public
authority.



      (4)   Motorized bicycles shall be driven single file, and in
the normal direction of vehicular travel.  In the event that the operator of
a motorized bicycle is compelled or wishes to travel at a speed below the
maximum speed limit applicable to the area, he or she shall drive as nearly
as practicable to the edge of the roadway, and shall yield right-of-way as
necessary to permit the safe and convenient passing of other vehicles
traveling in the same lane.



      (5)   The operator of a motorized bicycle shall obey all
traffic regulations and all traffic-control signs and signals as lawfully
established by city ordinance and applicable to motor vehicles, and for
failure to obey the traffic regulations or control signs and signals the
operator shall be liable to the same penalties as prescribed for the operator
of a motor vehicle.



      (6)   State bicycle laws and regulations shall be deemed
applicable to the operation of motorized bicycles as follows.



         (a)   The provisions of I.C. 9-13-2 et seq. shall be
presumed to apply to and shall be enforced with respect to the operation of
motorized bicycles in the same manner as nonmotorized bicycles, and any
operator of a motorized bicycle violating the statutes shall be cited and
prosecuted for a state violation and subject to applicable penalties as
provided by law.



         (b)   However, should it happen that by virtue of any
ruling, interpretation, or construction of state law that any statute cited
in division (A)(6)(a) above would not be applicable to the operation of a
motorized bicycle because of any distinction in the meanings of the terms
BICYCLE and MOTORIZED BICYCLE as defined by I.C. 9-13-2-14 and I.C.
9-13-2-109, respectively, then the provisions of the statutes are hereby
adopted and incorporated as part of this division (A)(6)(b), and shall be
deemed to apply to motorized bicycles in the same manner as to bicycles for
the purposes of this act; and any person operating a motorized bicycle in
violation of the provisions may be cited for a city ordinance violation and
subject to penalties as provided in § 10.99.



         (c)   In the event that any of the statutes applicable
as provided in divisions (A)(6)(a) or (A)(6)(b) above would, by their
application, be less restrictive or permit a lesser standard than any
regulation otherwise set forth in this act, then the regulation shall apply
in lieu of the statutory provision.



      (7)   No parent or guardian of any child under 18 years of age
shall authorize or knowingly permit the child to violate any of the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   The regulations set forth in this section shall apply
severally, and any violation of two or more such regulations may be cited and
prosecuted as separate offenses and be subject to cumulative penalties under
§ 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 7-2-6)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Preferential and stop streets



      II.   Three-way and four-way stop intersections



      III.   Special city speed limits



      IV.   Weight limits



SCHEDULE I.  PREFERENTIAL AND STOP STREETS.



   The following streets are hereby designated to be preferential streets
at their intersections with the respective stop streets, as hereafter
indicated, and all vehicles traveling upon the respective stop streets are
required to come to a complete stop before entering or crossing the
preferential street, and to yield safe right-of-way to any traffic
approaching on the preferential street, in obedience to a stop sign or signal:



 


Preferential Street

 

Intersecting Stop Street






Bellview

 

Craig




Braun

 

Hayes




Brown

 

Lawrence




Carroll

 

Arthur




Carroll

 

Cora




Carroll

 

Schnebelt




Catalpa

 

Harry




Cook

 

Gunkel




Cook

 

Warren Place




Cora

 

Marie




Decker

 

Midway




Dianna

 

Park




Diehl

 

Tanner




Dorman (Hillside)

 

Glenn (westbound)




Dorman

 

Wayne Avenue




Eads Parkway East

 

Hardinstown Road




Eads Parkway East

 

Rudolph Way




Glenn (Hillside)

 

Dorman (southeastbound)




Hayes

 

Circle Drive




Hayes

 

Dietrich Crescent Drive




Hillside

 

Catalpa




Kansas

 

Lawrence




Ludlow

 

Cook




Ludlow

 

Hayman Drive




Ludlow

 

Mary




Mary

 

Nowlin (southbound)




Mary

 

South Sheldon




Meadowcreek

 

Brindley




North Sheldon

 

Billups




North Sheldon

 

De Juris




North Sheldon

 

Laurel Lane




Nowlin

 

Braun




Nowlin

 

Cook




Nowlin

 

Cora




Nowlin

 

Diehl




Nowlin

 

Feller




Nowlin

 

Forest Drive




Nowlin

 

Gage




Nowlin

 

Gages Lane




Nowlin

 

Haag




Nowlin

 

Locust




Nowlin

 

Mary (westbound)




Nowlin

 

Meadowcreek




Nowlin

 

Oakey




Nowlin

 

Park




Nowlin

 

Park Grove




Nowlin

 

Poplar




Nowlin

 

Schnebelt




Nowlin

 

Tebbs




Oakey

 

Dietrich Crescent Drive




Parkside

 

Harry




Parkside

 

Heck




Parkside

 

Hillside




Parkside

 

Sunset




Probasco

 

Nead Lane




Probasco

 

North Sheldon




Probasco

 

South Sheldon




Ridge

 

Gages Lane




Ridge

 

Garden Ridge




Ritzman

 

Brindley




Ritzman

 

Meadowcreek




Rudolph Way

 

Minger Drive




Sunset

 

Dearborn Court




Sunset

 

Decker




Sunset

 

Gage Lane




Sunset

 

Gages Lane




Tebbs

 

Gunkel




Tebbs

 

North Sheldon




Tebbs

 

Warren Place




Wayne Avenue

 

McGuire





 



(1985 Code, § 7-5-1)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 3-1992, passed
4-14-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  THREE-WAY AND FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The following described intersections are designated as three-way or
four-way stop intersections, and all vehicles approaching these intersections
from any direction must come to a full stop before entering or crossing the
intersection, in obedience to stop signs or signals:



 




Arthur and Marie




Hayes and Oakey




Ludlow and Oakey




Ludlow and Probasco




Ludlow and Tebbs




North Sheldon and Oakey




Nowlin and Parkside




Nowlin and Probasco




Tanner and Cook





 



(1985 Code, § 7-5-2)  (Ord. 10A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



SCHEDULE III.  SPECIAL CITY SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Pursuant to its powers under statute, the City Council hereby
finds and declares on the basis of traffic studies that the presumptive urban
speed limit referred to and otherwise applicable under § 70.04 is either too
high or too low to satisfy the public safety and convenience.  Therefore,
special city speed limits, differing from the speed limit referred to in §
70.04 and applicable in lieu thereof when appropriate signs are erected, are
hereby established and shall be enforced with respect to certain city streets
or other thoroughfares as indicated in the following schedule.  Unless
otherwise indicated in the schedule or a footnote thereto, the respective
speed limit applies to all portions of the indicated street or thoroughfare.



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to cause
speed limit signs to indicate the speed limits to be erected and maintained
along the affected portions of the indicated streets in accordance with the
State Uniform Traffic Control Manual.  Any person who violates the special
city speed limits established by this schedule when the required signs have
been erected shall be cited and prosecuted for a city ordinance violation,
and upon conviction shall be liable for a penal fine in accordance with the
schedule listed in § 10.99.



   (C)   (1)   For purposes of administering this schedule, the
enforcement officer shall note on the court and office copies of the traffic
citation the amount by which the violator was found to have been exceeding
the posted city speed limit.



      (2)   All fines assessed and collected under this section
shall be deposited in the City General Fund in accordance with statute.



      (3)   Fines may not be paid directly to the Clerk-Treasurer,
but may be paid to the Clerk of the County Court.



 


Street/Thoroughfare

 

Limit (mph)






Arthur Street

 

25




Bellview Drive

 

25




Billups Drive

 

25




Birch Street

 

25




Braun Street

 

25




Brindley Drive

 

25




Broadway Street

 

25




Brown Street

 

25




Carroll Avenue

 

25




Catalpa Avenue

 

25




Circle Drive

 

25




Cook Avenue

 

25




Cora Avenue

 

25




Cottonwood Circle

 

25




Craig Avenue

 

25




Dearborn Court

 

25




Decker Avenue

 

25




DeJeris Lane

 

25




Dianna Drive

 

25




Diehl Drive

 

25




Dietrich Cresent Drive

 

25




Dorman Avenue

 

25




Feller Avenue

 

25




Foxwood Court

 

25




Gages Lane

 

25




Garden Drive

 

25




Glenn Drive

 

25




Green Road

 

25




Gunkel Place

 

25




Haag Avenue

 

25




Hardinstown Road

 

25




Harry Avenue

 

25




Hayes Street

 

25




Heck Drive

 

25




Hillside Avenue

 

25




Indian Woods Trail

 

25




Jackson Street

 

25




Kansas Street

 

25




Laurel Lane

 

25




Lawrence Street

 

25




Locust Street

 

25




Lorey Lane

 

25




Ludlow Street

 

25




Marcia Court

 

25




Marie Street

 

25




Mary Avenue

 

25




McClure Way

 

25




McGuire Street

 

25




Meadowcreek Drive

 

25




Midway Court

 

25




Miller Avenue

 

25




Minger Drive

 

25




Nead Lane

 

25




Nowlin Avenue

 

25




Oakey Avenue

 

25




Oberting Road

 

35




Park Street

 

25




Park Grove Avenue

 

25




Persimmon Woods Court

 

25




Poplar Street

 

25




Probasco Street

 

25




Rand Avenue

 

25




Ridge Avenue, from Brown Street intersection north to intersection with SR 1

 

35




Ridge Avenue from Lawrenceburg boundary north to intersection with Brown
Street

 

25




Ritzmann Drive

 

25




Robinson Drive

 

25




Rudolph Way

 

25




Running Deer Lane

 

25




St. Andrews Lane

 

25




Schnebelt Street

 

25




Sheldon  Street

 

25




Springwood Court

 

25




Stateline Road

 

35




Sunset Drive

 

25




Sycamore Woods Drive

 

25




Tanner Avenue

 

25




Tebbs Avenue

 

25




Warren Place

 

25




Wayne Street

 

25




Whispering Woods Drive

 

25





 



(1985 Code, § 7-9-3)  (Ord. C3-1985, passed - -1985; Ord. 1996-18, passed
10-9-1996; Ord. 1997-7, passed - -1997; Ord. 1997-10, passed - -1997) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE IV.  WEIGHT LIMITS.



   Weight limits on vehicles, exclusive of city equipment, are established
on the following indicated portions of the city streets:



 


Street

 

Not to Exceed




Dorman Avenue

 

5 tons gross weight




 



(1985 Code, § 7-4-1)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Res. passed
6-10-1980; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Parking prohibited



      II.   Parking time limited



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   The following described areas of the city streets are designated to be
“no parking” zones:



 


Street

 

Side

 

Location






Brown Street

 

North

 
Entire length



Dianna Drive

 

East

 
For 140 feet north of Rand Avenue



Dorman Avenue

 

North

 
From Ridge Avenue to Hillside Avenue



Dorman Avenue

 

South

 
Between McGuire Street and Hillside Avenue from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday



Dorman Avenue

 

South

 
Between Ridge Avenue and McGuire Street and in front of the school house



Kansas Street

 

South

 
From Ridge Avenue to the end of Kansas Street



Ludlow Street

 


 
In front of the school house as signs and markings indicate



Mary Street

 

North

 
From Ludlow Street for 515 feet to the Schenley Office Building



Mary Street

 

South

 
For 255 feet east of Nowlin Avenue



Nowlin Avenue

 

West

 
From Diehl Drive north to the railroad underpass



Nowlin Avenue

 

West

 
From Park Street to Rand Avenue



Oakey Avenue

 

South

 
From Ridge Avenue to Sheldon Street



Park Driveway

 

North and west sides of the swimming pool

 
Swimming pool sides of the driveway



Park Street

 

North

 
From Nowlin Avenue to the swimming pool or Greendale Park Drive



Probasco Street

 

South

 
From Ridge Avenue to the end of the street



Rand Avenue

 

North

 
Entire length



Sheldon Street

 

East

 
From Broadway Street to Probasco Street



Wayne Avenue

 

West

 
 



Wayne Avenue

 

East

 
For 30 feet from the corner of Dorman Avenue




 



(1985 Code, § 7-3-2)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  PARKING TIME LIMITED.



   Parking in the following described areas is limited as to time, as
indicated:



 


Street

 

Location

 

Limit



Mary Street
 
In the front of the Schenley Office Building on the north side of Mary Street
for 200 feet east of Nowlin Avenue
 

2 hours




 



(1985 Code, § 7-3-3)  (Ord. 1-1973, passed 4-10-1973; Ord. 6-1976, passed
8-10-1976; Ord. 10-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 75: GOLF CARTS



Section



   75.01   Purpose



   75.02   Definitions



   75.03   Use of golf carts authorized



   75.04   License required



   75.05   Insurance required



   75.06   Equipment required at certain times



   75.07   Registration required



   75.08   Disallowed roads and streets



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is not intended to promote the operation of golf carts on
city streets. Greendale does not recommend or even endorse the operation of
golf carts on its streets. However, many of the citizens of Greendale want to
operate golf carts on city streets. All persons operating golf carts must be
attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including passengers, other
motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. All persons who operate or ride golf
carts on city streets do so at their own peril. Greendale assumes no
liability for the operation of golf carts within the city based upon this
chapter.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED STREETS. All private roads and highways, as those terms are
defined by I.C. 9-13-2-137 and 9-13-2-73 respectively, within the city's
jurisdiction which have not been disallowed by ordinance.



   GOLF CART. A commercially manufactured four wheeled motor vehicle
originally and specifically designed and intended to transport one or more
individuals for the purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course and
that has not been modified in any fashion to increase speed.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.03  USE OF GOLF CARTS AUTHORIZED.



   The operation of a golf cart upon authorized streets in compliance with
this chapter and all other applicable traffic laws and regulations is
permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., local time.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a golf cart within the city of unless the
operator holds a valid driver's license.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.05  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a golf cart within the city without financial
responsibility. Financial responsibility shall have the same meaning in this
chapter as it is defined in I.C. Title 9. Proof of financial responsibility
shall be in the same manner as provided in I.C. 9-25-4.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.06  EQUIPMENT REQUIRED AT CERTAIN TIMES.



   No person shall operate a golf cart before sunrise or after sunset
within the city unless it is equipped with head lights, tail lights, brake
lights, and turn signals.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.07  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a golf cart within the City of Greendale unless
the golf cart is registered with the city. To register a golf cart, the owner
shall present proof of financial responsibility to the Clerk-Treasurer, and
pay the registration fee of $50 to the city through the Clerk-Treasurer. The
owner must affix the registration sticker issued by the Clerk-Treasurer upon
the back of the golf cart so that it is clearly visible from behind. All
registrations expire December 31 of each year.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.08  DISALLOWED ROADS AND STREETS.



   No person shall operate a golf cart on the following private road or
highways: Interstate 275 (including the entrance and exit ramp), U.S. Highway
50, Indiana State Route 1, State Line Road, Oberting Road, Ridge Avenue, and
Bellview Drive; provided, however, that a person may operate a golf cart
across Ridge Avenue at the traffic light at the intersection of Probasco
Street and Ridge Avenue and the traffic light at the intersection of Brown
Street and Ridge Avenue.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this penalty shall be subject to a fine of $50
for the first violation in a calendar year and $100 for the second violation
in a calendar year. All fines collected hereunder shall be deposited in the
general fund of the city. If a person is cited for a violation of this
chapter for a third time in any calendar year, he or she shall be subject to
a fine of $200 and the registration for the golf cart the person was
operating at the time of the citation and the registration for any golf cart
registered by that person shall be revoked and the golf cart(s) may not be
reregistered for a period of one year.



(Ord. 2010-3, passed 8-11-2010; Am. Ord. 2011-1, passed 4-13-2011)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES



      91.   ANIMALS



      92.   PUBLIC HOUSING



      93.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      95.   TREES



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Leaving abandoned vehicle unlawful



   90.03   Enforcement; towing and storage of abandoned vehicles



   90.04   Abandoned vehicles; towing costs



   90.05   Leaving junk vehicles in open view restricted



   90.06   Junk vehicles; abatement of violations



Cross-reference:



   Parking Regulations, see Ch. 71



   Parking Schedules, see Ch. 74



   Traffic Schedules, see Ch. 73



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  Any vehicle defined as being abandoned by I.C.
9-13-2-1, excepting those exempted under I.C. 9-22-1-1.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  Any vehicle, irrespective of model or age, which is so
mechanically or structurally deteriorated or has had necessary parts removed,
so that it is inoperable or may not be safely operated as a motor vehicle.



   VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle or part or appurtenance thereof, designed
for use as a conveyance on the public streets and highways, and which is
required to be licensed for the use by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-1)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 90.02  LEAVING ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be an unlawful act for any person to leave an abandoned
vehicle anywhere within the city for more than 72 hours beyond the time when
the vehicle is first declared to be abandoned and tagged as hereinafter
provided.  Any person who leaves an abandoned vehicle in violation of this
section shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99 in addition to any
costs for towing and storage of the vehicle.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-2)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.03  ENFORCEMENT; TOWING AND STORAGE OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Any police officer who has cause to believe that a vehicle is abandoned
shall attach a tag to the vehicle of a type and in the manner prescribed by
I.C. 9-22-1-11 and I.C. 9-22-1-14.  If the vehicle is not then removed
within 72 hours, the officer shall cause the same to be removed in accordance
with I.C. 9-22-1-16 and shall notify the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in
accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-19; provided, however, that notwithstanding any
provision of I.C. 9-22-1-13 nor the officer’s estimated value of the
vehicle, the same shall be towed and safely stored, and regular notice shall
be given to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the same manner as with any other
abandoned vehicle.  The officer shall cause the vehicle to be removed and
stored by a towing service with which the city has a contract under § 90.04.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-3)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 90.04  ABANDONED VEHICLES; TOWING COSTS.



   On or before December 31 of each year, the City Council shall enter
into a contract with one or more vehicle towing and storage services for the
removal and storage of abandoned vehicles.  The contract shall stipulate a
schedule of costs and charges to apply under the contract, and a copy thereof
shall be filed with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in accordance with I.C.
9-22-1-30(1).  The owner of the vehicle shall be liable for paying all the
costs to the vehicle towing and storage service upon and as a condition of
reclaiming the vehicle, or in default thereof the costs shall be the
liability of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles from the State Abandoned Vehicle
Account and not a liability of the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-4)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 90.05  LEAVING JUNK VEHICLES IN OPEN VIEW RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a junk vehicle parked on
any public property, except temporarily in an emergency and due to mechanical
failure while driving the vehicle; or to leave the vehicle on private
property other than in an enclosed building or other area screened from
public view for any continuous period longer than 14 days.  Any person
violating this section shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99 for
each day that a violation continues.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-5)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.06  JUNK VEHICLES; ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   Any junk vehicle left on public property in violation of § 90.05 shall
be deemed prima facie an abandoned vehicle as provided by I.C. 9-13-2-1 and
shall be abated in accordance with § 90.03.  A junk vehicle left on private
property in violation of § 90.05 may be abated in accordance with I.C.
36-1-6-2 or I.C. 36-1-6-4, and the owner of the property shall be liable for
all costs of the abatement in addition to any penal fine which may be
incurred under § 90.05.



(1985 Code, § 7-7-6)  (Ord. 14F-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   City Dog Warden; dog regulations; impoundment



   91.02   Animals or fowl disturbing the peace



Vicious Dogs



   91.15   Definitions



   91.16   Special restraint of vicious and certain other dogs



   91.17   Evidence of viciousness; impoundment; duty of Dog Warden



   91.18   Release of vicious dog from impoundment



   91.19   Subsequent attacks by vicious dog



   91.20   Violation of restraint requirements




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  CITY DOG WARDEN; DOG REGULATIONS; IMPOUNDMENT.



   There is hereby created a city officer designated City Dog Warden, who
will enforce this chapter pursuant to the rules and regulations of the City
Council.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Dog Warden to cause any
of the following described dogs to be captured:



         (a)   Any dog which is more than six months of age, and,
after June 15 of any year, on which the city tax has not been paid, or which
does not have a collar of leather, iron, copper, brass, or other durable
material to which shall be attached the license, check, and/or dog tag
showing the aforementioned tax paid;



         (b)   Is running at large unaccompanied by its master,
or owner or owner’s agent; or



         (c)   Is more than six months of age and has not been
vaccinated against rabies in violation of I.C. 35-46-3-1.



      (2)   Any dog captured in accordance with this division (A)
shall be kept or disposed of in the manner hereafter provided; however, the
Dog Warden or other enforcement officer may immediately destroy, by the
safest and most humane means available, any vicious, ferocious, or apparently
rabid dog which, in his or her opinion, cannot be safely captured or held by
reasonable and ordinary means.



   (B)   A dog taken into custody by the Dog Warden shall be disposed
of as follows.



      (1)   The dog shall be held for a period of 20 days (or the
minimum period then required) if the only cause for taking up the dog was
failure to have a city tax tag, or shall be held for a period of five days if
taken up for any other cause, and, subject to the provisions of division (C)
below, the owner or other person may reclaim the dog upon payment to the city
of the following fees, as applicable:



         (a)   A pick-up charge of $10 on the first occasion the
dog has to be impounded, and $25 for each subsequent impoundment; and



         (b)   For the care and feeding of the dog, a charge of
$2 per day or portion thereof, or a charge of $.25 per day (or the maximum
per diem fee) if the only cause for taking up the dog was failure to have a
city tax tag.



      (2)   However, if the owner of the dog is known and it is
believed that the owner wishes to reclaim the dog but is prevented from doing
so by unusual circumstances, the Dog Warden may keep the dog in custody for a
longer period of time than provided above pending reclamation by the owner
before further disposition is made.



      (3)   If the 20-day or five-day period, as applicable under
division (B)(1) above, has expired and the dog has not been reclaimed, the
Dog Warden may;



         (a)   Release the dog into the custody and possession of
any person over 18 years of age who pays to the city the fees owing under
division (B)(1) above;



         (b)   Sell the dog, the proceeds to be deposited in the
General Fund for the benefit of the city; or



         (c)   Humanely destroy the dog, or authorize its
destruction by the officials of any pound to which it has been delivered.



   (C)   No dog taken up hereunder may be released to its owner or
keeper without the authorization of the Dog Warden, which shall only be given
if:



      (1)   Evidence is given that the city tax has been paid, if
owing;



      (2)   The dog is vaccinated against rabies by a qualified
veterinarian, at the expense of the owner, if not previously vaccinated;
and/or



      (3)   The fees required under division (B)(1) above are paid
to the city.



   (D)   In addition to any liability for costs as herein provided, any
owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog who permits his or her dog to be in
violation of divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b), or (A)(1)(c) above shall be
liable for citation, prosecution, and penalties as provided by law for
violation of the respective statutes therein indicated.



(1985 Code, § 4-4-1)  (Ord. 2-1974, passed 7-9-1974; Ord. 7A-1984, passed -
-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.02  ANIMALS OR FOWL DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge or control of
any animal or fowl, or for any person who has the authority or power to
prevent the same, to suffer or permit any such animal or fowl by barking,
howling, crying, or other distressing, loud, or unusual noise or by offensive
odor to disturb the peace, quiet, or enjoyment of any place, neighborhood,
family, person, property, or life in the city.  The disturbing of the peace,
quiet or enjoyment by any such animal or fowl is hereby declared a
nuisance.  A report shall be made by any person so disturbed by written
statement of the facts and circumstances thereof upon that form as shall be
supplied by and delivered to the Police Department.  Any person who suffers
or permits any such nuisance to exist shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $100.  This provision shall not apply to properly
zoned and constructed kennels, animal hospitals, or pounds.



(Ord. 1-1991, passed 2-12-1991; Ord. 2000-5, passed 4-12-2000)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99




VICIOUS DOGS




§ 91.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTACK.  Intentionally biting or attempting to bite, or charging at,
leaping upon, or pursuing any person with evident purpose of causing bodily
injury to the person so that the person has reasonable grounds to fear for
his or her safety.  Merely barking or growling at a person does not in
itself constitute an ATTACK.



   VICIOUS DOG.  Any dog which on one or more prior occasions is known to
have attacked any person without warrantable cause shall be deemed a VICIOUS
DOG for purposes of this subchapter.



   WARRANTABLE CAUSE.  There exist good and reasonable grounds to believe
that an attack by a dog was precipitated by one or more of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   The dog was itself being deliberately threatened or
subjected to unreasonable taunting and teasing by the person attacked;



      (2)   The dog was acting to protect the person or property of
its owner or keeper from an unlawful intruder or attacker; and/or



      (3)   The dog is a specially  trained animal to be used for
guard or law enforcement duties, and acted on command in that capacity.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-1)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. C2-1985,
passed - -1985)



§ 91.16  SPECIAL RESTRAINT OF VICIOUS AND CERTAIN OTHER DOGS.



   Any person who owns or keeps a vicious dog; any dog that is of breed
commonly referred to as “pit bull” and commonly recognizable and
identifiable as such; an Akita; an American Pit Bull Terrier; an American
Staffordshire Terrier; a Chow Chow; a Doberman; a Staffordshire Bull Terrier;
a Staffordshire Terrier; a Pressa Canarios (Spanish Pit Bull); a Rottweiler;
a wolf hybrid; any dog whose sire or dam is one of the aforementioned dogs;
any dog known by the owner(s) to be a pit bull or one of the aforementioned
dogs; and any dog identifiable as having any of the aforementioned dogs as an
element in their breeding; shall be required to constantly restrain the dog
in one of the following ways:



   (A)   By keeping the dog confined within an enclosed building on the
owner’s or keeper’s premises;



   (B)   By keeping the dog within a completely fenced and locked pen
of chain link at least six feet high with metal top rail and concrete footing
and completely covered with strong material sufficient to prevent the escape
of the dog, the pen to be marked with a “Beware of Dog” sign on all sides;



   (C)   By walking the dog, only on a strong leash no longer than six
feet in length and directly held and controlled by a person over 18 years of
age and physically capable of controlling the dog, and the dog being muzzled
at all times; or



   (D)   By keeping the dog confined within a locked vehicle
sufficiently enclosed to prevent the escape of the dog and to prevent
innocent passers-by from attempting to pet the dog.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-2)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. C2-1985,
passed - -1985; Ord. 5-1985, passed 8-13-1985; Ord. 2008-6, passed
10-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.17  EVIDENCE OF VICIOUSNESS; IMPOUNDMENT; DUTY OF DOG WARDEN.



   (A)   The first occasion on which a dog commits an attack without
warrantable cause shall constitute prima facie evidence that the dog is
vicious.



   (B)   Upon being notified of or discovering any such attack, it
shall be the duty of the Dog Warden to impound the dog in the manner provided
by § 91.01.



   (C)   If the dog has succeeded in biting or scratching any person
during the attack, the Dog Warden shall also promptly notify the County
Health Officer of the incident, and may not release the dog from impoundment
without the authorization of the County Health Officer.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-3)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. C2-1985,
passed - -1985)



§ 91.18  RELEASE OF VICIOUS DOG FROM IMPOUNDMENT.



   A dog which has been impounded on the first occasion for a vicious
attack may be released to its owner or keeper in accordance with the same
procedures and requirements of the release of other impounded dogs as
prescribed by § 91.01, but subject to any applicable further restriction as
provided by § 91.17 above and to the following additional requirements.



   (A)   The dog may only be released directly to its owner or keeper
who acknowledges possession of the dog as his or her property, and who is
over 18 years of age.



   (B)   The Dog Warden shall keep a special record detailing the
incident of viciousness and including:



      (1)   A description of the dog;



      (2)   The city license tag number of the dog;



      (3)   The name and address of the acknowledged owner or keeper
claiming the dog; and



      (4)   A pledge, signed by the owner or keeper, acknowledging
the above and certifying that he or she understands and will strictly abide
by the requirements for keeping the vicious dog as prescribed by § 91.16.



   (C)   An owner or keeper who has signed a pledge as provided by
division (B)(4) above may not sell, give, or transfer principal custody of
the dog to another person within the city without informing the other person
that the dog is vicious and must be kept in accordance with § 91.16.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-4)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. C2-1985,
passed - -1985)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.19  SUBSEQUENT ATTACKS BY VICIOUS DOG.



   In the event that any dog which has been found vicious in accordance
with § 91.17 commits any further attack without warrantable cause, the dog
shall be deemed to pose an undue public nuisance and hazard to the public
safety and welfare, and shall be subject to summary destruction.  However,
if the Dog Warden deems that the dog may be safely captured by ordinary
means, he or she shall impound and keep the dog confined for not less than 72
hours before destroying the dog, and shall inform the owner or keeper as
recorded pursuant to § 91.17 that he or she may file an appeal with the City
Council prior to the end of the 72-hour period, and if an appeal is so filed
the dog shall be kept impounded pending the City Council’s decision. 
Destruction of a dog impounded under this section may also be delayed by
order of the County Health Officer.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-5)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984; Ord. C2-1985,
passed - -1985)



§ 91.20  VIOLATION OF RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS.



   Any owner or keeper of a vicious dog who fails to keep the dog
restrained as provided by § 91.16, either willfully or through negligence,
or who transfers the dog to another person without informing them of its
viciousness as required by § 91.18, shall be liable to a fine as provided in
§ 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 4-4.5-6)  (Ord. 14C-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 92:  PUBLIC HOUSING



Section



   92.01   Housing Authority created



   92.02   Low-rent housing units; agreement between city and Housing
Authority



§ 92.01  HOUSING AUTHORITY CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Housing Authority for the city,
consisting of five members designated as Commissioners, and who shall be
residents of the city.  Commissioners shall be appointed by the City Council
for the terms provided by I.C. 36-7-18-7.  The Housing Authority shall
constitute a municipal corporation, and shall perform all the duties and have
all the powers granted to it by I.C. 36-7-18 et seq.



      (1)   The members of the Authority shall select a Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson, and adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations as provided by
statute.



      (2)   Commissioners shall receive no salary paid out of city
funds or monies appropriated to the Housing Authority by the city, but may be
compensated in the amount to which they are entitled under I.C. 36-7-18-8 out
of other corporate monies or revenues of the Housing Authority.



      (3)   Commissioners may be removed for causes set out in the
appropriate statutes.



      (4)   No Commissioner or employee may acquire any interest in
any plan, project or contract of the Authority.  In the event that any such
Commissioner shall acquire any interest in any such project, contract or
anything proposed by the Authority, he or she shall make a complete written
report which shall be entered upon the minutes of the Authority.



      (5)   The Authority shall present an annual report to the City
Council at the Council meeting in January of each year for the year
immediately preceding.



   (B)   The City Council, or other appropriate city officers,
departments, and agencies with the approval of the City Council, may as
necessary exercise any of the powers or perform any of the functions
described under I.C. 36-7-19-3 on behalf or in aid of the Housing Authority.



(1985 Code, § 5-4-1)  (Res. passed 1-26-1981; Ord. 8A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 92.02  LOW-RENT HOUSING UNITS; AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND HOUSING
AUTHORITY.



   The city shall enter into a “Cooperation Agreement” between the
city and the Housing Authority relative to 50 units of low-rent housing to be
developed or acquired by the Housing Authority with financial assistance of
the United States acting through the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development, excluding any low-rent housing project covered by any contract
for loans and annual contributions entered into between the local authority
and the United States, or its predecessor agencies, prior to 2-9-1981.  The
City Council President is authorized to execute the agreement on behalf of
the city.



(1985 Code, § 5-4-2)  (Res. passed 2-9-1981; Ord. 8A-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 93:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   93.01   Department of Parks and Recreation



   93.02   Closing time of parks and playgrounds



   93.03   Littering and disorderly conduct prohibited



   93.04   Greendale Park softball rules



   93.05   Alcoholic beverages in parks restricted



§ 93.01  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   The Department of Parks and Recreation for the city is formed
under the provisions of I.C. 36-10-3 et seq.



   (B)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall be composed of four
members appointed by the City Council.  The members shall be appointed on
the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation, but no
more than two members may be affiliated with the same political party.



   (C)   (1)   Each appointment to the Board of Parks and Recreation
shall be for a four-year term.  All terms shall expire on the first Monday
of January, but a member shall continue in office until his or her successor
is appointed.  The appointing authorities shall make initial appointments
within 90 days after the creation of the Department.  If an appointment for
any new term is not made by the first Monday in April, the incumbent shall
serve another term.  If a vacancy on the Board occurs, the appointing
authority shall appoint a person to serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.



      (2)   Neither an executive of the city nor a member of the
City Council may serve.



   (D)   (1)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board
of Parks and recreation shall elect a President and a Vice-President.  The
Vice-President shall have the authority to act as the President of the Board
during the absence or disability of the President.  The Board may select a
Secretary either from within or without its own membership.



      (2)   All meetings of the Board are open to the public.  The
Board shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings, but it shall meet
at least quarterly.



      (3)   Special meetings of the Board may be called by the
President or by any two members by written request to the Secretary.  The
Secretary shall send to each member, at least two days before a special
meeting, a written notice fixing the time, place, and purpose of the
meeting.  Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of
the special meeting is fixed at a regular meeting or if all members are
present at the special meeting.



      (4)   A majority of the members constitutes a quorum.  Action
of the Board is not official unless it is authorized by at least three
members present and acting.



   (E)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall have the power to
perform all acts necessary to acquire and develop sites and facilities to
conduct the programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation
functions.  In addition, the Board shall have all the powers and duties
listed in I.C. 36-10-3.



   (F)   The Board of Parks and Recreation shall prepare and submit an
annual budget in the same manner as other departments of the city government,
as prescribed by the State Board of Accounts.  The Board may accept gifts,
donations, and subsidies for park and recreation purposes.



(Ord. 6-1985, passed - -1985; Ord. 3-1993, passed 7-13-1993)



§ 93.02  CLOSING TIME OF PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.



   All city parks and playgrounds will be closed at 11:00 p.m. local time,
and anyone therein after that time will be fined, upon conviction, as set
forth in § 10.99 for each offense.  However, this section shall not apply
to a person who has a valid written permit for overtime use obtained from the
city, nor to persons using the Greendale Cabin under permit issued by the
city.



(1985 Code, § 5-2-1)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 6-30-1978)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 93.03  LITTERING AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful to litter, engage in disorderly conduct while loitering,
or to maliciously destroy city property on parks or playgrounds, or on any
public place, and for violation of this section each person convicted shall
be fined as set forth in § 10.99, and shall additionally be liable to the
city for any damages sustained to its property.



(1985 Code, § 5-2-2)  (Ord. 8-1978, passed 6-30-1978)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 93.04  GREENDALE PARK SOFTBALL RULES.



   (A)   The following rules and requirements govern the use of the
softball diamond in Greendale Park.



      (1)   The team manager shall be responsible for the conduct of
his or her team at all times.  He or she shall further be responsible for
policing the area.  All refuse, bottles, cans, paper, and the like must be
placed in waste containers provided.



      (2)   Batting practice in any area other than the ball diamond
proper is strictly prohibited.



      (3)   Players retrieving a ball from tennis courts must first
remove shoes with cleated soles.



      (4)   No inning can be started after 11:00 p.m.



      (5)   The park shall be cleared of all team players within one
hour after the ending of the last game.



      (6)   In addition to the above rules, the following apply to
tournament play only.



         (a)   The team, or person(s) in charge of the
tournament, is responsible for the complete clean-up of the park area.



         (b) Tournament play is limited to a maximum of two weekends
per month during the softball season.



         (c)   A fee of $20 per day, payable in advance, will be
charged for use of the ball diamond.  Check shall be made payable to city.



         (d)   Receipt for payment of the fee must be available
upon request.



   (B)   Any team or player violating any of the rules as herewith set
forth will be banned from further play in Greendale Park for the rest of the
softball season.



(1985 Code, § 5-2-3)  (Ord. 8A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.05  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS RESTRICTED.



   Except as hereafter permitted, and notwithstanding any other provisions
of this chapter, no person shall consume alcoholic beverages in areas
designated as “parks” by the city.  However, this restriction does not
apply to the Greendale Cabin Recreational Building in connection with events
which are properly sanctioned by the city.  PROPERLY SANCTIONED means that
the person sponsoring the event has applied in writing for permission to
serve and/or consume alcoholic beverages and the request has been approved by
the City Council President or City Manager.  Any person violating this
section shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 5-2-4)  (Ord. 8-1984, passed 7-10-1984; Ord. 8B-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Use and Regulation of Sidewalks and Gutters



   94.01   Specifications and regulations for construction of curbs and
gutters



   94.02   Snow removal; duty of adjacent property owners



   94.03   Skating on sidewalks prohibited



   94.04   Spitting on sidewalks prohibited



Control of Rubbish, Weeds, and Rank Vegetation



   94.15   Maintenance of weeds and rank vegetation prohibited



   94.16   Maintenance of trash and debris prohibited



   94.17   Enforcement; mandatory abatement




USE AND REGULATION OF SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS




§ 94.01  SPECIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS AND
GUTTERS.



   All curbs and gutters hereafter constructed in the city shall conform
with the following specifications and regulations, which are on file in the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer, and shall be subject to approval by the proper
officials of the city.



   (A)   Types and design of combined curbs and gutters.  The combined
curb and gutter may consist of either the vertical curb type or the
“rolled” type curb, though one type, only, shall be used on both sides of
any street and between street intersections.



      (1)   Vertical type.  The curb shall have a thickness of six
inches, a vertical height of 12 inches in the rear, and a vertical height of
six inches in front.  The gutter portion shall be six inches in thickness,
18 inches in width, and the outside edge of the gutter pan, on the top, shall
be one inch higher than the pan where the pan joins the curb.  The outer
edge of the curb, at the top, shall be rounded to a radius of one inch and
the junction of the curb and the top of the gutter pan shall be rounded to a
radius of three-fourth inch.  The inner edge of the curb and the outer edge
of the gutter pan shall be rounded to a radius of one-fourth inch.



      (2) Rolled-type; alternative designs.  The entire width of the
curb and gutter shall be 24 inches with all measurements being the same as in
the vertical curb type, excepting that the junction of the face of the curb
with the top of the curb shall be rounded to about a four-inch radius, the
face of the curb shall slope about one to one, and the junction of the top of
the pan with the face of the curb shall be rounded to about a six-inch
radius.  However, any other type or design of rolled-type curb which
maintains essentially the curvatures herein required may be used if approved
by the City Engineer.  The combined curb and gutter of either type shall be
built in uniform sections of ten feet, excepting where shorter sections are
required for closures.  No section shall be less than four feet in length. 
The sections shall be separated by steel templets of a thickness of about
one-eighth inch, excepting that at intervals of 40 feet and at the beginning
and ending of all curb returns, a one-half inch of preformed expansion joint
material shall be inserted.  Steel templets, as well as the preformed
expansion joint material, shall be set truly perpendicular, the steel
templets being carefully withdrawn after the concrete has sufficiently
hardened.  The preformed expansion material shall be placed between the back
of the curb and any abutting sidewalk or structure.  All edges at the joints
shall be rounded to a radius of about one-fourth inch.



   (B)   Excavation and fill requirements.  The subgrade for the
combined curb and gutter shall be excavated or filled to the required depth
below the finished surface in accordance with the lines and grades
established by the city.  All soft and yielding spots and all unsuitable
material shall be removed and the entire subgrade shall be thoroughly
compacted to a firm, smooth surface.  All fill material required to bring
the bottom of the curb and gutter to the required subgrade elevation shall
consist of pea gravel, coarse sand, or other approved material, all of which
shall be placed on a well-compacted base.



   (C)   Construction of concrete forms; inspection.  Forms shall be
accurately set to line and grade and shall be of sufficient strength to
successfully resist springing out of shape during the process of depositing
the concrete.  The forms shall be securely staked and held firmly in
position and shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar.  No
concrete shall be placed within the forms before the same have been inspected
and approved by an authorized official of the city.



   (D)   Concrete specifications.  The portland cement concrete used
in the construction of combined curbs and gutter shall be capable of
developing an ultimate compressive strength of not less than 3,000 pounds per
square inch in 28 days.  “Ready mixed” concrete shall be transit mixed
and shall be mixed and delivered in accordance with the Standard
Specification for Ready Mixed Concrete, ASTM Designation C-94.  If the
concrete is mixed at the site, the amount and size of aggregates and the
amount of water used, together with the manner of mixing and placing, shall
be such as will produce a concrete with the compressive strength herein set
out.  Excessive over mixing, requiring additions of water to preserve the
required consistency, will not be permitted.



   (E)   Placing of concrete.  Concrete shall be placed within the
forms before initial set has occurred, and in no event after it has contained
its water content for more than 30 minutes.  Retempering to preserve
required consistency will not be permitted.  The concrete shall be deposited
within the forms in the quantity that, after being compacted, the surface
shall be at the required grade.  The concrete shall be tamped and spaded
until mortar entirely covers the surface, after which it shall be finished
true and even with a wood float.



   (F)   Finishing and curing. After the concrete has been placed
within forms and shall have been well tamped and spaded, and has sufficiently
hardened, then the forms shall be removed and any minor defects filled with
one to two mortar and then rubbed smooth with a wood float.  Then the
exposed surfaces shall be rubbed smooth and finished true and even while the
concrete is still green.  The surface shall be smoothed by rubbing with a
mortar brick or wood block, using plenty of water either by dipping the block
or brick in water or by throwing water on the surface with a brush.  The
combined curb and gutter shall be kept moist for not less than 48 hours
either by maintaining water on the surface, by covering with a plastic cloth,
or by spraying a water proofing compound over the surface to form a film.



(1985 Code, § 5-1-1)  (Ord. 7-1958, passed - -1958)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.02  SNOW REMOVAL; DUTY OF ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNERS.



   It shall be the duty of owners or occupants of real estate in the city
to remove by 10:00 a.m. of the following day all snow and ice from the
sidewalks fronting along and abutting the property owned or occupied thereby,
and to keep the sidewalks clear of snow and ice.  Any person failing to
comply with this section shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 5-1-2)  (Ord. passed 1-7-1919; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984;
Ord. C2-1985, passed - -1985; Ord. 5-1985, passed 8-13-1985)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 94.03  SKATING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or use roller skates,
skateboards, or other such devices on the sidewalks of the city, except in
the necessary act of crossing.  Any person violating this section shall be
liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 5-1-3)  (Ord. passed 10-3-1916; Ord. 12-1984, passed -
-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk within the
city.  Any person who violates this section shall be liable to a fine as set
forth in § 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 5-1-4)  (Ord. passed 11-3-1915; Ord. 12-1984, passed -
-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99




CONTROL OF RUBBISH, WEEDS, AND RANK VEGETATION




§ 94.15  MAINTENANCE OF WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain his or her real estate
in any of the following conditions:



   (A)   Failing to keep the cover crop, grass, and weeds mowed to a
height of six inches or less;



   (B)   Permitting trees or shrubbery to grow or hang over a sidewalk,
street, or alley at a height of less than seven feet; and/or



   (C)   Permitting trees or shrubbery to grow at the intersection of
any two streets or of a street and alley in such a manner as to obstruct the
vision of operators of vehicular traffic.



(1985 Code, § 4-5-1)  (Ord. passed 6-10-1952; Ord. 7A-1984, passed -
-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.16  MAINTENANCE OF TRASH AND DEBRIS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall fail to keep his or her real estate in a clean and neat
condition free of trash and debris.  This restriction includes, but is not
limited to, the leaving in any area open to view of broken, discarded, or
disused furniture, household appliances or equipment; or machinery or machine
parts; waste paper, cardboard, packing boxes or materials; scrap lumber,
bricks, masonry, shingles and other construction materials; scrap metal, old
tires, and rubber or plastic products; piles of old grass cuttings, leaves,
plant trimmings, and dead limbs; broken or discarded glass, glassware, or
crockery; and similar junk and refuse.  All the materials must either be
removed and properly disposed of or must be stored in areas where they cannot
be seen from public property or adjoining premises.  However, this section
shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance and operation of a public
or commercial scrap yard, salvage operation, refuse transfer facility, or
landfill located in a properly zoned area and operated in accordance with
City Zoning Ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 4-5-2)  (Ord. passed 6-10-1952; Ord. 7A-1984, passed - -1984;
Ord. 14D-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.17  ENFORCEMENT; MANDATORY ABATEMENT.



   Any violation of this subchapter shall be deemed to constitute a
nuisance and a danger to public health and general welfare, and shall be
subject to mandatory abatement as follows.



   (A)   In the case of any such nuisance arising out of the failure to
mow weeds, grass, or other cover crop in violation of § 94.15, it shall be
the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer upon learning of violation to send
notice of the violation to the owner of the property.  If the violation is
not corrected within five days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall correct
the violation and serve an accounting of the actual costs to the city upon
the property owner.  If the owner does not reimburse the city within ten
days thereafter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall certify a copy of the
accounting to the County Auditor plus any additional costs incurred in the
certification in accordance with I.C. 36-7-10.1-4.



   (B)   In the case of the unlawful maintenance of trash and debris in
violation of § 94.16, the appropriate authorities of the city responsible
for enforcement may do either or both of the following:



      (1)   Require and pursue the appropriate corrective action in
the manner provided by I.C. 36-1-6-2; and/or



      (2)   File a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction
to enjoin the continued maintenance of the nuisance, in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 36-1-6-4.



(1985 Code, § 4-5-3)  (Ord. passed 6-10-1952; Ord. 7A-1984, passed - -1984;
Ord. 2009-4, passed 6-10-2009)



CHAPTER 95:  TREES



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Creation and establishment of City Tree Board



   95.03   Term of office



   95.04   Compensation



   95.05   Duties and responsibilities



   95.06   Operation



   95.07   Tree species to be planted



   95.08   Spacing



   95.09   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   95.10   Distance from street corners and fireplugs



   95.11   Utilities



   95.12   Public tree care



   95.13   Pruning standards



   95.14   Tree topping



   95.15   Pruning and corner clearance



   95.16   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property



   95.17   Removal of stumps



   95.18   Protection of trees



   95.19   Interference with Tree Board



   95.20   Arborist license and bond



   95.21   Review by City Council



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in
public parks, all areas owned by the city, and all areas to which the public
has free access as a park.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues,
or ways within the city.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.02  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE BOARD.



   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board.  The Tree
Board shall consist of five members.  A member must be a resident of the
city.  The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
City Council.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.03  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of each member of the Tree Board shall be three years. 
However, the term of two of the members appointed to the first Board shall be
for only one year and the term of two other members of the first Board shall
be for two years.  In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term
of any member, that member’s successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.04  COMPENSATION.



   Members of Board shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.05  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study,
investigate, counsel, develop, and administer a written plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas.  The plan
will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and
approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan.



   (B)   The Board shall promote and supervise the establishment of a
tree inventory for street and park trees.  The inventory shall be updated
with the results of inspections every three years.



   (C)   The Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report, and recommend upon any special matter or
question coming within the scope of its work.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.06  OPERATION.



   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and
regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.07  TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   The Tree Board shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for
planting along streets in three size classes based on mature height:  small
(under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet), and large (over 40 feet).  Efforts
shall be made to ensure a sufficient diversity of tree species.  Lists of
trees not suitable for planting shall also be created by the Tree Board.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.08  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in § 95.07, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following:  small trees, 15 feet; medium trees, 25 feet;
and large trees, 35 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by
a licensed landscape architect.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.09  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the tree species size classes listed in § 95.07,
and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than two feet for
small trees and three feet for medium or large trees.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.10  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.



   No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any street corner,
measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines.  No
street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fireplug.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.11  UTILITIES.



   No street trees other than those species accepted as small trees by the
Tree Board may be planted under, or within ten feet of, any overheard utility
wire.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.12  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and
remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
grounds.



   (B)   The Tree Board may remove, or cause or order to be removed,
any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason
of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines, or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect, or other pest.  This section does not prohibit the planting of
street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of the trees is in accordance with §§ 95.07 through 95.11.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.13  PRUNING STANDARDS.



   All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the ANSI A300
standards for tree care operations.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.14  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city
department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public
property.  Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.  Crown
reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted, where appropriate. 
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the
Tree Board.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.15  PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE.



   (A)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the city shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not
severely obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any
street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13 feet above
street surface or eight feet above the sidewalk surface.  The owners shall
remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs
which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.  The city shall have
the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or
interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign or sight
triangle at intersections.



   (B)   Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors
shall be maintained clear of the conductors by the electric utility company
in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements.  A utility tree
trimming policy must be reviewed by the utility company and City Tree Board
prior to any trimming by the utility company.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.16  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased tree on private property within the city when the tree constitutes a
hazard to life and property, or harbors insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city.  The Tree Board will notify
in writing the owners of the trees.  Removal shall be done by the owners at
their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice.  In
the event of failure of owners to comply with the provisions, the city shall
have the authority to remove the trees and charge the cost of removal on the
owner’s property tax notice.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.17  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.18  PROTECTION OF TREES.



   (A)   In order to maintain the overall forest, reasonable efforts
shall be made to replace trees that are removed and to protect quality trees
that are endangered.



   (B)   Trees removed by decision of the Tree Board or by natural
causes shall be replaced somewhere in the forest on a one-for-one basis
within one year.  The location and species of any replacement tree shall be
determined by the Tree Board.



   (C)   Trees of desirable species and good health shall be protected
as much as possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair,
utilities work above and below ground, and other similar activities.  The
zone of protection shall include the ground beneath the canopy of the tree.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.19  INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street
trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.20  ARBORIST LICENSE AND BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within
the city without first applying for and procuring a license.  The license
fee shall be $25 annually in advance; provided, however, that no license
shall be required of any public service company including electric utilities
and their agents and contractors or city employee doing the work in the
pursuit of their public service endeavors.  Before any license shall be
issued, each applicant shall first file proof that the applicant has
liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and
$100,000 property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or
damaged from the pursuit of the endeavors as herein described.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.21  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decisions of the Tree Board.  Any person may appeal from any ruling or order
of the Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter and make final
decisions.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500.



(Ord. 2003-10, passed 12-10-2003)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VEHICLES



      111.   MERCHANDISING ESTABLISHMENTS



      112.   TEMPORARY SALES



      113.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      114.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  COMMERCIAL PASSENGER VEHICLES



Section



   110.01   Application of chapter



   110.02   Insurance



   110.03   Vehicle requirements



   110.04   Rates



   110.05   Stands



   110.06   Rights of vehicles licensed by other governmental entity



   110.07   Business and vehicle licenses



   110.08   Commercial vehicle driver’s license



   110.09   Application for license



   110.10   Submission of application to Council



   110.11   Fees



   110.12   License term



   110.13   Suspension or revocation



   110.14   Violations



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter applies to all motor vehicles, including
automobiles, vans, limousines, and other similar vehicles used to carry or
transport passengers for hire, commercially, or incidental to a business or
other commercial enterprise.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to buses, vans, or other vehicles
used only to transport students to or from public or private school
facilities or functions, however, it shall apply to other transportation of
passengers.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-1)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1997-1, passed
1-13-1997)



§ 110.02  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Each commercial vehicle shall have evidence of fully paid
primary insurance during its license period for coverage upon liability for
bodily injury or property damage to passengers or others with limits as
determined by the seating capacity as follows:



 

Passenger Seating Capacity


16 or more
 
$5,000,000


11 to 15
 
$1,500,000


5 to 10
 
$1,000,000


4 or less
 
$300,000



 



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall not issue any license and shall
revoke any license issued for any vehicle for which it appears is not covered
by insurance as provided.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-2)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996; Ord. 1997-1, passed 1-13-1997)



§ 110.03  VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Sanitation; equipment.  All commercial vehicles shall be kept
in a proper condition for safe operation and be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.  Each owner and/or operator of a commercial vehicle
shall deliver the vehicle to the Police Department for inspection when
requested.



   (B)   Lettering.  Each vehicle, while operated, shall have on each
side, in letters readable from a distance of 20 feet, the name of the
licensee operating it and the number of the license issued to it.



   (C)   Inspection.  Each vehicle is subject to inspection at any
time by the Police Department to insure the safety of its passengers and
compliance with all ordinances and statutes.  Any vehicle not in compliance
is subject to an order by the Police Department for suspension of service.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-3)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.04  RATES.



   This chapter is applicable to all commercial vehicles used to transport
passengers whether the transport is incidental to a business and provided
without charge or if a fare is charged for the transport by a vehicle by
means of either a charge for the vehicle or to each passenger.  Any charges
for the transport of a passenger or passengers by a commercial motor vehicle
shall be in compliance with that as determined and approved from time to time
by the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-4)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995)



§ 110.05  STANDS.



   Location of any stand for a commercial vehicle shall be as determined
and approved by the City Council.  Each stand shall be marked by signs and
it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other than a commercial vehicle in
the designated area.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-5)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.06  RIGHTS OF VEHICLES LICENSED BY OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a
commercial vehicle regularly licensed by another governmental entity
transporting or from delivering passengers by travel upon a federal, state,
or county roadway within the city.



   (B)   This chapter shall be applicable to any commercial vehicle
licensed by another governmental entity delivering passengers by travel upon
a municipal roadway or portion thereof within the city.



   (C)   Only commercial vehicles and operators thereof licensed by the
city are permitted to pick up or deliver passengers within the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-6)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  BUSINESS AND VEHICLE LICENSES.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial passenger vehicle or
engage in the business thereof in the city without a valid license permit
issued by the city for the business and each vehicle operated by the
business.  No license shall be issued to or held by any person or business
entity in which a partner, officer, director, or other principal thereof,
does not have good character or who has a finding, judgment, conviction, or
other record of a misdemeanor or a felony involving either violence, personal
injury, or moral turpitude.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-7)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996; Ord. 1997-1, passed 1-13-1997)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE DRIVER’S LICENSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive a commercial vehicle in the city
without a valid license permit issued by the city in compliance with this
chapter.



   (B)   No commercial vehicle shall be driven by any individual who
does not have a valid license to operate or drive the appropriate vehicle
issued by or recognized as valid at law in the state and who in addition, is
not a person of good character or who has a finding, judgment, conviction, or
other record of any:



      (1)   Moving traffic violation within any consecutive 12-month
period over the previous three years or more than five moving traffic
violations within the previous five years;



      (2)   Operation or driving while under the influence;



      (3)   Misdemeanor involving violence or personal injury; and/or



      (4)   Felony.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-8)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996; Ord. 1997-1, passed 1-13-1997; Ord. 2010-1, passed
1-13-2010)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.09  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Application for a license shall be made in writing to the
Clerk-Treasurer upon the forms as provided by the city and shall include all
names by which the applicant has been known or identified, all addresses of
residences or places of business maintained by the applicant, a description
of any traffic, criminal or regulatory charge, official notice, finding of
liability, conviction or other determination made by any governmental or
regulatory agency, unit or other entity.  If the applicant is a business
entity, the information shall be provided for each partner, officer,
director, or other principal thereof.  Included with the application, the
applicant shall provide a driving record and criminal history background
report.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-9)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996; Ord. 2001-7, passed 6-13-2001)



§ 110.10  SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION TO COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall present the application for the
license when properly executed to the Council.  The Council may require the
personal appearance of the applicant, and in addition,  may require the
investigation of matters by the Police Department or other investigating
private or public agency it considers appropriate to consideration of the
license and the cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant subject to the
further requirement of a deposit of the costs in advance.



   (B)   Notwithstanding compliance with any or all other provisions of
this chapter, the Council may, in its discretion, reject or deny any
application for a commercial vehicle or operator license if the Council finds
there is an insufficient need or it would be detrimental to the welfare of
the community; issue a permit subject to special conditions as it deems
appropriate for the safety or welfare of the passengers of commercial
vehicles and/or the community.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-10)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996)



§ 110.11  FEES.



   An application fee of $50 shall be paid for an initial commercial
passenger vehicle business license.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-11)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1997-1,
passed 1-13-1997; Ord. 2001-7, passed 6-13-2001)



§ 110.12  LICENSE TERM.



   After the application for a license has been duly approved by the City
Council, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant
authorizing the operation of a commercial passenger vehicle within the
municipality for a period of not more than one year from the date of issuance
thereof.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-12)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995)



§ 110.13  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Mayor shall have the power to suspend or revoke any
license issued upon violation by the licensee of this chapter, any other
provision of this code, or any regulation or statute of the state or the
United States of America.



   (B)   The power granted herein shall be exercised as follows.



      (1)   Upon information that a violation has been committed by
a licensee, the Mayor shall cause such to be investigated and upon a finding
that the violation reasonably appears to have been committed by the licensee,
may, after three days’ notice to the licensee suspend any or all licenses
issued to the licensee for the period as considered appropriate.



      (2)   In the event a suspension shall be ordered, the licensee
shall be notified in writing at the address as stated in the license
application.  Any licensee receiving a notice of suspension may, within 15
days from the date of the order, request a hearing for reconsideration.



      (3)   Upon delivery of a written request for reconsideration
of a license suspension delivered to the Clerk-Treasurer not more than 15
days from the date of the notice of suspension, the Mayor shall set a date
and place for hearing not less than ten nor more than 20 days from the date
the request was received by the Clerk-Treasurer.



      (4)   At any hearing for reconsideration for a license
suspension, the licensee shall present the evidence, statements, or witnesses
relevant to the suspension as the Mayor shall rule appropriate whereafter the
Mayor may modify, amend, rescind, or continue the order of suspension.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-13)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996)



§ 110.14  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Citation and a proceeding to enforce this chapter shall be
brought in the name of the city and any fine or expense paid upon judgment
shall be remitted to the City General Fund.



   (B)   In the event prosecution of an ordinance violation is brought
by the City Attorney or any other attorney designated by the city as the
Municipal Prosecutor, the city shall be entitled upon trial to recover
reasonable attorney fees therefor in addition to any fines or costs as
otherwise provided.



(1985 Code, § 7-10-14)  (Ord. 1995-9, passed 12-12-1995; Ord. 1996-19,
passed 12-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other provision or procedure, any person who
violates the requirements of, or operates a commercial vehicle in violation
of, this chapter shall be subject to a judgment of penalty fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $2,500.



(Ord. 2001-7, passed 6-13-2001)



CHAPTER 111:  MERCHANDISING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   111.01   License required



   111.02   License application procedure; fee



   111.03   Denial of license; cause; hearing



   111.04   Term of validity



   111.05   Exemptions from license requirement



   111.06   Limitation of effect on prior licenses



   111.07   Liquor retailer permits



§ 111.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful, except as provided in § 111.05, for any person
to establish or locate a market-house, market-place, store, or establishment
of any kind wherein merchandise is sold at retail or wholesale within the
limits of the city unless a license is issued authorizing the same by the
City Council.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-1)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE; FEE.



   (A)   Before any person begins the operation of a market-house,
market-place, or store for the purpose of retailing or wholesaling, the
person shall make application to the City Council for a license authorizing
the person to operate the business at retail or wholesale, setting forth:



      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner if a sole
proprietorship, the partners if a co-partnership, or the resident agent for
service of process and principal officers if a corporation;



      (2)   A listing of the names and locations of any other
wholesale or retail merchandising businesses currently or previously owned or
operated by any of the above named persons;



      (3)   A statement as to whether any of the above named persons
have ever been convicted in any criminal or civil action involving the
illegal, fraudulent, or unscrupulous operation of a wholesale or retail
merchandising establishment, and if so, a description of the nature and
circumstances of the conviction;



      (4)   The trade name under which the proposed establishment
will operate;



      (5)   The nature of the business to be operated by retail or
wholesale, with a description of the building, and location of the business
to be established; and



      (6)   Any other information which the City Council may require
either on a prescribed application form or by specific request.



   (B)   The application shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer for
review by the City Council, and shall be accompanied by an application fee of
$50, one-half of which shall be refunded only if the application is denied. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly submit any false or
incomplete information on the application, and any license granted pursuant
to an application found to contain false or incomplete information shall
thereby be deemed invalidated.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-2)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  DENIAL OF LICENSE; CAUSE; HEARING.



   (A)   The City Council shall not unreasonably deny or withhold any
wholesale or retail merchandising license when properly applied for, but may
deny or defer granting the license if it finds that:



      (1)   The persons proposing to own or operate the business are
not of good and lawful reputation, or that further investigation is warranted;



      (2)   The nature or location of the proposed business is such
that its conduct would create undue and unreasonable disturbance, congestion
of traffic, devaluation of surrounding property, or other substantive public
hazard or nuisance as commonly defined in law; or



      (3)   The nature or location of the proposed business is such
as to be in nonconformance with other applicable laws, ordinances, and
regulations, or that any other required licenses or permits have not been
properly obtained or applied for.



   (B)   However, if the City Council proposes to deny or defer a
license, it shall notify the applicant and afford the applicant a reasonable
opportunity to appear before the Council at a public meeting to rebut any
adverse findings or make the further covenants, agreements, or stipulations
as may be required, before final action is taken.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-3)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 111.04  TERM OF VALIDITY.



   A license shall remain valid indefinitely so long as the original
applicant continues to operate a wholesale or retail merchandising business
of substantially the same character at the location for which the license was
originally granted.  The license may not be transferred to a new business
location.  A license may be continued or transferred to a new owner, with
the consent of the City Council, in the event that the substantive character
or ownership of the business changes, provided that the original licensee or
new owner files with the Clerk-Treasurer an application for license amendment
describing the nature of the change and providing the appropriate amended
information as reflected in the original application, and pays a
nonrefundable license amendment fee of $5.  The City Council may deny the
continuance or transfer of the license if it finds on reasonable grounds that
the continued operation of the business after the proposed change would not
be consistent with the conditions under which the original license was
granted, but shall notify the interested parties and afford them opportunity
for hearing in the same manner as in the case of an original license
application.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-4)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 111.05  EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   A wholesale or retail merchandising license is not required with
respect to the conduct of any wholesale or retail merchandising activity
authorized under a peddler’s or itinerant merchant’s registration
certificate granted under §§ 112.15 through 112.21, or which is exempt from
the registration requirement under the provisions of § 112.17, nor for
concessionary sales of merchandise upon the premises of a licensed wholesale
or retail merchant in conjunction with his or her usual business; nor for the
maintenance and operation of automatic vending machines.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-5)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 111.06  LIMITATION OF EFFECT ON PRIOR LICENSES.



   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended nor shall be construed to
invalidate nor impose any additional requirements with respect to any license
held prior to the taking effect of any included provision, except that the
requirements of § 111.04 shall hereafter fully apply to the prior license.



(1985 Code, § 3-4-6)  (Ord. 1-1947, passed 6-10-1947; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 111.07  LIQUOR RETAILER PERMITS.



   The city hereby consents to the issuance of retail liquor permits to
applicants otherwise duly qualified under the laws of the state in respect to
premises located within the city.



(1985 Code, § 3-2-1)  (Ord. 4-1959, passed 5-12-1959)



CHAPTER 112:  TEMPORARY SALES



Section



General Provisions Concerning Sales



   112.01   Garage sale regulations



   112.02   Signs



Peddlers and Itinerant Merchants



   112.15   Definitions



   112.16   Registration certificate required; carrying and display



   112.17   Exceptions and exemptions



   112.18   Requisites of certificate



   112.19   Form of registration certificate



   112.20   Regulation of business activity



   112.21   Violation




GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING SALES




§ 112.01  GARAGE SALE REGULATIONS.



   Garage sales, porch sales, yard sales, and the like are permitted,
provided the following conditions are met.



   (A)   No merchandise other than that normally found in the household
may be sold.



   (B)   The sale shall not exceed three days.



   (C)   No more than three sales per year are allowed at any one
location.



   (D)   The sale is restricted to the owner or occupant of the
premises on which the sale is being conducted.



   (E)   All persons having a yard sale shall apply for a permit at
least one week prior to the first day of the sale.  The application is to be
made at the office of the City Manager. The city shall provide all applicants
with a copy of these sales ordinances.



(1985 Code, § 4-6-1)  (Ord. 1989-1, passed 2-14-1989; Ord. 2011-3, passed
5-11-2011)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.02  SIGNS.



   (A)   Sale signs are prohibited on city property, including but not
limited to parks, playgrounds, utility poles, guard rails, public buildings,
public right-of-ways, except the grass area between street curbs and
sidewalks.



   (B)   Sale signs are permitted on private property, but only with
the permission of the property owner.



   (C)   All sale signs shall be removed within 24 hours of the end of
the sale.



   (D)   Any sale sign in violation of this section may be removed by
the private property owner or any city employee or official. The person
responsible for placement of the sign may be subject to a fine.



   (E)   A fine of $50 may be imposed for the first violation; a fine
of $100 for the second and each subsequent violation in the same calendar
year.



(Ord. 5-1990, passed 9-11-1990; Ord. 2011-3, passed 5-11-2011)   Penalty,
see § 10.99




PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS




§ 112.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMODITY.  Any real or personal property, merchandise, produce,
intangible asset or security (including any insurance policy), subscription,
membership, ticket, or work or service to be performed by contract or
agreement other than as an employee or agent of the person for whom the work
or service is performed, irrespective of whether any of the aforementioned
are offered for immediate or future delivery.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person who sells or offers for sale any
commodity and who:



      (1)   Conducts the business by standing or moving about on
streets, sidewalks, or other public places, or by operating from a portable
stand, pushcart, or vehicle not constituting a fixed and established place of
business; or



      (2)   Operates as a transient merchant, conducting the
business from a room, building, structure, or lot rented or leased for the
purpose of carrying on the business, and with intent to do so for less than a
continuous period of 120 days.



   PEDDLER.  Any person who sells or offers for sale any commodity by
traveling door-to-door between dwelling places or business establishments; or
by telephone solicitation, calling from one telephone to another, both of
which are located within the corporate limits of the city, when there exists
an offer or intent by the caller to complete or agree to complete the sale of
a commodity by means of the telephone call; and without prior consent or
arrangement by the occupant of the premises or his or her presumptive agent.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-1)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 112.16  REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; CARRYING AND DISPLAY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant merchant to
solicit, sell, or offer for sale any commodity to any person within the
corporate limits of the city without first having registered with the
Clerk-Treasurer and having been issued a registration certificate, except as
provided in § 112.17.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-2)



   (B)   Every registrant shall carry his or her registration
certificate with him or her at all times while engaged in selling or
soliciting and shall, when so required, either by an officer or a private
person with whom the registrant is, or is attempting to, conduct business,
produce and show the person or officer the registration certificate.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-6)



(Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 112.17  EXCEPTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following described persons are exempt from the
registration requirements imposed under § 112.16 for the purposes indicated:



      (1)   A person selling commodities for the bona fide purpose
of raising funds in support of a nonprofit charitable, educational,
scientific, religious, or civic organization or purpose when no part of the
net proceeds are retained by the person for his or her own benefit;



      (2)   A person soliciting subscriptions to newspapers;



      (3)   A farmer selling unprocessed produce raised on his or
her own farm;



      (4)   A person selling his or her own property which was not
originally acquired for purposes of resale;



      (5)   A person holding a city wholesale or retail merchants
license who temporarily and incidentally to the conduct of his or her regular
business conducts a sale of commodities from a temporary structure on his or
her own premises, or conducts the sale from different premises but under the
name of his or her regularly established and licensed business;



      (6)   Honorably discharged military service veterans of a
class described by I.C. 10-17-5-1 or I.C. 10-17-5-2 who have obtained a
license from the County Auditor pursuant to I.C. 25-25-2-1, and who limit
their activities to vending, hawking, or peddling goods, wares, fruits, and
merchandise; or



      (7)   Manufacturers, producers, wholesalers, wholesale
distributors, jobbers, or their authorized sales representatives soliciting
orders from retail merchants or other wholesale consumers or wholesale
distributors at the latter’s place of business.



   (B)   However, a person exempt from registration under this section
is not exempt from the regulations imposed under § 112.20 to the extent
otherwise applicable.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-3)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 112.18  REQUISITES OF CERTIFICATE.



   Prior to the issuance of a registration certificate, the applicant
shall:



   (A)   Furnish the Clerk-Treasurer with two photographs of a size not
smaller than two inches by one and one-half inches, one of which shall be
attached to the registration certificate issued to the registrant and the
other shall be retained in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer;



   (B)   Submit to the taking of a set of fingerprints by the Police
Department and shall sign the cards upon which the fingerprints are taken;



   (C)   Deposit with the Clerk-Treasurer a bond in the penal sum of
$500 executed by a surety company or two  freeholders of land located within
the city or a cash bond of equal amount, conditioned that all commodities not
as represented will be refunded by the applicant for registration, and any
person aggrieved by the action of any registrant shall have a right of action
on the bond for the recovery of money or damages or both, in the event a cash
bond is deposited, the bond shall be retained by the Clerk-Treasurer for 90
days after the expiration of the registration certificate in connection with
which the bond was deposited; and/or



   (D)   Pay to the Clerk-Treasurer a registration fee of $20.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-4)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 112.19  FORM OF REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The registration certificate required by § 112.16 shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and home address of the registrant;



      (2)   The name and address of any person, firm, or corporation
by whom the registrant is employed or represents;



      (3)   A photograph of the registrant;



      (4)   The date of issuance of the registration certificate;



      (5)   The expiration date of the registration certificate;



      (6)   A description of the thing to be sold and/or services to
be performed; and



      (7)   A declaration by the Clerk-Treasurer that the registrant
has complied with all prerequisites for issuance of the registration
certificate.



   (B)   Every registration certificate as required by § 112.16 shall
expire six calendar months after the date issued.  If the registrant wishes
to continue his or her business after expiration of his or her certificate, a
new registration certificate must be obtained.  No registration certificate
issued under this chapter shall in any manner be assignable or transferable,
or authorize any other person than the registrant to sell or solicit, or
authorize the sale of, or solicitation for, any other class of articles than
those specified in the registration certificates.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-5)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 112.20  REGULATION OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY.



   The following regulations govern the conduct of business under a
registration certificate.



   (A)   No peddler nor itinerant merchant may sell nor offer to sell
any commodity, except newspapers, to the occupant of any dwelling place,
either by going from dwelling place to dwelling place or by telephone, before
9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. local time without first securing permission
from a resident of the dwelling place.



   (B)   No peddler nor itinerant merchant shall ask for nor accept an
invitation to enter a house from a minor child.



   (C)   No minor child shall be asked to buy anything nor to answer
any personal questions without his or her parent or guardian being present.



   (D)   The owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises may
place a sign at the door or other entrance to the premises saying “No
Soliciting,” “No Peddling,” or other wording of clearly similar
meaning, and all peddlers shall be obliged to honor and observe the sign.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-7)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)



§ 112.21  VIOLATION.



   Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined as set forth in § 10.99, and the
President of the City Council may revoke a registration certificate issued
under this chapter to any person for any violation or failure to comply with
its provisions.



(1985 Code, § 3-3-8)  (Ord. 4-1968, passed 11-12-1968; Ord. 6A-1984, passed
- -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Findings



   113.02   Purpose and intent



   113.03   Definitions



   113.04   Effective date



Regulations



   113.15   Establishment and classification of businesses regulated



   113.16   Measurement of distance



   113.17   Location of sexually oriented businesses



   113.18   Regulations governing existing sexually oriented businesses



   113.19   Injunction



   113.20   Sexually oriented business permit; purpose and intent



   113.21   Permit required



   113.22   Investigation and application



   113.23   Issuance of permit



   113.24   Annual permit fee



   113.25   Inspection



   113.26   Expiration of permit



   113.27   Suspension of permit



   113.28   Revocation of permit



   113.29   Judicial review of permit denial, suspension, or revocation



   113.30   Transfer of permit



   113.31   Sexually oriented business employee license



   113.32   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit
films or videos in video booths



   113.33   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented
businesses



   113.34   Advertising and lighting regulations



   113.35   Hours of operation



   113.36   Nudity at sexually oriented businesses prohibited



   113.37   Regulations pertaining to live entertainment



   113.38   Additional criminal prohibitions for the operation of a
sexually oriented business without a valid permit



   113.39   Exemptions



   113.40   Immunity from prosecution



   113.41   Prohibition of distribution of sexual devices



   113.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 113.01  FINDINGS.



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses in the incorporated area of the
city require special supervision from public safety and health agencies of
the county in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare
of the patrons of the businesses as well as citizens of the city.



   (B)   The City Council and staff have conducted an extensive review
of land use studies concerning the secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses in other cities, including, but not limited to:  Garden Grove,
California (1991); Phoenix, Arizona (1986); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980);
Houston, Texas (1983); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Amarillo, Texas (1977);
Los Angeles, California (1977); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Austin, Texas (1986):
Seattle, Washington (1989); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); Beaumont, Texas
(1982); and Whittier, California (1978).



   (C)   From review of other cities’ studies and testimony from its
citizens there is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented
businesses, because of their very nature, have a deleterious effect on both
existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas
adjacent to them, causing, among other adverse secondary effects, increased
crime and downgrading of property values.



   (D)   It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses, due to
their nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when they are operating in close proximity to each other,
thereby contributing to crime, lower property values, urban blight, and
downgrading of the quality of life in the adjacent area.



   (E)   The City Council finds that sexually oriented businesses are
frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution and
sexual liaisons of casual nature.



   (F)   Increased crime and unhealthful conduct tend to accompany,
concentrate around, and be aggravated by sexually oriented businesses,
including, but not limited to, prostitution, pandering, exposing minors to
harmful materials, possession and distribution of obscene materials and child
pornography, possession and sale of controlled substances, and violent crimes
against persons and property.



   (G)   Concern over sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, is
a legitimate health concern of the city, which demands reasonable regulations
of sexually oriented businesses in order to protect the health and well-being
of the citizens.



   (H)   The City Council has considered, in part, each of the
following matters:



      (1)   Areas within close walking distance of single- and
multiple-family dwellings should be free of sexually oriented business uses;



      (2)   Areas where children could be expected to walk,
patronize, or frequent to be free of sexually oriented business uses;



      (3)   Sexually oriented business uses should be located in
areas of the city which are not in close proximity to residential uses,
churches, parks, or other public facilities and schools;



      (4)   The image of the city as a pleasant, attractive place to
reside will be adversely affected by the presence of sexually oriented
business uses in close proximity to residential land uses, churches, parks
and other public facilities, and schools;



      (5)   Sexually oriented business land use should be regulated
by zoning to separate it from other dissimilar uses just as any other land
use should be separated from uses with characteristics different from itself;



      (6)   Residents of the city, and persons who are nonresidents
but use the city for shopping and other commercial needs, will move from the
community or shop elsewhere if sexually oriented business land uses are
allowed to locate in close proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and
other public facilities, and schools;



      (7)   Merchants in the commercial area of the city are
concerned about the adverse impact and the character and quality of the city
in the event that sexually oriented business land uses are located within
close proximity to residential uses, churches, parks and other public
facilities, and schools, and that the locations will reduce retail trade to
commercial uses in the vicinity, thus reducing property values and tax
revenues to the city; and that the adverse effect on property values and
business would cause the loss to some commercial districts within the city
leading to further deterioration of the commercial quality of the city; and



      (8)   No evidence has been presented to show that location of
sexually oriented businesses within the city will improve the commercial
viability or quality of life of the community.



   (I)   Zoning, licensing, and other police power regulations are
legitimate reasonable means of accountability to ensure that the operators of
sexually oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and are
located in places which minimize the adverse secondary effects which
naturally accompany the operation.



   (J)   The city recognizes the possible harmful effects on children
and minors exposed to the effects of such businesses and the deterioration of
respect for family values, and the avoidance of such businesses which
necessitate children walking through or visiting in the immediate
neighborhood of the businesses.



   (K)   The City Council finds that there would be a deterioration in
the quality of businesses which choose to operate in and around the sexually
oriented businesses.



   (L)   The City Council desires to minimize and control these adverse
secondary effects and thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens; protect the citizens from increased crime; preserve the quality of
life; preserve the property values and the character of surrounding
neighborhoods and businesses; deter the spread of urban blight; and protect
against the threat to health from the spread of communicable and social
diseases.



   (M)   The City Council has considered the decisions of the United
States Supreme Court regarding local regulation of sexually oriented
businesses, including, but not limited to, Young v. American Mini-Theatres,
Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) reh. denied 429 U.S. 873; Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, 475 U.S. 41 (1986) reh. denied 475 U.S. 1132; FW/PBS, Inc. v.
Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560 (1991);
National City v. Wiener, et al, 3 Cal.4th 832 (1993); and Topanga Press,
Inc., et al v. City of Los Angeles, 939 F.2d 1524 (1993).



   (N)   The City Council has determined that locational criteria alone
do not adequately protect health, safety, and general welfare of the people
of the city and thus certain requirements with respect to the ownership and
operation of sexually oriented businesses is in the public interest.



   (O)   The City Council, consistent with sale and consumption of
alcohol and outside advertising limitations, further finds that restricted
hours of operation will further prevent the adverse secondary effects of
sexually oriented business.



   (P)   It is not the intent of this chapter to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact a content neutral
ordinance which addresses the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented
businesses.



   (Q)   It is not the intent of the City Council to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene material, and the Council recognizes
that state law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects
and encourages state enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity
statutes against the illegal activities in the city.



   (R)   The City Council and staff find that the live entertainment
presented by some sexually oriented business establishments involves a
considerable amount of bodily contact between patrons and performers,
including physical contact while giving and receiving gratuities, hugging,
kissing, and sexual fondling of performers and patrons.  Many sexually
oriented businesses offer “sofa/couch” or “straddle” dancing.  In
these “dances,” the performers sometimes do things such as sit in the
patron’s lap; place their breasts against the patron’s face; while
physical contact is maintained, gyrate in such a manner as to simulate sexual
intercourse; allow patrons to suckle their breasts; breathe heavily into a
patron’s groin area; and bite and gnaw at, as well as fondle, the genitals
of patrons.  Performers, both during the semi-private dances and on a stage,
have pulled patrons’ faces into their vaginal areas, including a “whipped
cream” dance wherein patrons were allowed to spoon feed themselves with
whipped cream that had been spread on the breasts and vaginal and anal areas
of the performer.  In other instances, males have placed a peeled banana
between their legs while female performers have eaten the banana.  Some of
this conduct would violate the State Penal Code, which prohibits, among other
things, the public fondling of genitals.  Although no actual sexual
intercourse may be involved, contact titillation provided in exchange for a
gratuity is tantamount to prostitution.



   (S)   The City Council and staff find that a number of courts have
upheld distance limitations between performers and patrons, prohibitions
against physical contact between performers and patrons, and direct payment
and receipt of gratuities between performers and patrons at sexually oriented
business establishments that provide live entertainment:  BSA, Inc., v. King
County, 804 F.2d 1104, 1110-11 (9th Cir. 1986) (six feet); Kev, Inc. v.
Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1091 (9th Cir. 1986) (ten feet); Zanganeh v. Hymes,
844 F. Supp. 1087, 1091 (D.Md. 1994) (six feet); T-Marc, Inc. v. Pinellas
County, 804 F. Supp. 1500, 1506 (M.D.Fla. 1992) (three feet), DLS, Inc., v.
City of Chattanooga, 894 F. Supp. 1140 (E.D. Term. 1995) (six feet and
prohibiting direct payment and receipt of gratuities); Parker v. Whitfield
County, 463 S.E.2d 116 (Ga. 1995) (prohibiting tipping and contact between
dancers and patrons); and Hang On, Inc., v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1243
(5th Cir. 1995) (aff’d prohibition on touching or any contact between
dancers and patrons).  The City Council and staff have also reviewed a
letter by the City of Newport Beach, California, regarding “The Mermaid
Application,” dated 4-12-1996, containing a notice or revocation and
refusal to renew a sexually oriented business permit based on repeated
violations of the Newport Beach Municipal Code.  The violations include
distance limitations and direct payment and receipt of gratuities between
performers and patrons during physical contact, including sexual contact.



   (T)   The City Council and staff recognize that preventing
prostitution and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases are clearly
within its police powers:  Southeastern Promotions, Inc., v. Conrad, 341 F.
Supp. 465, 477 (E.D. Tenn. 1972), rev’d on other grounds, 420 U.S. 546
(1975).  The City Council and staff believe that prohibiting physical
contact between performers and patrons at a sexually oriented business
establishment, prohibiting performers from soliciting payment of gratuities
from patrons, and the direct payment of gratuities to performers by patrons
are a reasonable and effective means of addressing these legitimate
governmental interests.  It is not the intent of the city to place any
impermissible burden on any constitutionally protected expression or
expressive conduct by the enactment or enforcement of these regulations.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate sexually
oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the
adverse secondary effects from the sexually oriented businesses.  The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented materials.  Similarly, it is not the intent nor
effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.  Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not the person is paid a salary,
wage, or other compensation by the operator of the business.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any such business as a
new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this section;



      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses
defined in this section to any other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.



      (1)   The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover
human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or
nipple of the female breast.



   OPERATOR.  The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or
person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.



   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES.  Any premises that requires a license
and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.



   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   PUBLIC BUILDING.  Any building owned, leased, or held by the United
States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school
district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the
United States, which building is used for governmental purposes.



   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA.  Public land which has been designated
for park or recreational activities, including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness
areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control,
operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE.  A single-family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple-family, or mobile park or subdivision and campground as defined in
this code.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private educational facility, including, but
not limited to, child day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities.  SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does
not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only
incidentally as a school.



   SEMI-NUDE.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, escort agency, or nude model studio.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES are those businesses defined as follows.



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE.  An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide
projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for
viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO
STORE.  A commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial
portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion
of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its
interior business or advertising to the sale, or rental for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; and/or



         (b) An establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of
materials depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store.  Any other business purposes will not serve to
exempt the establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal business
purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the
specified materials which are characterized by an emphasis on matters that
depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, “bottle
club,” or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, which regularly features films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   ADULT MOTEL.  A motel, hotel, or similar commercial
establishment which:



         (a)   Offers public accommodations, for any form of
consideration, which provide patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas. and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, or
television;



         (b)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time less than ten hours; or



         (c)   Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours.



      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial
establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of
consideration.



      (6)   ESCORT.  A person who, for any form of consideration,
agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.



      (7)   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



      (8)   MASSAGE PARLOR.



         (a)   Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities,
or where any person providing the treatment, manipulation, or service related
thereto exposes his or her specified anatomical areas.



         (b)   The definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital; nor by a
licensed hospital; nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or
osteopath; nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a
licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath; nor by trainers for
any amateur, semi-professional, or professional athlete or athletic team or
school athletic program.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:



         (a)   Human genitals and pubic region;



         (b)   Buttocks and anus; and



         (c)   Female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Includes any of the following:



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
sodomy;



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; and



      (4)   Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals, whether between humans, a human and an animal, or
for the purpose of sadomasochistic sexual abuse or stimulation.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Increase in
the floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15% at the time of
original application or as approved at the time of the last renewal of
license.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. 
Includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; and/or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person
possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.04  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect on upon publication within 30 days of
passage.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)




REGULATIONS




§ 113.15  ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED.



   (A)   The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be
subject to the following restrictions.



   (B)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of
the following sexually oriented



businesses, as defined in § 113.03, within 1,000 feet of another such
business or within 1,000 feet of any religious institution, school, boys
club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization, or public park or
public building, or within 1,000 feet of any property zoned for residential
use or used for residential purposes, and are classified as follows:



      (1)   Adult arcade;



      (2)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store;



      (3)   Adult cabaret;



      (4)   Adult motel;



      (5)   Adult motion picture theater;



      (6)   Adult theater;



      (7)   Massage parlor;



      (8)   Sexual encounter establishment;



      (9)   Escort agency; or



      (10)   Nude model studio.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.16  MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.



   As regarding § 113.15, distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business.  The distance between any sexually oriented business and any
religious institution; public or private elementary or secondary school; boys
club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization; public park or
public building; or any properties zoned for residential use or used for
residential purposes, shall also be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest point of the
property line of the premises where the sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest point of the property line of the premises of a
religious institution; public or private elementary or secondary school; boys
club, girls club, or similar existing youth organization; public park or
public building; or any properties zoned for residential use or used for
residential purposes.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.17  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and
governed by the procedures and policies specified in this subchapter.



   (B)   In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be subject
to the following restrictions.



      (1)   The person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, except as provided in
§ 113.15.



      (2)   The person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates
or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:



         (a)   Any religious institution;



         (b)   Any school;



         (c)   The boundary of any residential district;



         (d)   A public park adjacent to any residential district;



         (e)   A property line of a lot devoted to residential
use; or



         (f)   A boys club, girls club, or similar existing youth
organization.



      (3)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another such business, which will include any adult arcade, adult book store,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, massage parlor, or any sexual encounter establishment.



      (4)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she causes or
permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one
sexually oriented business within the same building, structure, or portion
thereof, or causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented
business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.



      (5)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



         (a)   By a proprietary school licensed by the state, a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;



         (b)   By a private college or university which maintains
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or



         (c)   In a structure:



            1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior
of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is
available for viewing;



            2.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



            3.   Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.18  REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Any sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating on
8-1-2001 that is in violation of §§ 113.15 and 113.17 shall be deemed a
nonconforming use.  A nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a
period of one year, with a possible extension of one year to be granted by
the Plan Commission only upon a convincing showing of extreme financial
hardship which is defined as the recovery of the initial financial investment
in the nonconforming use, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more.  The nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use.  If two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
established and continually operating at the particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming,
except as provided in division (B) below.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as conforming
use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a
church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, public
building, residential district, or residential lot within  1,000 feet of the
sexually oriented business.  This provision applies only to the renewal of a
valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a
permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired
or has been revoked.



   (C)   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section
shall apply for the permit provided for by § 113.21 within 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter.  Any establishment, existing prior to the
effective date of this chapter, shall comply with the regulations pertaining
to §§ 113.32, 113.34, and 113.41, within 60 days of the effective date of
this chapter, and all other applicable permit regulations within 30 days of
the effective date of this chapter.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.19  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without having a valid permit due to locational restrictions is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal
violation.  The violation shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 and/or 30
days’ imprisonment, and if an injunction must be sought, attorneys’ fees
and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the
sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.20  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT; PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the
city.  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials.  Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market.  Neither is it the intent or effect of this
chapter to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene, or
harmful to minors, material.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate
without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for the
particular type of business.  It shall be unlawful and a person commits a
misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business without the permit.



   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designee is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented
businesses.  The City Manager or his or her designee is also responsible for
ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit
is being applied for complies with all locational requirements of §§
113.15, 113.17, and 113.18, all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now
in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of this
chapter in the city and the City Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   The Police Department is responsible for providing information
on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during
the time period set forth.



   (D)   The City Code Enforcement Office is responsible for inspecting
a proposed, permitted, or non-permitted sexually oriented business in order
to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and
ordinances.



   (E)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by
the city.  Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall
file with the city an original and two copies of a sworn permit application
on the standard application form supplied by the city or designee.



   (F)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his or
her legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he or she
is 18 years of age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; or



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of
all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and the name of the
registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she
must state:



         (a)   The sexually oriented business’s fictitious
name; and



         (b)   Submit the required state registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
listed pursuant to this section has, within the two- or five-year period as
specified in § 113.23 immediately preceding the date of the application,
been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified
criminal act involved, the date of conviction, and the place of conviction;



      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
pursuant to this section and/or licenses of this chapter has had a previous
permit under this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business
ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension, or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other
individuals listed pursuant to this section has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director, or principal stockholder of a
corporation that is permitted under this chapter whose permit has previously
been denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, or revocation;



      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed
pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this
chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another
city or county and, if so, the names and locations of those other permitted
businesses;



      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the
applicant is filing;



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any;



      (8)   The applicant’s mailing addresses and residential
address;



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s);



      (10)   The applicant’s driver’s permit number, Social
Security number, and/or his or her state or federally issued tax
identification number;



      (11)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business.  The sketch or diagram need nor be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;



      (12)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by a state-registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
established existing uses regulated by this chapter within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution, synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within
1,000  feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any
residentially zoned area or residential property within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified.  For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted;



      (13)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she must sign the application for a permit
as applicant.  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.  If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a 10% or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant; and



      (14)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business which shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes, or other
video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then the person shall comply with the application
requirements stated in this subchapter.



   (G)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by
this section in the event that the information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application.  The failure to comply with the continuing
duty within 30 days from the date of the change, by supplementing the
application on file with the City Manager or his or her designee, shall be
grounds for suspension of a permit.



   (H)   In the event that the City Manager or his or her designee
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he or she shall
promptly notify the applicant of the fact and allow the applicant ten days to
properly complete the application.  (The time period for granting or denying
a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed
an opportunity to properly complete the application.)



   (I)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with health, fire, and building codes and laws.



   (J)   The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable
application fee of $100 at the tine of filing an application under this
section.



   (K)   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any
sexually oriented business defined in this chapter, and as part of any
application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from
the city or its designee a certification that the proposed location of the
business complies with the locational requirements of §§ 113.17 and 113.18.



   (L)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him or her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.



   (M)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to
the exercise by the City Manager, or his or her designee, the City Police
Department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances, and codes applicable in the city of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.



   (N)   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to §
113.31.  This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is
granted or renewed.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.22  INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city, or its
designee, shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall
immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the Police
Department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health,
fire, and building codes and laws.  Each department or agency shall promptly
conduct an investigation of the applicant, application, and the proposed
sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law
and as set forth in this chapter.  The investigation shall be completed
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city or its designee. 
At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall
indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of
the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state
the reasons therefor.  The Police Department shall only be required to
certify the NCIC records request check mentioned in § 113.23.  The Police
Department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.



   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it
finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of
any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in
effect in the city.  After its indication of approval or disapproval, each
department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the
application to the city or its designee.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.23  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Generally.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall
grant or deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its
proper filing.  Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the
applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the
applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the
permit is sought, unless and until the city, or its designee, notifies the
applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons(s) for that
denial.



   (B)   Grant of application for permit.



      (1)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall grant
the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in division (C)
below is present.



      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name
of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business.  The permit shall also indicate
that the sexually oriented business whether permitted or not may be subject
to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United
States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc, 501 U.S. 560
(1991).  The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place an or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at
any time.



   (C)   Denial of application for permit.



      (1)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall deny the
application for any of the following reasons:



         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;



         (b)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue
on his or her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties
assessed against him or her or imposed upon him or her in relation to a
sexually oriented business;



         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person who has
been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months;



         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information
required by this section or permit application for the issuance of the permit
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form;



         (e)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire, and
building codes by the department or agency responsible under law for
investigating the compliance;



         (f)   The application or permit fees required by this
chapter have not been paid;



         (g)   An applicant of the proposed business is in
violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the zoning locational requirements
for a sexually oriented business under §§ 113.15, 113.17, and 113.18;



         (h)   The granting of the application would violate a
statute, ordinance, or court order;



         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter
which has been suspended or revoked;



         (j)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the SPECIFIED
CRIMINAL acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape,
or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but
not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the SPECIFIED
CRIMINAL acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape,
or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business, including, but
not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses for
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape, or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful
to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations; offenses occurring
within any 24-month period;



            4.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant; and



            5.   An applicant who has been convicted of the
above described specified criminal acts may qualify for a sexually oriented
business permit only when the time period required in this division (C)(1)(j)
has elapsed.



         (k)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an
employee who does not have a valid license as required in § 113.31.



      (2)   If the City Manager, or his or her designee, denies the
application, he or she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reasons(s) for the denial.



      (3)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular
location within a period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to
lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.24  ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $850.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.25  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the
Code Enforcement Office, the County Health Department, and the Fire
Department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for
the business under this chapter, or his or her agent or employee, commits a
misdemeanor if he or she refuses to permit the lawful inspection of the
premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.26  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 113.23 (for
renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this chapter. 
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be affected.



   (B)   When the City Manager, or his or her designee, denies renewal
of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this chapter
for one year from the date of denial.  If, subsequent to denial, the city,
or its designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit
has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.27  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a
permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter;



      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while
working in the sexually oriented business premises;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises;



      (5)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation,
whether federal, state, or local, the determination being based on
investigation by the division, department, or agency charged with enforcing
the rules or laws.  In the event of the statute, code, ordinance, or
regulation violation, the city, or its designee, shall promptly notify the
permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven-day period
in which to correct the violation.  If the permittee fails to correct the
violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the city, or its
designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee
of the suspension;



      (6)   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to § 113.30.  In
the event that the city, or its designee, suspends a permit on the grounds
that a permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to § 113.30, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, shall forthwith notify the permittee of the
suspension.  The suspension shall remain in effect until the applicable
section of this chapter has been satisfied;



      (7)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
the hours of operation in § 113.35; and/or



      (8)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid
license as required in § 113.31.



   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of
the statute, code, ordinance, or regulation in question has been corrected.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.28  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall revoke a
permit if a cause of suspension in § 113.27 occurs and the permit has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall revoke a
permit upon determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the
applicant’s opportunity for obtaining a permit;



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee’s
permit was suspended;



      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal
act for which the time period required in § 113.23 has not elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed.  The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit;



      (7)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes
or fees related to a sexually oriented business;



      (8)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; and/or



      (9)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually
oriented business under a single roof, except as provided in § 113.15.



   (C)   When the City Manager, or his or her designee, revokes a
permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective.  If, subsequent to revocation, the City
Manager, or his or her designee, finds that the basis for revocation under
this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if
at least 90 days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective. 
If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted
another permit until the number of years required under this section have
elapsed.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.29  JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or
permittee may seek prompt review of the administrative action through the
City Council or special City Review Board if one is established by the
city.  If the denial, suspension, or revocation is affirmed upon review, the
administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.30  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application for permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another
person unless and until the other person satisfies the following requirements:



      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the City
Manager, or his or her designee, which provides that he or she is now the
permittee, which amendment may be obtained only if he or she has completed
and properly filed an application with the City Manager, or his or her
designee, setting forth the information called for under § 113.23 in the
application; and



      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee set
by this chapter.



   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the City Manager, or his or
her designee, has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation
proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee.



   (D)   A permittee shall not transfer his or her permit to another
location.



   (E)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.31  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Generally.  Each individual to be employed in a sexually
oriented business, as defined in § 113.24, who engages in the services
rendered by a semi-nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual
encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a live performer or entertainer
shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25.  The fee is to cover
reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process.



   (B)   Information.  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually
oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to
be provided by the City Manager, or his or her designee, the following
information:



      (1)   The applicant’s name or any ocher names (including
“stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date, and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair, and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   State driver’s license or identification number;



      (7)   Social Security number;



      (8)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least
18 years of age;



      (9)   Attached to the application form as provided above, a
color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and
the applicant’s fingerprints, on a form provided by the City Police
Department.  Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by
the applicant;



      (10)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of
the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether the applicant previously operating or
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has
ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked,
or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended.  In the event of any such denial, revocation, or
suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. 
A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to
the application;



      (11)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act as defined in § 113.23.  This information shall include the
date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and
identifying the convicting jurisdiction;



      (12)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall refer
the sexually oriented business employee license application to the City
Police Department for an investigation to be made of the information as is
contained on the application.  The application process shall be completed
within ten days from the date the completed application is filed.  After the
investigation, the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall issue a
license unless the report from the Sheriff’s Department finds that one or
more of the following findings is true:



         (a)   The applicant has knowingly made any false,
misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for
a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the
Sheriff’s Department or other department of the city;



         (b)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



         (c)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act as defined in § 113.23;



         (d)   The sexually oriented business employee license is
to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law,
statute, rule, or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this
chapter; and/or



         (e)   The applicant has had a sexually oriented business
employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the
current application.



   (C)   Renewal of license.



      (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be
subject to annual renewal by the City Manager, or his or her designee, upon
the written application of the applicant and a finding by the City Manager,
or his or her designee, and the City Police Department that the applicant has
not been convicted of any specified criminal act as defined in § 113.23 or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which
would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.



      (2)   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment
of a fee as set by a resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.32  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS
OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel and regardless
of whether or not a permit has been issued to the business under this
chapter, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video
reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business
permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s
stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  A
manager’s station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area with no
dimension greater than eight feet.  The diagram shall also designate the
place at which this permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.  A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be
drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimension of all areas of the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches.  The City Manager, or his or her
designee, may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the city or its
designee.



      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose, excluding restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment.  If the premises have two or more manager’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations.  The view required in this division (A)(5) must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises,
to ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) above remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials or person at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this
section.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any one time.  No holes, commonly known as “glory holes,” shall be
allowed in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing room from an
adjoining viewing room or restroom.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two footcandles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



   (B)   A person having a duty under division (A) above commits a
misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.33  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for the business under this chapter, and knowingly, or with
reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer, or allow:



   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;



   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to remain at the business
premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian;



   (C)   A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services
at the business premises without the specific consent of a parent or
guardian; or



   (D)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.34  ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under
this chapter, and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by
any applicable state statute or local ordinance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under
this chapter, and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials and/or
performances at the sexually oriented business in any advertising which is
visible outside the premises.  This prohibition shall not extend to
advertising of the existence or location of the sexually oriented business.



   (C)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior
premises to be visible from outside the premises.



   (D)   All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the
sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkways.  This required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees
and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct.  The lighting
shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premise.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the
operator(s) of a sexually oriented business from complying with the
requirements of this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time, or any
subsequently enacted city ordinances or regulations.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.35  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under
this chapter, and allows the business to remain open for business, or to
permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a
sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if,
working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for the business under this chapter, the
employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale,
solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.36  NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen
Theatre., Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 (1991), which upheld the rights of cities
to prohibit live public exposure of a person’(s) private parts,
specifically applies to sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued to the businesses under this chapter),
including the businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or
consumed at the premises.



   (B)   Public nudity is prohibited within the city, including any
sexually oriented business.  Any sexually oriented business which is found
in violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the
provisions of § 113.27.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.37  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, LIVE ENTERTAINMENT is defined as
a person who appears nude, semi-nude, or a performance which is characterized
by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.



   (B)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a
sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least 18
inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at
least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patron(s).  No patron shall
be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a
performer.



   (C)   The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide
separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers which shall
not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.



   (D)   The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide
access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is
completely separated from the patrons.  If the separate access is not
physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum four-foot wide
walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with
a railing, fence, or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers
which prevents any physical contact between patrons and performers.



   (E)   No entertainer, either before, during, or after a performance,
shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical
contact with any entertainer either before, during, or after a performance. 
This division (E) shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the
premises of the establishment.



   (F)   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained
establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this
section.



   (G)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer.  A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer
shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located
separately from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical
contact between a patron and a performer.  No performer shall solicit any
gratuity from any patron.



   (H)   No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment
shall cause or allow a performer to contract or engage in any entertainment
such as a “couch” or a “straddle” dance with a patron while in or on
the establishment premises.  No performer shall contract to or engage in a
“couch” or “straddle” dance with a patron while in or on the
establishment premises.  For purposes of this division (H), COUCH DANCE or
STRADDLE DANCE is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally
touching or coming within ten feet of any patron while engaged in the display
or exposure of any specified anatomical area, or any specified sexual
activity.  For purposes of this division (H), EMPLOYEE is defined as it is
in § 113.03.



   (I)   This section shall not apply to an employee of an
establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or
bartender, comes within ten feet of a patron.  No employee shall engage in
any specified sexual activity or display or expose any specified anatomical
area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender.



   (J)   Compliance with this section:



      (1)   For purposes of this section, ESTABLISHMENT is defined
as it is in § 113.03.  No establishment shall be in compliance with this
section until the city’s designated agent(s) have inspected and approved of
the establishment’s compliance.  The city shall have ten days from the
date it receives written notice from the operator that the establishment is
ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of compliance required by this
section.  Failure to approve or disapprove of compliance within ten days
shall constitute a finding of compliance under this section;



      (2)   The operator of an establishment, that has been
providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit,
shall have the time periods listed below in which to bring the establishment
into compliance with this section.  Failure to do so while continuing to
provide live entertainment shall cause the establishment’s permit to be
suspended under § 113.27.  The permit shall remain suspended until the
establishment is approved by the city’s designated agent(s) as being in
full compliance with this section;



      (3)   The operator of establishment, that has been operating
under a valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business
and who wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall
apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation
of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live
entertainment is provided at that establishment.  No live entertainment
permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter;



      (4)   (a)   The applicant for a permit to operate a new
establishment, who wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and
receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is
provided.



         (b)   No live entertainment permit shall be issued until
the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section
and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Division (B) above - 60 days from the date this section
becomes effective;



      (6)   Division (C) above - 90 days from the date this section
becomes effective;



      (7)   Division (D) above - 90 days from the date this section
becomes effective;



      (8)   Division (E) above - upon the date this section becomes
effective;



      (9)   Division (F) above - 60 days from the date this section
becomes effective;



      (10)   Division (G) above - upon the date this section becomes
effective; and



      (11)   Division (H) above - upon the date this section becomes
effective.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.38  ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PROHIBITIONS FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.



   (A)   In addition to the criminal provisions found at other sections
of this chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also
apply to sexually oriented businesses.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he
or she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business,
regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under
this chapter, and the person knows or should know that:



      (1)   The business does not have a sexually oriented business
permit under this chapter for any applicable classification;



      (2)   The business has a permit which is under suspension;



      (3)   The business has a permit which has been revoked; or



      (4)   The business has a permit which has expired.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.39  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this
chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:



      (1)   By a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure:



         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a
student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter
that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or
not it is permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area
during the employee’s bona fide use of a restroom, or during the
employee’s bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to
employees.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.40  IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.



   The city and its designee, the Police Department and all other
departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents, and employees,
charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune
from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon
a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority
conferred by this chapter.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



§ 113.41  PROHIBITION OF DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial
purposes, sell, or offer for sale any device, instrument, or paraphernalia
designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.



   (B)   The devices, instruments, or paraphernalia include, but are
not limited to:  phallic-shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains,
bather restraints, racks, non-medical enema kits, body piercing implements
(excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry), or other tools of
sadomasochistic abuse.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under
the Indiana Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, that person, upon
conviction of the offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60
days in the city jail, or both, in the discretion of the court.  Each
violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense.  Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be
considered as a separate offense.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the
city from taking any other lawful action in any court of competent
jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance.  The other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be
limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for
damages.



      (3)   Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the city from prosecuting any violation of this chapter by means of
a Code Enforcement Board established pursuant to the authority as provided by
the laws of the state.



      (4)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section
shall be cumulative and independently available to the city and the city
shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section
to the full extent allowed by law.



   (B)   Section 113.41.  A violation of § 113.41 is a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 and six months incarceration, or both.



(Ord. 2001-8, passed 9-12-2001)



CHAPTER 114:  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



   114.01   Interim application process



§ 114.01  INTERIM APPLICATION PROCESS.



   There is hereby enacted a three-month interim application process on
the issuance of permits by the city on applications for the construction of
wireless telecommunications facilities and related facilities.



(Ord. 2001-9, passed 8-15-2001)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Discharging weapons in corporate limits prohibited



   130.02   Curfew



   130.03   Begging by children restricted to Halloween



   130.04   Tampering with fire hydrants prohibited



   130.05   Posters or signs on utility poles or trees



   130.06   Tampering with city property/utilities



§ 130.01  DISCHARGING WEAPONS IN CORPORATE LIMITS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, shoot, force, or throw by means of
any firearm, air gun, or other arm or implement a lead, iron, or other hard
substance upon a street, alley, lane, or public place, or within the
corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   However, this section does not apply to:



      (1)   A law enforcement officer;



      (2)   A member of the armed forces acting in the capacity of
military duty;



      (3)   A person acting in defense of his or her own person or
property, or those of another person, to the extent deemed reasonable and
justifiable by law; or



      (4)   An owner of a tract or parcel, or adjacent tracts or
parcels, of real estate having a size of not less than ten acres, or an
individual with written permission on his or her person from such an owner:



         (a)   Within the boundary lines of the real estate
tract(s) or parcel(s);



         (b)   Is more than 300 feet from a neighboring
residence; and



         (c)   Is possessing or discharging a firearm or hunting
in compliance with all laws and regulations of the state.



(1985 Code, § 4-2-1)  (Ord. 1-1962, passed - -; Ord. 7A-1984, passed -
-1984; Ord. 1998-3, passed - -1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for:



      (1)   (a)   Any minor person to loiter, idle, congregate,
stroll, play, or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or
public places or establishments, either on foot or in a vehicle of any kind,
within the city if the minor;



            1.   Is under 15 years, between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. local time of any day; or



            2.   Is 15, 16, or 17 years of age, between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the next day on Sunday through Thursday,
or between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on a Friday or Saturday night and 5:00
a.m. of the succeeding Saturday or Sunday morning.



         (b)   However, this division (A)(1) shall not apply to
any such minor when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or other
adult person having been designated by a parent or guardian to accompany the
minor, or if the minor is engaged in lawful employment or school and church
sponsored activities, or when going directly to or returning directly home
therefrom, provided, however, the minor shall not be permitted to loiter
during prohibited hours in going to or returning to his or her home from the
activities.



      (2)   Any parent, guardian, or other person having the
authorized custody, care, and control of any minor person to knowingly and
willfully permit the person to be in violation of the curfew hours imposed
under division (A)(1) above.



   (B)   Any minor found to be in violation of the curfew hours
prescribed under division (A)(1) above shall be taken into custody by an
enforcement officer and treated as a delinquent child in accordance with I.C.
31-37-3-2(b) and I.C. 31-37-3-3(b).  Any person who violates division (A)(2)
above shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99.



(1985 Code, § 4-3-1)  (Ord. 9-1978, passed 6-30-1978; Ord. 7A-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  BEGGING BY CHILDREN RESTRICTED TO HALLOWEEN.



   “Trick-or-Treating” shall be restricted to Halloween Eve, if the
same falls on a Sunday, or otherwise to the Sunday prior to Halloween Eve,
between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. each year.  It shall be
unlawful for any child to roam the streets or congregate for the purpose of
begging at any other time than the afternoon so designated for
Trick-or-Treating.



(1985 Code, § 4-3-2)  (Ord. 5-1962, passed 10-9-1962; Ord. 7A-1984, passed
- -1984; Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone, except authorized firefighting
personnel or personnel of the City Utility Department in the performance of
their duties, to in any manner tamper with or make use of any fire hydrant
situated in the city without the express written consent of the Manager of
the City Utility Department or the President of the City Council.  However,
this section does not prevent any person, in an emergency, from activating or
using any sprinkler system or an emergency fire hose within or appurtenant to
a building for the purpose of combating a fire pending the arrival of
qualified firefighting personnel.  Any person violating the provisions of
this section shall be liable to a fine as set forth in § 10.99, and shall
additionally be liable for any damages to city property sustained through the
violation.



(1985 Code, § 5-3-1)  (Ord. passed 1-17-1951; Ord. 8A-1984, passed - -1984;
Ord. 12-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  POSTERS OR SIGNS ON UTILITY POLES OR TREES.



   (A)   The policy of the city is not to allow political posters or
signs of any sort, on any utility poles or trees in the city when the poles
or trees are:



      (1)   Owned by the city or any of its agencies or subsidiary
corporations; or



      (2)   Located on public property, or on a public right-of-way
or easement, either primary or secondary.



   (B)   Any city or utility officer or employee is hereby authorized
to remove any such poster or sign; provided, however, that this policy shall
be uniformly and equitably enforced without regard to the political party or
candidate represented by the poster or sign.



(1985 Code, § 5-3-2)  (Res. passed 6-8-1982; Ord. 8A-1984, passed -
-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  TAMPERING WITH CITY PROPERTY/UTILITIES.



   No person shall have access to or tamper with, work in, use, repair,
attach, adjust, and/or regulate any property or device owned by the city
except city employees in the course and scope of their employment or agents
of the city under agreements authorized by the city.  The property or device
shall include, but is not limited to, electric transformers, substations,
meters, meter boxes, poles, junction boxes, service lines, and all associated
equipment above ground or underground, water meters, meter boxes, hydrants,
flush valves, valves, and piping, sewer clean-outs, manholes, and piping,
storm basins, storm pipes, curbs, sidewalks, drives, approaches, roadways,
buildings, and/or fences, tools, trucks, tractors, grading equipment, mowing
equipment, and other equipment.  Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be liable for a fine as prescribed by § 10.99 and, in
addition, shall be liable for any damages caused to city property.



(Ord. 2004-3, passed 3-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      152.   MOBILE HOMES



      153.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



      154.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



      155.   ZONING



      156.   SIGNS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Title; purpose



   150.02   Authority



   150.03   Scope



   150.04   Adoption of rules by reference



   150.05   Application for permits



   150.06   Permit required



   150.07   Other ordinances



   150.08   Fees; required inspections



   150.09   Review of application



   150.10   Inspections



   150.11   Inspection assistance



   150.12   Entry



   150.13   Stop order



   150.14   Certificate of occupancy



   150.15   Workmanship



   150.16   Violations



   150.17   Right of appeal



   150.18   Remedies



Unsafe Buildings



   150.30   Department of Unsafe Buildings



   150.31   Hearing Authority



   150.32   State law adopted



Additional Provisions



   150.40   Outdoor fired furnaces




BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  TITLE; PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory
hereto, shall be known as the Building Code of the city, and may be cited as
such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”



   (B)   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for
the protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general
welfare, and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.02  AUTHORITY.



   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and directed to administer
and enforce all of the provisions of this code.  Whenever in this code it is
provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the
direction of the Building Inspector or any other person appointed by the
Building Inspector, this shall be construed to give the officer only the
discretion of determining whether this code has been complied with; and no
provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to
what this code shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by
ordinances or to enforce this code in an arbitrary or discriminatory
manner.  Any variance from adopted building rules are subject to approval
under I.C. 22-13-2-7(b).



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.03  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alteration,
repair, use, occupancy, and addition to all buildings and structures, other
than industrialized building systems or mobile structures certified under
I.C. 22-15-4 et seq., in the city.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.04  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The following building rules of the State Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, as set out in the following articles of Title 675
of the Indiana Administrative Code, are hereby incorporated by reference in
this code and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same
are published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein:



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards;



         (b)   Indiana Building Code;



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards; and



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Code:  Indiana
One and Two Family Dwelling Code;



      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Code:  Indiana Plumbing Code;



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code; and



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Code:  Indiana Mechanical Code;



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code; and



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Code:  Indiana Swimming Pool
Code.



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the offices of the Clerk-Treasurer and City Manager.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.05  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes,
unless the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.



   (B)   In addition, a copy of a design release issued by the State
Building Inspector and the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3-1
shall be provided to the Building Inspector before issuance of a permit for
construction covered by the design release.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.06  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration,
or repair of any building or structure, the cost of which exceeds $500, using
forms furnished by the Building Inspector, and all fees required by this code
shall be paid to Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.07  OTHER ORDINANCES.



   All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all
other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits,
there shall be paid the fees prescribed in the ordinances.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.08  FEES; REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Residential.



      (1)   The fee for construction of a residential one- or
two-family dwelling or placement of a mobile or prefabricated home is $200,
and includes not more than five inspection occasions.



      (2)   The fee for an addition or alteration of any residential
structure is $45, plus $.05 for each square foot greater than 500 square feet.



      (3)   The fee for any repair or replacement of a residential
roofing, plumbing, heating, or wiring is $50.



      (4)   (a)   In the case of unusually large or complex
buildings, the Building Inspector, at the time an application is filed, shall
determine the number and cost of inspections to be required.



         (b)   Any additional inspections necessary because of
the size or complexity of construction or if any work fails an inspection or
because the work is not ready for inspection at the time indicated by the
builder, an additional fee of $25 must be paid to the city before any
inspection, reinspection, or rescheduled inspection is made.



   (B)   Commercial and other.



      (1)   Basic fees.  The fee for any commercial or other type
of construction, whether new or an addition or alteration or replacement or
repair or otherwise, is determined by the total construction cost thereof as
established by copy of the contract(s), receipt(s), and/or affidavit of the
owner furnished by the applicant as follows:



 


Total Construction Cost

 

Fee





$1 to $500
 
$15


$501 to $2,000
 
$15 for the first $500 plus $2 for each additional $100 or fraction thereof,
to and including $2,000


$2,001 to $50,000
 
$45 for the first $2,000 plus $9 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000


$25,0001 to $50,000
 
$252 for the first $25,000 plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000


$100,001 to $500,000
 
$639.50 for the first $100,000 plus $3.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000


$500,000 to $1,000,000
 
$2,039.50 for the first $500,000 plus $3 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000


$1,000,000 and up
 
$3,539.50 for the first $1,000,000 plus $2 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof




 



      (2)   Other inspections and fees.  The fee for each of the
following shall be $30 per hour, or the total hourly cost to the city,
whichever is greater.  This cost shall include supervision, overhead,
equipment, hourly wages, and fringe benefits of the employees involved:



         (a)   Inspections outside of normal business hours
(minimum charge of two hours);



         (b)   Reinspection fees;



         (c)   Inspections for which no fee is specifically
indicated (minimum charge of one-half hour); and/or



         (d)   Additional plan review required by changes,
additions, or revisions to approved plans (minimum charge of one-half hour).



(Ord. 7-1996, passed 5-15-1996; Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.09  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Inspector
shall:



   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this code;



   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within
the flood plain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage, and  uses construction methods and practices that
will minimize flood damage; and



   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the flood plain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes):



      (1)   Is protected against flood damage;



      (2)   Is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure, flood damage; and



      (3)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.10  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Inspector shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work
being done as are necessary to insure full compliance with the provisions of
this code and the terms of the permit.



   (B)   Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not ready for
inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in
this code.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.11  INSPECTION ASSISTANCE.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designated representative, shall assist
the Building Inspector in the inspection of fire suppression, detection, and
alarm systems and shall provide reports of the inspection to the Building
Inspector.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.12  ENTRY.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Inspector or his
or her duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon
him or her by this code.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.13  STOP ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Building Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing
served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing the work to be done,
and any such persons shall forthwith stop the work until authorized by the
Building Inspector to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.14  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure constructed
after the adoption of this code shall be issued unless the building or
structure was constructed in compliance with the provisions of this code. 
It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a full,
partial, or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Inspector.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.15  WORKMANSHIP.



   All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.16  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the city or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this
code.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.17  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   All persons shall have the right to appeal any order of the Building
Inspector first through the city and then to the Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission of the state in accordance with the provisions of I.C.
22-13-2-7.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)



§ 150.18  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner shall in the name of the city bring actions
in the County Circuit Court, for mandatory and injunctive relief in the
enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order or orders made by the
Building Inspector, and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief
may be joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in this
code.



(Ord. 14-1996, passed 8-14-1996)




UNSAFE BUILDINGS




§ 150.30  DEPARTMENT OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   There is hereby created the Department of Unsafe Buildings.  The
Department of Unsafe Buildings is hereby authorized to administer this
subchapter.  The chief administrative officer of the Department of Unsafe
Buildings shall be appointed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 2001-6, passed 5-9-2001)



§ 150.31  HEARING AUTHORITY.



   There is hereby created the Hearing Authority of the Department of
Unsafe Buildings.  The Hearing Authority shall be composed of all members of
the City Council.



(Ord. 2001-6, passed 5-9-2001)



§ 150.32  STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq., a copy of which is appended to the ordinance
codified in this subchapter, is hereby adopted by reference as if set out
herein in full.



(Ord. 2001-6, passed 5-9-2001)



ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.40  OUTDOOR FIRED FURNACES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to create or utilize an outdoor fired
furnace or burning device intended to provide heat to any structure of any
kind which structure is separate and apart from the outdoor furnace or
burning device itself.



   (B)   This section may be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer,
City Attorney, or any other duly authorized designee of Common Council.



   (C)   Each day during which any violation exists shall be deemed a
separate offense.



   (D)   In addition to any fine imposed, any person deemed to be in
violation of this section shall be responsible for all reasonable attorney
fees or costs incurred by the city in the enforcement and prosecution of this
section.



(Ord. 2010-2, passed 5-12-2010)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   151.01   Statutory authorization



   151.02   Statement of purpose



   151.03   Definitions



   151.04   Disclaimer of liability



   151.05   Abrogation and greater restrictions



Flood Plain Regulations



   151.20   Duties of the Administrator



   151.21   Regulatory flood elevation



   151.22   Improvement location permit



   151.23   Preventing increased damages



   151.24   Protecting buildings



   151.25   Other development requirements



   151.26   Variances



   151.27   Violations




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 151.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The State Legislature granted the power to local units of government
(I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.) to control land use within their jurisdictions in order
to accomplish the following.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.02  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to guide development in the
flood hazard areas in order to reduce the potential for loss of life and
property, reduce the potential for health and safety hazards, and to reduce
the potential for extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief.



   (B)   Under the authority granted to local units of government to
control land use within their jurisdiction, which includes taking into
account the effects of flooding, the City Council hereby adopts the following
flood plain management regulations in order to accomplish the following:



      (1)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or
drainage hazards to others;



      (2)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to
buildings from flood damage;



      (3)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of
flooding;



      (4)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



      (5)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blighted areas; and



      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available
for structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements
of the National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   DEVELOPMENT. 



      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
building or any addition to a building valued at more than $1,000;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a recreational
vehicle on site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction or roads, or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or
the construction of permanent buildings.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR  SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of this chapter.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FBFM.  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.



   FEMA.  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FHBM.  Flood Hazard Boundary Map.



   FIRM.  Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory  flood.  The FLOOD PLAIN includes both the floodway and the
floodway fringe districts.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE or FPG.  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE.  Those portions of the flood plain lying outside the
floodway.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).  An amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).  A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).  An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map.  It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the basement floor;



      (2)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the building;



      (3)   The top of the first floor of buildings elevated on
pilings or constructed on a crawl space with permanent openings; or



      (4)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure below an
elevated building where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to
the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total area of one square foot for every two
square feet of enclosed area subject to flooding.  The bottom of all the
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and/or



         (b)   The enclosed space shall be usable for the parking
of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of this chapter.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure which
is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 151.21.  The REGULATORY FLOOD is also known
by the term BASE FLOOD.



   SFHA or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the regulatory
flood.  The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated 9-16-1982.  The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated the
county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that
may be annexed into the city are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map prepared for the county by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated 9-16-1982.



   STRUCTURE.  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof.  The term includes a gas or liquid storage
tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building.  The term also
includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180
days.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or the improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the “start of
construction” of the improvement.  This term includes structures which
have incurred “substantial damage” regardless of the actual repair work
performed.  The term does not include improvements of structures to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as an
“historic structure.”



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.04  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.  Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions.  Therefore, this chapter does not create
any liability on the part of the community, natural resources, or the state,
for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.05  ABROGATION AND GREATER  RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the City
Council to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program,
including § 151.25.  However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program.  Nor
does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions.  Where this chapter and other ordinance
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall take precedence.  In addition,
the City Council shall assure that all National Flood Insurance Program
regulations and laws are met.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)




FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS




§ 151.20  DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall implement this chapter and
hereafter be referred to as the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator for the city is appointed to review
all development and subdivision proposals to ensure compliance with this
chapter, including, but not limited to, the following duties:



      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs
of the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon
request about permit procedures and flood plain construction techniques;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the State Natural Resources Commission for all development projects
subject to § 151.23, and maintain a record of the authorization (either copy
of actual permit or letter of recommendation);



      (4)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the
top of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and/or substantially
improved buildings constructed in the SFHA.  Inspect before, during, and
after construction;



      (5)   Maintain a record of the engineer’s certificate and
the “as-built” floodproofed elevation of all buildings subject to §
151.24;



      (6)   Cooperate with state and federal flood plain management
agencies to improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the
administration of this chapter.  Submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program; and



      (7)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letters of
Map Revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and letters of recommendation,
federal permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data
for all building constructed subject to this chapter.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.21  REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION.



   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood.  The
best available regulatory flood data is listed below.  Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, the party submitting the detailed
engineering study needs to replace existing data with better data and submit
it to the Department of Natural Resources for review and approval.



   (A)   The regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits for the
SFHAs of Ohio River and Tanners Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the city dated 9-16-1982,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (B)   The regulatory flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as an
“AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city.



   (C)   The regulatory flood elevation for each of the remaining SFHAs
delineated as an “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Department
of Natural Resources.



   (D)   The regulatory flood elevation and floodway limits for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated the county that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the
city shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the County
Flood Insurance Study of 3-16-1982, and the corresponding FBFM dated
9-16-1982, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (E)   If the SFHA is delineated as “AH Zone or AO Zone,” the
elevation (or depth) will be delineated on the County Flood Insurance Rate
Map.  If the SFHA is delineated as “Zone A” on the County Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the regulatory flood elevation shall be according to the
best data available as provided by the Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993; Ord. 11-1994, passed 12-13-1994)



§ 151.22  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by state law shall commence any “development” in the SFHA
without first obtaining an improvement location permit from the Zoning
Administrator.  The Zoning Administrator shall not issue an improvement
location permit if the proposed “development” does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A description of the proposed development;



      (2)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



      (3)   A legal description of the property site;



      (4)   A site development plan showing existing and proposed
development locations and existing and proposed land grades; and



      (5)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed development. Elevation should be in National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD) or North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD).  In either case the conversion formula should be included.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for an improvement location
permit, the Zoning Administrator shall determine if the site is located
within an identified floodway, floodway fringe, or within the flood plain
where the limits of the floodway have not yet been determined.



      (1)   (a)   If the site is in an identified floodway the
Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application,
along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of
Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway.



         (b)   A permit from the Natural Resources Commission is
required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation,
deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. 
This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing,
paving, and the like, undertaken before the actual start of construction of
the building.



         (c)   No action shall be taken by the Zoning
Administrator until a permit has been issued by the Natural Resources
Commission granting approval for construction in the floodway.  Once a
permit has been issued by the Natural Resources Commission, the Building
Official may issue the local improvement location permit, provided the
provisions contained in §§ 151.23 and 151.24 been met.  The improvement
location permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit issued by the
Natural Resources Commission.



      (2)   If the site is located in an identified floodway fringe,
then the Zoning Administrator may issue the local improvement location permit
provided the provisions contained in §§ 151.23 and 151.24 have been met. 
The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the Flood Protection
Grade (FPG).



      (3)   (a)   If the site is in an identified flood plain
where the limits of the floodway and floodway fringe have not yet been
determined (shown as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map), and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application,
along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of
Natural Resources for review and comment.



         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Zoning
Administrator until either a permit for construction in the floodway or a
letter of recommendation citing the 100-year flood elevation and the
recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Department of
Natural Resources.



         (c)   Once the Zoning Administrator has received the
proper permit or letter of recommendation approving the proposed development,
an improvement location permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
improvement location permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from natural resources and the provisions contained in §§ 151.23
and 151.24 have been met.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.23  PREVENTING INCREASED  DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the SFHA shall create a damaging or
potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to
public health or safety.



   (B)   Within the floodway identified on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the following standards shall
apply:



      (1)   No development shall be allowed which, acting alone or
in combination with existing or future development, will cause any increase
in the elevation of the regulatory flood; and



      (2)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



   (C)   Within all SFHAs identified as A Zones (no 100-year flood
elevation and/or floodway/floodway fringe delineation has been provided) the
following standard shall apply.  The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all of the existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the regulatory flood elevation more than
one-tenth of one foot and will not increase flood damages or potential flood
damages.



   (D)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection grade, unless
the materials are stored in a floodproofed storage tank or building
constructed according to the requirements of § 151.24.  New and replacement
sanitary sewer lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted
providing all manholes or other above ground openings are located above the
FPG, or those which are located below the FPG are watertight.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993; Ord. 11-1994, passed 12-13-1994)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 151.24  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
151.23, all buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood
damage below the FPG.



   (B)   This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new building valued at
more than $1,000; or greater than 400 square feet, whichever is less;



      (2)   Structural alterations made to an existing building that
increase the market value of the building by more than 50% (excluding the
value of the land);



      (3)   Any subsequent alterations;



      (4)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged building
that are valued at or more than 50% of the market value of the building
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site.  This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (6)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days.



   (C)   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods.  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of
compliance with these building protection standards as required in § 151.20.



      (1)   A residential or nonresidential building may be
constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the following.



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
the standard Proctor test method.



         (b)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the FPG.



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against eroding and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading.  If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements
(see definition of lowest floor in § 151.03) shall be at or above the FPG.



      (2)   A residential or nonresidential building may be elevated
in accordance with the following.



         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on
posts, piers, columns, extended walls, or other types of similar foundation,
provided:



            1.   Walls of any enclosure below the elevated
floor shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters, through
providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows)
having a total area of one square foot for every two square feet of enclosed
area subject to flooding.  The bottom of all the opening shall be no higher
than one foot above grade; and



            2.   Any enclosure below the elevated floor is
used for storage of vehicles and building access.



         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be
anchored and aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so
as to minimize exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as buoyance,
current, waves, ice, and floating debris.



         (c)   All areas below the FPG shall be constructed of
materials resistant to flood damage.  The top of the lowest floor (including
basement) and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the
FPG.  Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPG.



      (3)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be
installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must
meet one of the following anchoring requirements.



         (a)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.  This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



            1.   Outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            2.   In a new manufactured home park or
subdivision;



            3.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision; or



            4.   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood.



         (b)   This requirement applies to all manufactured homes
to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
that has not been substantially damaged by a flood.  The manufactured home
shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis
is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.



      (4)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days;



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in
division (C)(3) above.



      (5)   A nonresidential building may be floodproofed to the FPG
(in lieu of elevating) if done in accordance with the following.



         (a)   A registered professional engineer shall certify
that the building has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the regulatory flood.  The building design shall take into
account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and
impacts from debris or ice.



         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.25  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all proposed
subdivisions to determine whether the subdivision lies in a flood hazard area
as defined elsewhere by ordinance.  If the Zoning Administrator finds the
subdivision to be so located, the Zoning Administrator shall forward plans
and materials to the State Department of Natural Resources for review and
comment.  The Zoning Administrator shall require appropriate changes and
modifications in order to assure that:



      (1)   It is consistent with the need to minimize flood damages;



      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;



      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and



      (4)   On-site waste disposal systems, if provided, will be so
located and designed to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them
during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.



   (B)   Developers shall record the 100-year flood elevation on all
subdivision plats containing lands (identified elsewhere by this chapter)
within a flood hazard area prior to submitting the plats for approval by the
Plan Commission.



   (C)   All owners of manufactured home parks or subdivisions located
within the SFHA identified as Zone A on the community’s FHBM or FIRM shall
develop an evacuation plan for those lots located in the SFHA and file it
with the local Plan Commission and have it filed with and approved by the
appropriate community emergency management authorities.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.26  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider issuing a variance to
the terms and provisions of this chapter, provided the applicant demonstrates
that:



      (1)   There exists a good and sufficient cause for the
requested variance;



      (2)   The strict application of the terms of this chapter will
constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      (3)   The granting of the requested variance will not increase
flood heights, create additional threats to public safety, cause additional
public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may issue a variance to the terms
and provision of this chapter subject to the following standards and
conditions.



      (1)   No variance or exception for a residential use within a
floodway subject to § 151.23 may be granted.



      (2)   Any variance or exception granted in a floodway subject
to § 151.23 will require a permit from Natural Resources.



      (3)   Variances or exceptions to the building protection
standards of § 151.24 may be granted only when a new structure is to be
located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood
protection grade.



      (4)   Variance or exception may be granted for the
reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the
Register of Historic Places or the State Survey of Historic Architectural,
Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts, and Objects.



      (5)   All variances shall give the minimum relief necessary
and be such that the maximum practical flood protection will be given to the
proposed construction.



      (6)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a written notice
to the recipient of a variance or exception that the proposed construction
will be subject to increased risks to life and property and could require
payment of increased flood insurance premiums.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



§ 151.27  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Failure to obtain an improvement location permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.  All violations
shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance
with the provisions of the zoning ordinance for the city and be made subject
to mandatory abatement in the same manner as unsafe buildings and premises as
dated under the City Building Code.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations.  All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 4-1993, passed 9-14-1993)



CHAPTER 152:  MOBILE HOMES



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Legislative intent and policy



   152.03   Establishment of trailer camps, mobile home parks, and
mobile home subdivisions



   152.04   Mobile home special districts; conditional provisions



   152.05   Other permissible location or parking of mobile homes or
house trailers



   152.06   Location and occupancy of modular homes



   152.07   Existing use exemption



   152.08   Violations



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOUSE TRAILER.



      (1)   A vehicle meeting the definition of a MOBILE HOME below
in this section, except that it is designed to normally provide only
temporary shelter or sleeping quarters and is not generally regarded as
suitable for residential occupancy in that it lacks some or all of the
following amenities usually found in a residence:



         (a)   Built-in toilet and bathing facilities;



         (b)   Built-in sinks or other appliances for dishwashing;



         (c)   Cooking and refrigeration appliances or
installations;



         (d)   Built-in heating systems;



         (e)   Built-in plumbing and electrical systems; and/or



         (f)   The ability, without substantial design
modification, to hook on to external utility service systems for purposes of
sanitary waste disposal, water supply, and electric supply.



      (2)   The term generally includes vehicles commonly known as
campers, camper-trailers, recreational vehicles (RVs), and dependent or
partially dependent mobile homes.



   MOBILE HOME.  Any vehicle which is so constructed as to permit its
being used as a conveyance, either by self-propelled means or otherwise, upon
public highways, and which is designed, constructed, or altered in the manner
as to permit the use and occupancy thereof as a permanent or principal
residence for one or more persons.



   MOBILE HOME PARK.  An unsubdivided or subdivided tract of land wherein
lots, sites, bays, or spaces are made available and leased to persons wishing
to establish thereon a mobile home unit for residential occupancy; the mobile
home unit may or may not be provided by the lessor as a part of the lease.



   MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION.  A tract of land subdivided into individual
lots which may be purchased and owned by a person specifically for the
purpose of locating and establishing thereon a mobile home unit as a fixed or
semi-fixed structure to be occupied as a residence.



   MODULAR HOME.  A structure designed for single-family or two-family
residential dwelling purposes, but consisting of two or more detachable,
factory-manufactured, and substantially preconstructed units each designed to
be transported along the public highways upon a flatbed trailer rig or
similar conveyance to a location site, where the units are placed upon some
type of foundation and assembled into a unified dwelling unit.



   PRIMARY ZONING DISTRICT.  A Residential (“A”), Local Business
(“LB”), or Industrial (“I”) District or similar major district as now
or hereafter defined and established in the Zoning Ordinance of the city.



   TRAILER CAMP.  A guest facility operated commercially or by a public
authority such as a park board or similar entity, wherein parking spaces and
support amenities and facilities are provided for temporary use by transient
persons traveling in or with a mobile home or home trailer, on a more or less
overnight or short-term basis, and not for location and/or occupancy as a
full- or part-time residence within the community.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-1)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.02  LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND POLICY.



   It is the legislative intent, in adopting the provisions set forth in
this chapter governing mobile home use, occupancy, and development, to take
cognizance of and to make adequate allowance for the state-wide policy and
purpose set forth by the State General Assembly as expressed in I.C. 16-41-27
et seq. that is, “to recognize the mobile home as a suitable and necessary
dwelling unit in the State of Indiana,” and in accordance therewith to
provide reasonable and adequate access to land space and land use within the
city for those persons who need or desire to occupy that type of housing. 
All officers, boards, or commissions given authority hereunder to
administrate the regulation of mobile home use and occupancy shall give just
consideration to this policy in the exercise of their powers and discretion,
and shall apply these provisions in a fair and equitable manner to the extent
not clearly inconsistent with the health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience, and general welfare of the community as a whole.  However,
nothing in this act is intended nor shall be construed to effectuate any
amendment to nor supersession of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,
subdivision control regulations, flood protection plan, or Building Code of
the city as the same are now in effect as they may apply to mobile homes or
related dwelling units, but merely to clarify or stipulate the relationship
of the other provisions to the location and occupancy of mobile dwelling
units, or to specify separate and distinct regulations or procedures.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-2)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF TRAILER CAMPS, MOBILE HOME PARKS, AND MOBILE
HOME SUBDIVISIONS.



   Trailer camps, mobile home parks, and mobile home subdivisions may be
established as follows.



   (A)   Trailer camps.  A trailer camp may be established in any
primary zoning district wherein the use is expressly permitted as a
conditional use in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, subject to all
requirements for conditional use permits.  A mobile home or house trailer
may be accommodated for temporary and transient location and occupancy within
the authorized trailer camp, and the location and occupancy shall not be
deemed to constitute a residential use for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance,
nor to constitute the erection or occupancy of a building for purposes of the
Building Code.  Any improvement location permit, certificate of occupancy,
and building permit properly issued for the trailer camp itself shall be
deemed to cover any mobile home or house trailer properly harbored therein
for purposes of temporary and transient location and occupancy.



   (B)   Mobile home parks.



      (1)   A mobile home park shall be considered a single-family
residential use and may only be established as follows:



         (a)   If the proposed mobile home park is eligible for
licensing, and has had its preliminary plans and specifications submitted to
and approved by the State Board of Health in accordance with I.C. 16-41-27 et
seq.;



         (b)   Is located in a primary zoning district wherein
single-family residential use is permitted or is permitted as a conditional
use in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, and all mobile home sites
therein strictly comply with all requirements and specifications of the
Zoning Ordinance as to single-family dwellings, including lot and yard
specifications;



         (c)   Is located in a primary zoning district other than
an “A” District, and a variance is applied for and obtained in accordance
with the Zoning Ordinance to permit the use in the other district or to
exempt the use from requirements otherwise applicable to the location of
single-family dwellings as to minimum lot width, minimum lot area, maximum
lot coverage, minimum yards, minimum ground floor area, and the like; or



         (d)   Is established in any primary zoning district in
accordance with a properly submitted and approved residential unit
development plan as provided in the Zoning Ordinance.



      (2)   No improvement location permit may be issued for a
mobile home park until division (B)(1)(a) and either divisions (B)(1)(b),
(B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) above have been complied with, and no final
certificate of occupancy may be granted until the mobile home park’s
license has been issued by the State Board of Health.  A mobile home may be
located and occupied as a residence within a properly established mobile home
park.  A house trailer may be so located and occupied only if and to the
extent that the mobile home park’s State Board of Health license permits it
to accept and harbor dependent or partially dependent mobile homes.  The
improvement location permit and certificate of occupancy issued for mobile
home park itself shall be deemed to cover all mobile homes and house trailers
properly located therein.  A separate building permit shall not generally be
required for the mobile homes or house trailers, which shall be presumed to
comply with the applicable Building Code and regulations, unless the Building
Inspector has cause to believe that there exists in a particular unit some
noncomplying condition posing an actual and present hazard to its occupants
or others.  In the latter case, the Building Inspector may require an
inspection or require that an individual building permit be obtained to
permit the continued location and/or occupancy of the affected unit.



   (C)   Mobile home subdivisions.



      (1)   A mobile home subdivision shall be considered a
single-family residential use, and may only be established as follows:



         (a)   In full compliance with the subdivision control
regulations of the city as the same pertain to other subdivisions of land for
single-family residential development;



         (b)   In accordance with the provisions of divisions
(B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) above in the same manner as those
provisions pertain to mobile home parks;



         (c)   In accordance with all state or city ordinances,
laws, or regulations as they pertain to mandatory sewer connections to
individual dwelling units or other utility services; and



         (d)   If each lot in the subdivision is or will be
supplied with a permanent foundation of a type approved by the City Plan
Commission and the Building Inspector, upon which each mobile home unit must
be erected and securely attached in the same manner as a fixed building.



      (2)   A mobile home may be located and occupied as a residence
in an authorized mobile home subdivision; however, house trailers may not be
so located and occupied. Individual improvement location permits and
certificates of occupancy shall be required for each mobile home unit in a
mobile home subdivision.  An individual building permit shall also be
required unless the mobile home unit is factory-constructed and bears a seal
certifying that it was built in compliance with  the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq.) in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1106(1), as provided by I.C.
22-1-1-10(c), and has not since been substantially redesigned, reconstructed,
or structurally modified.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-3)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.04  MOBILE HOME SPECIAL DISTRICTS; CONDITIONAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The City Plan Commission may set off specific, compact, and
contiguous areas of land of not less than three acres in any one or more
primary zoning districts wherein single-family dwellings are provided as a
permitted or conditional use or may be permitted through a residential unit
development plan in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   The areas shall be designated as Mobile Home Special (MHS)
Districts, and shall provide adequate land area for mobile home use as, in
the opinion of the Plan Commission, is sufficient to allow for current and
immediate future demand for mobile home occupancy and development in the
community.  An MHS District is not a zoning district, does not effect any
existing primary zoning districts as now or hereafter created.



   (C)   However, no part of an MHS District may lie within the
boundaries of an existing “A” District without the approval of the City
Council.  If one or more MHS Districts are created in accordance with this
section, development of all mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions
shall thereafter be limited to the MHS District(s), subject nevertheless to
all requirements, limitations, and procedures for single-family residential
use (either permitted or conditional) or residential unit development as
specified in the Zoning Ordinance for the primary zoning district in which
the affected MHS District or portion thereof is located.  An MHS District
need not be devoted exclusively to mobile home use and development, and
inclusion of an area in an MHS District does to prevent or limit other forms
of uses as permitted in the Zoning Ordinance in any coincidental primary
zoning district.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-4)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.05  OTHER PERMISSIBLE LOCATION OR PARKING OF MOBILE HOMES OR HOUSE
TRAILERS.



   (A)   It shall be lawful to locate or park a mobile home or house
trailer as follows:



      (1)   Within an enclosed accessory building or private garage
or on the rear yard of an occupied dwelling, if not used for living or
business purposes;



      (2)   For inspection and sale upon any automobile or mobile
home sales lot in a properly zoned area, and unoccupied;



      (3)   Upon a public street or parking lot, subject to
applicable traffic and parking regulations, in an emergency, or for use in
community service of public health purposes (e.g., book-mobiles, educational
exhibits, temporary x-ray, immunization, disease testing, blood donation
centers, and the like), for a period not to exceed 24 hours; and/or



      (4)   As a temporary site office at a construction site, for
use in connection with the construction and not as living quarters, and
provided that the mobile home or house trailer is promptly removed when
construction is completed.



   (B)   No improvement location permit, certificate of occupancy, or
building permit is required for the uses permitted under this section.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-5)



   (C)   Except as permitted under § 152.04 or divisions (A) and (B)
above, it shall be unlawful for any person to locate, park, occupy, or use
any mobile home or house trailer on any lot, tract of land, or premises
within the city.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-6)



(Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.06  LOCATION AND OCCUPANCY OF MODULAR HOMES.



   Location and occupancy of a modular home shall be considered a
single-family or two-family residential use, and a modular home may be
erected and occupied on any conforming lot in any primary zoning district
wherein single-family or two-family dwellings are permitted or conditional
uses or may be permitted under an approved residential unit development plan
in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance.  All provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance applicable to traditionally constructed single- or two-family
dwellings shall apply equally to modular homes, including provisions for
improvement location permits and certificates of occupancy.  A
factory-constructed modular home shall be presumed to comply with applicable
provisions of the Building Code if it bears a seal certifying that it was
built in compliance with  the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.) in accordance with
I.C. 36-7-4-1106(1), and a building permit will not be required; otherwise,
or if the structure is substantially modified, the permit is required as with
all other single- or two-family dwellings.  A modular home shall be erected
upon and firmly secured to a foundation of a type suitable and permitted for
other such dwellings, and a building permit shall be required for the
excavation and construction of the foundation whether or not required for the
principal structure as well.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-7)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.07  EXISTING USE EXEMPTION.



   Nothing herein is intended to require the removal, modification, or
vacating of any mobile home, house trailer, or modular home lawfully located
and/or occupied prior to 9-15-1984.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-8)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)



§ 152.08  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable to the same civil penalties of fine or to process for injunctive
relief as now or hereafter provided for violation of the city Zoning
Ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 8-8-9)  (Ord. 11A-1984, passed - -1984)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 153:  PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



Section



Plan Commission



   153.01   Plan Commission created



   153.02   Membership



Joint Development Commission



   153.15   Region 12 Development Commission joinder



Surveys; Designation of Building Numbers



   153.25   Numbering of buildings and lots




PLAN COMMISSION




§ 153.01  PLAN COMMISSION CREATED.



   There is hereby established a City Plan Commission under the authority
provided in the State Advisory Planning Law, I.C. 36-7-4-200 series.



(1985 Code, § 8-11-1)  (Ord. passed 11-10-1953; Ord. 11-1984, passed -
-1984)



§ 153.02  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The membership of the City Plan Commission shall be as
provided by statute, and shall consist of seven to 13 members to be appointed
as follows.



      (1)   The City Council shall designate as members of the City
Plan Commission three persons in the city government.  Members appointed
under this division to serve on the Plan Commission shall continue to serve
for as long as they continue to hold the city office held by them at the time
of their appointment to the Plan Commission, unless they sooner resign from
the Commission or are removed for cause; however, if any such Commission
member is appointed from the membership of the City Council, the City Council
may, at its first regular meeting of any year, appoint a different one of its
members to serve on the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Four citizen members of the City Plan Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor of the city.  As the respective terms of the
citizen members of the City Plan Commission appointed under this division
expire, each new appointment shall be for a term of four years.  Members
appointed under this division shall be residents of the jurisdictional area
of the City Plan Commission; shall hold no other municipal, county, or state
office; and not more than two of the citizen members shall be members of the
same political party.



      (3)   In the event that the City Plan Commission exercises
planning and zoning jurisdiction over any area outside the corporate limits
of the city under I.C. 36-7-4-205(f), two, four, or six additional citizen
members of the City Plan Commission shall be appointed by the County Board of
Commissioners as follows.



         (a)   Two members shall be appointed, one for an initial
term of one year and one for an initial term of four years, the terms
expiring on the first Monday of January of the first or fourth year,
respectively, following the year of their appointment.



         (b)   The County Board of Commissioners may also appoint
two or four further citizen members if it finds the further representation
justifiable, and in accordance with the criteria set forth in I.C.
36-7-4-215.  The Board of Commissioners shall determine and specify the
initial terms of the further members at the time of their initial terms of
the further members at the time of their initial appointment, but not to
exceed four years.



   (B)   After their initial terms, new appointments shall be made for
four-year terms.  Members appointed under this division (B) shall be
residents of the unincorporated portion of the planning jurisdictional area;
shall hold no other municipal, county, or state office; and no more than
one-half of all members so appointed shall be members of the same political
party.  Members appointed under this division shall cease to be members of
the City Plan Commission if the city ceases to exercise extraterritorial
planning and zoning jurisdiction.



(1985 Code, § 8-11-2)  (Ord. passed 11-10-1953; Ord. 11-1984, passed -
-1984)




JOINT DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION




§ 153.15  REGION 12 DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION JOINDER.



   Whereas, certain cities and counties situated in Region 12 established
by Executive Order 16-68, Governor of Indiana, have indicated their
willingness to enter into an agreement and form an organization to be known
and designated as the Twelfth Regional Development Commission; and it is
desirable, advantageous, and in the public interest that the City Council,
enter into such an agreement; and the signing of this agreement by the City
Council President shall enable the legal establishment of a representative
constitution of the Commission’s policy body, such that, a perfected
agreement can be discussed and developed, during the three months after
7-10-1973, at which time the agreement will be reconsidered by the
legislative body and moved to adoption by ordinance; the President of the
City Council is hereby authorized and directed to execute the agreement.



(1985 Code, § 8-12-2)  (Res. passed 7-10-1973; Ord. 11-1984, passed - -1984)




SURVEYS; DESIGNATION OF BUILDING NUMBERS




§ 153.25  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS.



   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to make surveys for the
purpose of and to designate numbers for each building site within the
corporate limits of the city.  The number assigned to each building site as
designated by the City Engineer is ratified and confirmed by the City
Council.  However, the Plan Commission, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-405(b):



      (1)   Shall approve all street numbers assigned to buildings
or lots as hereinbefore provided;



      (2)   May develop and prescribe a uniform and standard system
of street numbers to be assigned to buildings or lots within the city; and



      (3)   May itself make surveys and designate numbers for
building sites, or may provide for some other person to do so, in lieu of the
City Engineer.



   (B)   Information on the assigned street numbers shall be given to
the proper postal officials.



(1985 Code, § 8-12-1)  (Res. passed 11-1-1952; Ord. 11-1984, passed - -1984)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



   154.01   Definitions



   154.02   Submission of plat to Plan Commission required; approval by
City Council



   154.03   Notice to gas and telephone utilities required



   154.04   Minimum lot size



   154.05   Public improvements and utility systems; requirements and
specifications



   154.06   Construction of improvements; surety bond in lieu of
immediate construction



   154.07   Variances



§ 154.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PLAN COMMISSION.  The City Plan Commission of the City of Greendale,
Indiana.



   SPONSOR.  The person proposing the creation and construction of a new
subdivision within the limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-1)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.02  SUBMISSION OF PLAT TO PLAN COMMISSION REQUIRED; APPROVAL BY CITY
COUNCIL.



   The sponsor of the proposed subdivision shall submit a plat thereof
showing the size of lots, the location and widths of streets, the
specifications for the construction of the streets, curbs, and gutters and
the longitudinal grade of all proposed streets, prepared by a licensed
engineer or surveyor, to the Plan Commission.  If the Plan Commission
approves the plans and plat, then the sponsor shall submit the plat and plan
to the City Council for approval.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-2)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.03  NOTICE TO GAS AND TELEPHONE UTILITIES REQUIRED.



   Written notice of a proposed subdivision shall be given by the sponsor
to the person or corporation having the natural gas franchise and the public
telephone franchise in the city, which notices are to be given by registered
mail by the sponsor.  The sponsor shall show to the Plan Commission the copy
of the notices and the return receipt of the registered mailing.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-3)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.04  MINIMUM LOT SIZE.



   The minimum size of all lots proposed shall not be less than the
minimum set out in § 155.036.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-4)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.05  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND UTILITY SYSTEMS; REQUIREMENTS AND
SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The construction of all streets, roadways, the installation of
sanitary sewers, including necessary appurtenances, and the installation of
water lines in any subdivision shall be the responsibility of the sponsor.



   (B)   The requirements for the public improvements and utility
systems are as follows.



      (1)   Streets, curbs and gutters.  No street or public
thoroughfare shall be established to a width of less than 50 feet.  The
extension of a street presently established to a width of more than 50 feet
shall be established to a width of not less  than the width of the existing
street.  Construction of streets and roadways shall include all necessary
excavating and filling required to place the surface to the proper sub-grade
elevation for the placement of the required depth of paving material. 
Construction shall also include the building of concrete combined curbs and
gutters on each side of the paved portion of the street or roadway.  The
width of paving on streets 50 feet in width shall be 35 feet from the back of
one curb to the opposite curb.  The width of paving for streets 60 feet in
width shall be 40 feet from the back of one curb to the back of the opposite
curb.  For streets of other widths, the paving portion shall be determined
by the City Council.  The pavement shall consist of a sub-base of crushed
stone placed to a compacted thickness of not less than four inches on a well
prepared and substantial sub-grade, over which is to be placed prepared
processed gravel to a compacted depth of not less than four inches.  The
wearing surface, consisting of bituminous concrete or concrete, shall be
placed to a compacted thickness of not less than two inches.



      (2)   Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances.  Sanitary sewer
lines shall be laid to a grade level as set by the engineer employed by the
city.  Sewer lines shall consist of vitrified clay pipe of a quality and
size directed by the city and shall be laid in a manner satisfactory to the
City Council.  All manholes, house service lines, and other appurtenances
shall be installed as directed by the city.



      (3)   Water and gas lines.  All water lines shall be of cast
iron, the mains being not less than six inches in diameter and placed to a
depth of not less than four feet below the surface.  The location of the
lines, the manner and method of laying the lines and all matters in
connection of the installation of the water lines shall be subject to the
approval of the City Council.  In the event that gas lines are to be
installed, the location and manner of installation of the lines is subject to
the approval of the City Council.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-5)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.06  CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS; SURETY BOND IN LIEU OF IMMEDIATE
CONSTRUCTION.



   If the City Council approves the plat and plan, the sponsor shall then
construct all streets, roadways, curbs, and gutters, as well as the necessary
sewer lines and water lines in conformity with the regulations set out in §
154.05 to the approval of the city.  In lieu of the construction and
installation of streets and lines, the sponsor shall be allowed to furnish a
surety bond in an amount to be set by the City Council, ensuring that the
construction of sanitary sewer and water lines will be performed within a
time specified in writing by the City Council.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-6)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



§ 154.07  VARIANCES.



   The City Council may give a variance to any sponsor from the terms of
this chapter in regard to the distance between curbs provided herein, and
further in regard to the building of curbs and gutters.  In the event the
sponsor applies for a variance for the elimination of concrete curbing and
gutter, the sponsor shall include in the plans and plat of the subdivision a
plan for ample drainage facilities along each side of the paved portion of
the street or roadway, and must further construct the drainage facilities.



(1985 Code, § 8-7-7)  (Ord. 1965-1, passed 5-9-1967)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING



Section



General Provisions



   155.001   Applicability of chapter



   155.002   Short title



   155.003   Interpretation and intent



   155.004   Definitions



Zoning Districts and Zone Map



   155.020   Zoning districts denominated



   155.021   Zone map established



   155.022   Presumptive zoning of annexed or vacated territory



   155.023   Territory rezoned



   155.024   Determination and interpretation of district boundaries



District and Use Regulations



   155.035   General permitted principal, accessory, and contingent
uses; conditional use permits



   155.036   Lot and yard requirements; conditional exceptions



   155.037   Requirements as to building layout and location;
conditional exceptions



   155.038   Off-street parking and loading/unloading berth requirements



   155.039   Planned unit development



Well Field Protection Overlay District



   155.050   Purpose; responsibility of owners



   155.051   Definitions



   155.052   Requirements



   155.053   Uses of underlying zoning district



   155.054   Prohibited uses



   155.055   Groundwater protection standards



   155.056   Inspections



   155.057   Regulated substances



   155.058   Underground storage tanks



   155.059   Reporting requirements



   155.060   Public water supply protection authorities



Nonconforming Uses



   155.075   Applicability of chapter to nonconforming uses created by
amendment



   155.076   Continuation of preexisting nonconforming use



   155.077   Erection or re-erection of buildings on nonconforming
premises prohibited



   155.078   Nonconforming use of land for open storage



   155.079   Temporary commercial/industrial use



Improvement Location Permits and Certificates of Occupancy



   155.095   Improvement location permit required; permit fee



   155.096   Plat or site plan required with improvement location
permit application



   155.097   Issuance; denial; appeal



   155.098   Certificate of occupancy required; application



Administration and Enforcement



   155.110   Enforcement by Building Inspector



   155.111   Board of Zoning Appeals; powers and duties



   155.112   Amendments to zoning regulations



   155.113   Violations



Supplemental Provisions



   155.125   Prohibited buildings



   155.126   Signs



   155.127   Form and color standards



   155.128   Minimum green area required



   155.129   Minimum green area buffer required



   155.130   Parking lot green area islands required



   155.131   Landscaping



   155.132   Landscaping in residential zones



   Appendix A:   Permitted Uses by Zoning District



   Appendix B:   Lot and Yard Requirements



   Appendix C:   Building Height, Lot Coverage, Floor Area, and Vision
Clearance



   Appendix D:   Off-Street Parking and Loading Berth Requirements



   Appendix E:   Well Head Protection Area Map




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 155.001  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter and §§ 155.110, 155.112, and
155.113 apply to the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-1)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.002  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter, and any ordinances supplemental or amendatory thereto,
shall be known and may be cited as the City Zoning Ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-2)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.003  INTERPRETATION AND INTENT.



   In interpreting and applying provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, convenience, and general welfare.  However, they
are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements,
covenants, or other agreements between parties; nor any ordinances, rules,
regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict
with any of the provisions hereof, or which shall be adopted or provided;
except that where these provisions impose a greater restriction upon the use
of buildings or land, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger
open spaces or greater lot area per family than are required by or imposed by
such easements, covenants, or agreements between parties, or by the
ordinances, rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions hereof shall
control.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use which is incidental to the main use of the
premises.



   ALLEY.  A public thoroughfare, which affords only secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting property, and less than 30 feet in width.



   APARTMENT HOUSE.  A building designed for or occupied by three or more
families, exclusively for dwelling purposes, three or more stories in height.



   BASEMENT.  A story partly underground, but having less than one-half
of its clear height below, which unless subdivided into rooms and used for
tenant purposes, shall not be included as a story for the purpose of height
measurements.



   BLOCK.  Property having frontage of one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway, or
other barrier.



   BOARD.  The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Greendale, Indiana.



   BOARDINGHOUSE.  A building not open to transients where lodging and/or
meals are provided for three or more, but not over 30 persons regularly; a
lodging house.



   BUILDING.  A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of persons, animals,
chattels, or property.  When separated by party walls, without openings
through the walls, each portion of the building shall be considered a
separate structure.  The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE and vice
versa.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY.  A subordinate building, or a portion of a main
building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building.



   BUILDING AREA.  The maximum horizontal projected area of the principal
and accessory building, excluding open steps or terraces, unenclosed porches
not exceeding one story in height, or architectural appurtenances projecting
not more than two feet.



   BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF.  The line of that face of the building
nearest the front lot line.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  The vertical distance measured from the lot
ground level to the highest point of the roof for a flat roof; to the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for
gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.  Where a
substantial part of  the wall of an accessory building is a part of the wall
of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING or where an accessory building is attached to the
main building in a substantial manner by a roof, the accessory building shall
be counted as a part of the PRINCIPAL BUILDING.



   BUSINESS (COMMERCIAL) USES.  The engaging in the purchase, sale,
barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, the
maintenance or operation of offices, or recreational and amusement
enterprises for profit.



   BUSINESS USES, GENERAL.  Commercial uses including wholesale and
storage uses conducted within enclosed, substantially constructed buildings.



   BUSINESS USES, LOCAL.  Commercial uses primarily of a retail or
service nature.



   CAMP, PUBLIC.  Any area or tract of land used or designed to
accommodate two or more automobile house trailers, or two or more camping
parties, including cabins, tents, or other camping outfits.



   CONTINGENT USES.  Uses which are likely or liable, but not certain, to
occur, and which are not inappropriate to the principal use of the district
in which located.



   DISTRICT.  A section of the city for which uniform regulations
governing the use, height, area, size, and intensity of use of buildings and
land, and open spaces about buildings are herein established.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A dwelling or portion thereof, containing
three or more dwelling units, whether or not the units are under the same
roof.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A detached building designed or occupied by
one family exclusively.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A detached building designed for or occupied by
two families.  A duplex dwelling has one family above the other.  A double
dwelling has one family beside the other.



   FAMILY.  A group of one or more persons occupying a building and
living as a single housekeeping unit.  No unrelated group living as a single
housekeeping unit shall consist of more than six persons, as distinguished
from a group occupying a lodging house or hotel.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building with capacity for not more
than three motor vehicles for storage only, not more than one of which may be
a commercial vehicle of not more than three tons capacity.  However, a
garage designed to house one motor vehicle for each family housed in an
apartment shall be classed as a PRIVATE GARAGE.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC.  Any building or premises, except those defined herein
as a private garage, used for the storage, or care of motor vehicles, or
where the vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for
remuneration, hire, or sale.



   GROUND FLOOR AREA.  The square foot area of a residential building
within its largest outside dimensions computed on a horizontal plane at the
ground level, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, and
exterior and interior stairways.



   GROUP HOME.  A building designed for or occupied by three or more
families exclusively for dwelling purposes, not exceeding two and one-half
stories in height.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation carried on by a member of the family
residing on the premises, in conjunction with which no commodity is sold or
stock in trade is kept on the premises; no sign, other than a nameplate, not
exceeding one square foot in area, is displayed.



   HOTEL.  A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
public for compensation, and which is open to transient guests in
contradistinction to a boarding or lodging house.



   INDUSTRIAL USES.  An industrial use is one which requires both
buildings and open area for manufacturing, fabricating, processing, heavy
repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of raw materials, manufactured
products or wastes, which is not injurious to health or safety of humans or
animals, or injurious to vegetation; and which is not noxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of smoke, dust, gas fumes, odors, or vibrations beyond
the limits of the premises upon which the industry is conducted.



   INDUSTRIAL USES, LIGHT.  A LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE is one which
ordinarily uses only light machinery, is conducted entirely within enclosed,
substantially constructed buildings; does not use the open area around the
buildings for storage of raw materials or manufactured products or for any
other industrial purpose, other than loading and unloading operations in the
area; and which is not noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of
smoke, dust, fumes, gas, odors, noises, or vibrations beyond the confines of
the building.



   KENNEL.  Any lot or premises, or portions thereof on which more than a
total of two dogs, cats, or other animals over three months of age are kept
or maintained.



   LOADING AND UNLOADING BERTHS.  Space required in conjunction with
specified commercial and industrial uses for off-street loading and unloading
of delivery vehicles.  The space shall be provided on the same premises as
the building containing the specified use, and shall include a 12-foot by
35-foot loading space with a 14-foot height clearance.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use
permitted in this chapter, including one principal building and its accessory
buildings, and the open spaces required herein, and having its principal
frontage on a street, or an officially designated and approved place.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.



   LOT, COVERAGE.  The percentage of the lot area covered by the building
area.



   LOT, DEPTH OF.  The mean horizontal distance between the front line
and the rear line of the lot, measured in the general direction of the side
lot lines.



   LOT, GROUND LEVEL.



      (1)   For buildings having walls adjoining one street only,
the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.



      (2)   For buildings having walls adjoining more than one
street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all
walls adjoining the streets.



      (3)   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the
average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.



      (4)   Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than
five feet from a street is to be considered as adjoining the street.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot or through lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  In the case of an interior lot, a line separating
the lot from the street or place; and in the case of a corner lot a line
separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except
in cases where deed restrictions in effect specify another line as the FRONT
LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  A lot line which is opposite and most distant from
the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot,
a line ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum
distance from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two streets at opposite ends of
the lot.



   LOT, WIDTH OF.  The distance between the side lot lines at the front
line of building measured at right angles to the depth of the lot.



   MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings, in which lodging is provided
and offered to the public for compensation, and catering primarily to the
public traveling by motor vehicle.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  A building or premises which does not conform in
its use or otherwise with all of the regulations of the district in which the
building or premises is located.



   PARKING LOT.  A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking space for
five or more motor vehicles for compensation or otherwise.



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.  Office of members of recognized professions,
such as an architect, artist, dentist, engineer, musician, physician,
surgeon, or other professional person.



   SIGN.  Any structure, object, lettering, design, graphic, device, or
other thing of any nature or type which is designed, intended, or results in
a visual communication which is not subject to mandating requirements imposed
under any law of the state or the United States is regulated by this code.



   SIGN, TEMPORARY.  A sign which is neither mechanical nor electrified
and is constructed as a placard or board having a height of not more than
four feet and a total face area of not more than 20 square feet.



   STORY.  The portion of a building, included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it.  If there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it
shall be the STORY.



   STORY, HALF.  The portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip, or
gambrel roof, the wall plates on at least two opposite exterior walls of
which are not more than three feet above the floor level of the HALF STORY.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare 30 feet or more in width between
property lines, which affords principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or
any substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to
something permanently located on the ground.



   TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION FOR PLANNING AND ZONING.  The City of
Greendale, Indiana, and the contiguous unincorporated territory shown on a
map on file with the County Recorder.



   TOURIST HOME.  A dwelling in which overnight accommodations for not
more than five transient guests is offered for compensation.



   VEHICLE PARKING SPACES.  The area required for parking one automobile,
which in this chapter is held to be an area nine feet wide and 20 feet long
plus 70 square feet of maneuver area for each vehicle parking space.



   VISION CLEARANCE ON CORNER LOTS.  A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision between
the height of three and one-half and 12 feet above established grade,
determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured equidistant from
the corner along each property line.



   YARD, FRONT.  Horizontal space measured at 90 degrees with the
property line, between the front line of the principal building and the
property line of the street upon which the building faces, unoccupied other
than by steps, walks, terraces, and open, unroofed, unenclosed porches; or
architectural appurtenances projecting not more than 24 inches from the
building.



   YARD, REAR.  Horizontal space measured at 90 degrees to the rear lot
line, between the rear of the principal building and the rear line of the
lot, unoccupied other than by vehicle parking space, architectural
appurtenances, or accessory buildings which do not occupy more than 30% of
the required rear yard.



   YARD, SIDE.  Horizontal space measured at 90 degrees to the side lot
line between the side of a building and the adjacent side line of the lot,
unoccupied other than by architectural appurtenances projecting not more than
24 inches, or open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes or fireproof outside
stairways, projecting not over four feet.



   ZONE.  Same as DISTRICT.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-7)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Res. passed 6-14-1988; Ord.
7-1995, passed  10-10-1995; Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 2004-1,
passed 1-14-2004)




ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONE MAP




§ 155.020  ZONING DISTRICTS DENOMINATED.



   The city is hereby divided into five zoning districts in order to carry
out the purposes of this chapter.  The districts shall be known and
designated as follows:



 


Name of District

 

Designation Herein





Single-Family Residential - Local
 

R-A



Single-Family Residential - Rural
 

R-B



Multi-Family Residential
 

MF



Local Business - A
 

LB-A



Local Business - B
 

LB-B



Industrial
 

I



Well Field Protection Overlay
 

WP





 



(Ord. 2004-1, passed 1-14-2004; Ord. 2005-8, passed 10-12-2005)



§ 155.021  ZONE MAP ESTABLISHED.



   Subject to the provisions of §§ 155.022 and 155.023, the zone map
dated 10-12-2005 be and hereby is incorporated by reference into this section
as the zone map of the city.  The zone map shows the areas included in the
above districts.  The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby directed to keep on file two
copies of the zone map, and the map shall be available for public inspection
during all regular office hours of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 2004-1, passed 1-14-2004; Ord. 2005-8, passed 10-12-2005)



§ 155.022  PRESUMPTIVE ZONING OF ANNEXED OR VACATED TERRITORY.



   Territory which may be annexed to the city after 3-25-1957 shall
immediately be included in the “A” Residential District, until changed by
amendment of § 155.023 hereinafter. Whenever any street, alley, public way,
railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is vacated by proper
authority, the districts adjoining each side of the street, alley, public
way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or similar areas shall be extended
automatically to the center of the vacation, and all area included in the
vacation shall then and thenceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations
of the extended districts.



(1985 Code, § 8-2-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1971, passed
5-11-1971; Ord. 11-1976, passed 9-14-1976; Ord. 4-1979, passed 9-11-1979)



§ 155.023  TERRITORY REZONED.



   The zoning of territory as shown on the zone map adopted in § 155.021,
or as presumptively zoned in accordance with § 155.022, is hereby rezoned as
set forth in Table V of the Table of Special Ordinances of this code.



(Ord. 2004-1, passed 1-14-2004)



§ 155.024  DETERMINATION AND INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   In determining the boundaries of districts, and establishing
the regulations applicable to each district, due and careful consideration
has been given to existing conditions, the character of buildings erected in
each district, the most desirable use for which the land in each district may
be adapted, and the conservation of property values throughout the city.



   (B)   Where uncertainty exists as to the exact boundaries of any
district as shown on the zone map, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   Where district boundaries are indicated as following
street, alley, or lot lines, or approximately along the lines, the lines
shall be construed to be the district boundaries.



      (2)   In unsubdivided areas, or where a district boundary
subdivides a lot, the exact location of the boundary shall be determined by
use of the scale of the zone map.



      (3)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall interpret the intent of the zone map as to the location of the
boundary in question.



(1985 Code, § 8-2-5)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1971, passed
5-11-1971; Ord. 11-1976, passed 9-14-1976; Ord. 4-1979, passed 9-11-1979)




DISTRICT AND USE REGULATIONS




§ 155.035  GENERAL PERMITTED PRINCIPAL, ACCESSORY, AND CONTINGENT USES;
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, which is arranged, intended, or
designed to be used for any purpose other than a use which is permitted and
specified in a district in which the building or land is located, in
accordance with this section  and subject to the further requirements and
limitations as set forth in §§ 155.036 through 155.038.  Table 1 and its
footnotes (as set forth in Appendix A following this chapter) indicate the
permitted principal, accessory, and contingent uses in each district, and any
special requirements or limitations applicable thereto.  In the case of
those uses listed as “Conditional Principal Uses” in any district, the
uses are permitted uses only if application is made to the Board of Zoning
Appeals and a conditional use permit granted by them.  Upon receipt of an
application for a conditional use by the Board of Zoning Appeals, it shall be
referred to the Plan Commission for investigation as to the manner in which
the proposed location and character of the conditional use will affect the
Master Plan of the city.  The  Plan Commission shall report the results of
its study of the proposal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, and if the report
is favorable to the proposal, the Board of Zoning Appeals, may, after public
notice and hearing according to the law, grant the permit, including the
imposition of conditions of use, which the Board deems essential to ensuring
that the conditional use is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent
of this chapter, will not substantially and permanently injure the
appropriate use of neighboring property, and will substantially serve the
public convenience and welfare.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-1)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.036  LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS; CONDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered in
any manner which will encroach upon or reduce in any manner the lot and yard
requirements as set forth in Table 2 (contained in Appendix B following this
chapter) including the footnotes thereto, as established and specified for
the use and district in which the building is located.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-2)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.037  REQUIREMENTS AS TO BUILDING LAYOUT AND LOCATION; CONDITIONAL
EXCEPTIONS.



   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered if
it would thereby fail to comply to the height, maximum lot coverage, minimum
ground floor area, or vision clearance regulations, as set forth in the Table
3 and footnotes thereto (as contained in Appendix C following this chapter)
as applicable to the district.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.038  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every building erected after 3-25-1957 shall provide
off-street parking space for motor vehicles and loading and unloading berths
as specified hereinafter for the use to which the building is to be devoted,
as set forth in Table 4 and footnotes thereto (as set forth in Appendix D
following this chapter).  The off-street parking and loading/unloading berth
requirements apply irrespective of the district in which the use is
located.  Parking spaces or loading berths may be open or enclosed, but if
in an open area must be paved with a dust-proof or hard surface meeting
standard specifications established by the city.  Unless otherwise
indicated, required parking spaces may be provided off-lot from the principal
use, but within 300 feet, if the site is approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.  In addition, groups of uses requiring vehicle parking space may
join in establishing group parking areas with capacity aggregating that
required for each participating use.



   (B)   In order to meet requirements for vehicle parking space, where
the space is not available on the lot occupied by a building, as specified in
Table 4, (set forth in Appendix D following this chapter) the Board of Zoning
Appeals may, after receipt of a favorable report from the Plan Commission on
the proposal, and after public notice and hearing, grant a permit for the
establishment of a parking lot in an “A” District, provided that the
entire area of the parking lot is within 300 feet of an “LB” or “I”
District or, in the case of a church or other place of congregation in an
“A” District, immediately adjacent to the church or other place of
congregation, and provided further that:



      (1)   There shall be no sales, dead storage, repair work,
dismantling, or servicing of any kind on the parking lot;



      (2)   Entrances and exits shall be approved as to location by
the Plan Commission;



      (3)   No parking shall be permitted nearer than two feet from
the front or side lot line;



      (4)   Except for otherwise approved entrances and exits, curb
or rail not more than two feet in height and not less than eight inches in
height shall be erected so as to conform with the required front lot line and
may be required along boundaries of the parking lot as determined by the Plan
Commission for the protection of adjoining residentially zoned or used
property;



      (5)   No advertising signs shall be erected upon the lot,
except not more than one sign on each street side to indicate the operator
and purpose of the lot, the sign not to exceed 20 square feet in area and not
to extend more than ten feet in overall height above the ground level;



      (6)   Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged
as to be reflected away from property residentially zoned or used; and



      (7)   If at any time after the issuance of the required
permits any of the above provisions are not complied with, the permits shall
be revoked.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-4)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.039  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   The owner of any tract of land may submit a plan for the use
and development of the land primarily for residential purposes or for a
community shopping center even though the use of the land, the location of
buildings to be erected in the area, and the yards and open spaces provided
in the plan do not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the
district in which the development is to be located as heretofore set forth in
this chapter.  The requirements of such a unit development plan are as
follows.



      (1)   Residential development plan.  The tract of land to be
developed must comprise an area of not less than ten acres, and the plan must
show or make provisions for the following essential elements:



         (a)   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the
area included in the plan must be fully safeguarded;



         (b)   The plan must be consistent with the intent of
this chapter to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare;



         (c)   The buildings shall be used primarily for
single-family dwellings, apartments, or group houses, and the usual accessory
uses such as garages, storage, and community activities; and



         (d)   The area of the tract, excluding street area, but
including the area to be devoted to parks, parkways, and other open spaces,
must provide the minimum lot area per family, counting all families to be
housed under the unit development plan, which is required for the most
intensive use normally permitted in the district in which the development is
to be located.



      (2)   Community shopping center development plan.  The tract
of land to be developed must comprise an area of not less than four acres,
and the plan must show or make provision for the following essential elements.



         (a)   The commercial uses included in the plan must be
limited to those permitted in the “LB” District.



         (b)   The entire development must be designed as a
single architectural unit, with appropriate landscape architectural treatment
of the entire unit area.



         (c)   At least twice the gross floor area of the stores
to be included within the development, plus one vehicle parking space for
each six seats in any theater or place of congregation within the plan, is
provided in off-street parking area, which are integral parts of the design
of the unit plan.



         (d)   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the
area included in the plan must be fully safeguarded.



         (e)   The plan must be consistent with the intent of the
Zoning Ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   The proposed development plans shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission for examination, study, and report and for a public hearing.  If
the Plan Commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with
the recommendations of the Plan Commission shall be embodied in a report to
the Board of Zoning Appeals, stating the reasons for the approval of the plan
and applications, and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed
development plan has considered and made provisions for the essential
elements.  If the Board of Zoning Appeals approves the proposed development,
improvement location permits and certificates of occupancy shall be issued as
prescribed in §§ 155.095 through 155.098.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-5)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99




WELL FIELD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT




§ 155.050  PURPOSE; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.



   (A)   It is the purpose of the “WP” Well Field Protection
Overlay District to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare of the
customers of protected public water supplies and to protect the community’s
potable water supply against contamination by regulating land use and the
storage, handling, use, and/or production of regulated substances.  The Well
Field Protection Overlay District shall be as delineated in Appendix E of
this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6A.)



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real
property and/or owning or operating a business within the city to make a
determination of the applicability hereof as it pertains to the property
and/or business, and failure to do so shall not excuse any violation.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6B.)



(Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996; Ord. 2003-2, passed 4-9-2003)



§ 155.051  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AQUIFER.  A glacial formation, group of glacial formations, or part of
a glacial formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to
yield significant quantities of water.



   DE MINIMIS QUANTITY.  A specified amount of regulated substances,
expressed in gallons and/or pounds, that is excluded from the provisions of
the “WO”Wellhead Operation District and the “WP” Well Field
Protection Overlay District regulations.  Any use of regulated substances in
excess of the deminimis quantities and not explicitly subject to exclusion is
considered nonconforming.



   DIRECT RECHARGE AREA.  The portion of a drainage basin in which water
infiltrating vertically from the surface will intercept the water table.



   NONROUTINE MAINTENANCE.  Activities necessary not more frequently than
every 24 months to keep structures and equipment in good repair.



   ONE-YEAR CAPTURE AREA.  The area around protected public water supply
well fields delineated by the one-year travel time contour.



   OVERLAY DISTRICT.  The superimposition of a special district
designation, whereby certain regulations and requirements apply in addition
to those of the underlying zoning district to which the designation is added.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and
domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.



   PROTECTED PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.  A public water system which services
at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly
serves at least 25 year-round residents, and having a one-year capture area
defined through appropriate hydrologic studies.



   RECHARGE LAGOON.  A body of water designated and maintained by humans
to add water to the groundwater at a rate greater than that occurring
naturally.



   REGULATED SUBSTANCES.  Chemicals and mixtures of chemicals which are
health hazards.  Materials packaged for personal or household use as food or
drink for humans or other animals are not REGULATED SUBSTANCES.  REGULATED
SUBSTANCES include:



      (1)   Chemicals for which there is scientific evidence that
acute or chronic health effects may result from exposure including
carcinogens, toxic and highly toxic agents, reproductive toxins, irritants,
corrosives, sensitizers, hepatotoxins, nephrotoxins, neurotoxins, agents
which act on the hematopoietic system, and agents which damage the lungs,
skin, eyes, or mucous membranes;



      (2)   Mixtures of chemicals which have been tested as a whole
and have been determined to be a health hazard;



      (3)   Mixtures of chemicals which have not been tested as a
whole but which contain any chemical which has been determined to be a health
hazard and which comprises 1% or greater of the composition on a weight per
unit weight basis, and mixtures of chemicals which include a carcinogen if
the concentration of the carcinogen in the mixture is 0.1% or greater of the
composition on a weight per unit weight basis;



      (4)   Ingredients of mixtures prepared within the “WP”
Well Field Protection Overlay District in cases where the ingredients are
health hazards but comprise less than 0.1% of the mixture on a weight per
unit basis if carcinogenic, or less than 1% of the mixture on a weight per
unit weight basis if non-carcinogenic; and



      (5)   Petroleum and non-solid petroleum derivatives (except
non-PCB dielectric fluids).



   TRAVEL TIME CONTOUR.  A locus of points from which water takes an
equal amount of time to reach a given destination such as a well or well
field.



   UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK.  Any one or combination of tanks (including
underground pipes connected thereto) which is used to contain an accumulation
of regulated substances, and the volume of which (including the volume of
underground pipes connected thereto) is 10% or more beneath the surface of
the ground.  Flow-through process tanks and septic tanks approved by the
Health Department or State Environmental Protection Agency, as applicable,
are excluded from the definition of UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.



   WELL FIELD. A tract of land that contains one or a number of wells for
supplying water.



   ZONE OF INFLUENCE.  A zone delineated by iso-travel time contours
around well fields.  The zone is calculated, based on the rate of movement
of groundwaters in the vicinity of wells with an allowance for the dispersion
of a pollutant entering into and moving with the groundwater.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6F.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.052  REQUIREMENTS.



   The requirements hereof shall be in addition to any applicable
regulations found elsewhere within this code.



   (A)   The conditional uses within the “WP” Well Field Protection
Overlay District shall be those of the underlying zoning district except as
specified.



   (B)   When listed as a permitted or conditional use within the
underlying zoning district the excavation, extraction, mining, or processing
of sand, gravel, and minerals from the earth for resale shall remain as
conditional uses in the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District
subject to approval of the excavation and facilities plan that includes, but
is not limited to:



      (1)   An existing site plan with topographic detail at
two-foot contour intervals, all planimetric information, depth to
groundwater, and flood plain characteristics where applicable;



      (2)   The proposed extent and depth of excavations;



      (3)   Slope angle of excavation walls (any final slopes shall
be at the angle of repose for the remaining material);



      (4)   Use and disposition of the spoil and/or overburden
materials from the excavations including a landscaping and vegetation plan to
stabilize any disturbed material;



      (5)   Surface drainage plan:



         (a)   Drainage into on-site excavations from proximate
off-site transportation facilities such as roadways and roadbeds and off-site
watercourses is prohibited unless the applicant provides a plan which
otherwise protects the excavations from off-site waterborne regulated
substances; and



         (b)   The final on-site grading shall minimize all
surface drainage into the excavations.



      (6)   A post-excavation and operation land use plan; and



      (7)   A security plan (unauthorized access shall be strictly
prohibited as long as any excavations remain on site).



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6C.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.053  USES OF UNDERLYING ZONING DISTRICT.



   Accessory and/or permitted uses, buildings, or structures customarily
incident to a principal permitted use or a conditionally permitted use within
the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District shall be those of the
underlying zoning district.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6D.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.054  PROHIBITED USES.



   Sanitary landfills, dry wells, landfills comprised of demolition debris
or other non-approved matter, and junk yards are prohibited within the
“WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.055  GROUNDWATER PROTECTION STANDARDS.



   The“WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District shall be subject to
the following groundwater protection standards.



   (A)   Use, storage, handling, and/or production of regulated
substances in conjunction with permitted and conditional uses in this
district shall be limited to:



      (1)   Aggregate of regulated substances.  The aggregate of
regulated substances in use, storage, handling, and/or production may not
exceed 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any time; and



      (2)   Total use of regulated substances.  The total use,
storage, handling, and/or production of regulated substances may not exceed
50 gallons or 400 pounds in any 12-month period.



   (B)   A limited exclusion may be authorized for non-routine
maintenance or repair of property or equipment.  The use, storage, handling,
and/or production of regulated substances under this exclusion shall be
limited to:



      (1)   The aggregate of regulated substances in use, storage,
handling, and/or production may not exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds at any
time;



      (2)   The total use, storage, handling, and/or production of
regulated substances may not exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds in any 12-month
period; and



      (3)   The application of U.S. EPA approved agricultural
chemicals by licensed personnel using U.S. EPA best recommended practices. 
Below ground applications in excess of 100 gallons or 800 pounds in any
12-month period shall require 72-hour prior notice to the City Manager or his
or her authorized designee.



   (C)   A limited exclusion may be authorized for regulated substances
which are cleaning agents, provided, however, the cleaning agents are
packaged for personal or household use or are present in the same form and
concentration as a product packaged for use by the general public, and
provided the aggregate inventory of the cleaning agents shall not exceed 100
gallons or 800 pounds at any time.  In no case shall regulated substances
claimed under this exclusion include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon
solvents.



   (D)   A limited exclusion may be authorized for on-site storage of a
maximum one-year supply of agricultural chemicals to be used for routine
on-site agricultural operations, provided the substances are stored in
standard approved packaging and the chemicals are applied to cropland under
Best Management Practices as indicated by soil tests, agricultural experts,
or label directions approved by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) or the State Department of Agriculture.  This limited exclusion
also applies to the application of agricultural chemicals to cropland where
the chemicals are brought in from other locations.  This provision does not
exempt the agricultural chemicals either stored on-site or brought in from
other locations from the inventory, spill reporting, and underground storage
tank protection requirements of the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay
District.



   (E)   With the exception of residential use of heating fuels in
tanks having a capacity equal to or less than 500 gallons, the underground
storage of fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations and fuel for building
and/or process heating in conjunction with permitted and conditional uses in
this district shall be in tanks secondarily contained and monitored.  The
installations shall be subject to approval by the City Manager, or his or her
designee.



   (F)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter,
nonconforming uses in this district presently utilizing underground storage
tanks for fuel and lubricants for vehicle operations and fuel for building
and/or process heating shall be permitted to replace existing tanks with
those constructed as provided for new installation and not exceeding the
capacity of existing tanks.  Replacement of underground tanks for regulated
substances other than the above-noted fuels and lubricants is not permitted.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6G.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 155.056  INSPECTIONS.



   Subject to applicable provisions of law, the City Manager, or
authorized designee bearing proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter private property at any reasonable time, with reasonable cause or with
prior notification, for such purposes as inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and records examination pertaining to the requirements
of this chapter to ensure that activities are in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.  Upon request of the entity which is the subject
to the inspection, and if permitted by law, information obtained as a result
of the inspection shall be maintained as confidential.  If the owner or
tenant does not consent to the entry of the City Manager for the above stated
purposes, the City Manager may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for
an appropriate warrant or other authority to enter the property.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6H.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.057  REGULATED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall place, deposit, or permit to be deposited,
store, process, use, produce, dispose of, transport, or discharge,
hereinafter referred to as “handle” any regulated substance on public or
private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
city except as provided by law, statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation.



   (B)   Any violation of this section is hereby determined to be a
nuisance and must be abated.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6I.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 155.058  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.



   (A)   With the exception of the underground storage of fuel and
lubricants for vehicular operations and fuel for building heating and/or
process heating in conjunction with permitted and conditional uses in this
district any storage of regulated substances in underground storage tanks
within the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District shall be deemed to
constitute a dangerous nuisance.  Every nuisance must and shall be abated no
later than five years from the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   With the exception of residential use of home heating fuel in
tanks having a capacity equal to or less than 500 gallons, any underground
storage tank systems for vehicle fuel and lubricants and fuel for building
and/or process heating within the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay
District not removed within five years from the effective date of this
chapter must be secondarily contained and monitored in accordance with plans
submitted to and approved by the City Manager.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6J.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.059  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Regulated substance activity inventory.



      (1)   Applicability.



         (a)   Except as maybe otherwise provided, any owner or
occupant of any land in the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District
at the effective date of this chapter, shall file a regulated substance
activity inventory report with the City Manager or his or her authorized
designee.  The report shall be filed within 180 days of the effective date
of this chapter and at 24-month intervals thereafter.



         (b)   Except as may be otherwise provided, any new owner
or occupant of any land in the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay
District shall file a regulated substance activity inventory report prior to
receipt of a certificate of zoning compliance or a certificate of occupancy
and at 24-month intervals following the date of occupancy.  For purposes of
this division (A)(1)(b), NEW shall be defined as subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter.



         (c)   Where a person owns, operates, or occupies more
than one location, regulated substance activity inventory reports shall be
made for each location.



         (d)   Agricultural uses shall file a regulated substance
activity inventory report within 180 days of the effective date of this
subchapter and at 12-month intervals thereafter.  Regulated substance
activity inventory reports for agricultural uses shall include total annual
on-site application of regulated substances for the reporting property.



      (2)   Exclusions to activity inventory reporting.



         (a)   Any exclusion set forth in this division (A)(2)
shall apply provided that the exclusion does not substantially increase any
risk or hazard to the public health or water supply, wells, or well fields;
and provided further that any spill, leak, discharge, or mishandling shall be
subject to enforcement.  Any exclusions granted herein shall not remove or
limit the liability and responsibility of any person or activity involved.



         (b)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for incidental uses of
regulated substances, provided the uses are limited as follows.



            1.   The aggregate of regulated substances in use
may not exceed 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any time.



            2.   The total use of regulated substances may not
exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds in any 12-month period.



         (c)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for non-routine maintenance
or repair of property or equipment in the “WP” Well Field Protection
Overlay District, provided the uses are limited as follows.



            1.   The aggregate of regulated substances in use
may not exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds at any time.



            2.   The total use of regulated substances may not
exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds in any 12-month period.



         (d)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for regulated substances
which are cleaning agents; provided, however, the cleaning agents are
packaged for personal or household use or are present in the same form and
concentration as a product packaged for use by the general public, and
provided the aggregate inventory of the cleaning agents shall not exceed 100
gallons or 800 pounds at any time.  In no case shall regulated substances
claimed under the exclusion include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon
solvents.



         (e)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for medical and research
laboratory uses in the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay District;
provided, however, regulated substances shall be stored, handled, or used in
containers not to exceed five gallons or 40 pounds of each substance and the
aggregate inventory of regulated substances shall not exceed 250 gallons or
2,000 pounds.



         (f)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for the transportation of
regulated substances through the “WP” Well Field Protection Overlay
District, provided that the transportation vehicle is in compliance with
applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations; provided that the
regulated substance is fueling the transportation vehicle; and provided that
the transportation vehicle is in continuous transit, making delivery, or is
stopped for a period of time not to exceed 72 hours.



         (g)   A limited exclusion from regulated substance
activity inventory reporting is hereby authorized for owners and occupants of
single- or two-family residences, provided, however, the storage and use of
regulated substances are related to the maintenance of the residence or
vehicles under control of the occupant and provided waste regulated
substances are appropriately disposed of to a permitted solid waste facility
or a permitted publicly-owned wastewater treatment works.



   (B)   Spills, leaks, or discharges.



      (1)   Any person with direct knowledge of a spill, leak, or
discharge of a regulated substance within the “WP” Well Field Protection
Overlay District shall, if the spill leak or discharge escapes containment or
contacts a pervious ground surface and is not immediately and completely
remediated, give notice to the City Manager or the Police Department by
telephone within 30 minutes.  The notification shall include at a minimum,
the location of the incident name and telephone number, date and time
thereof, type of substance(s), concentration and volume, and control or
corrective action taken.  The notification shall in no way alleviate other
local, state, and federal reporting obligations as required by law.



      (2)   The application of agricultural chemicals, fertilizers,
mineral acids, organic sulphur compounds, and the like used in routine
agricultural operations, including plant nutrients and crop protection
materials, applied under Best Management Practices as indicated by soil
tests, agricultural experts or label directions approved by the United States
EPA or the State Department of Agriculture, shall not be considered a spill,
leak, or discharge subject to the reporting provisions of this division
(B)(2).



      (3)   (a)   Any entity or person who spills, leaks, or
discharges the substance(s) shall be liable for any reasonable expense, loss,
or damages incurred by the city in response to such an incident in addition
to the amount of any fines imposed on account thereof under state and federal
law.



         (b)   The entity or person shall document and maintain
sufficient records so as to reflect accurately the circumstances related to
any such incident and develop and implement procedures to substantially
eliminate the likelihood of reoccurrence of the spills, leaks, or discharges
as soon as practicable following the incident but no later than 180 days
after the incident.



   (C)   Falsifying information.  No person shall make any false
statement, representation, or certification in any report or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this subchapter.



   (D)   Retention of records.  Any reports or records compiled or
submitted pursuant to this section shall be maintained by the user for a
minimum of five years or so long as enforcement or judicial proceedings are
being pursued, whichever is longer.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6K.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)



§ 155.060  PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION AUTHORITIES.



   (A)   Application.  If any activity or use of regulated substance
is deemed by the City Manager or authorized designee to pose a real and
present danger of contaminating surface and/or groundwater which would
normally enter the public water supply, the City Manager is authorized to:



      (1)   Cause cessation of the activity or use of  the
regulated substance;



      (2)   Require the provision of administrative controls and/or
facilities sufficient to mitigate the danger; and/or



      (3)   Cause the provision of pollution control and/or
abatement activities.



   (B)   Exemption of certain regulated substances.  The City Manager
is authorized to exclude certain regulated substances, that pose no threat to
ground water, from the provisions of these regulations.  Prior to
authorizing the exemption of any regulated substance, the City Manager shall
have the request for exemption reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  The
recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be binding on the City
Manager.



   (C)   Technical consultants.  Upon application for a zoning
clearance permit and/or occupancy certificate for a use within the “WP”
Well Field Protection Overlay District, the City Manager may employ such
technical expertise as needed to ensure compliance with the provisions of
these regulations.  All costs incurred in the compliance review process
shall be passed through to the applicant and shall be in addition to those
fees normally charged by the city to review an application for a zoning
clearance permit and/or occupancy certificate.



   (D)   Appeals.  The Board of Zoning Appeals of the city shall hear
Well Field Protection Overlay District appeals.  The Board shall have the
authority to take appeals, investigate matters related to the appeals, deny,
uphold, or otherwise modify or waive the City Manager’s actions on a
case-by-case basis.



   (E)   Findings.  No modification or waiver of the requirements of
this subchapter shall be authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless it
enters written findings that all of the following facts and conditions exist:



      (1)   Exceptional burden.  That there are exceptional
circumstances regarding the property or its conforming uses which make
enforcement of this chapter an unreasonable burden on the continuation of the
conforming uses; and



      (2)   Lack of increased hazard.  That the waiver or
modification shall not increase the threat of contamination of the
community’s potable water supply.



(1985 Code, § 8-3-6L.)  (Ord. 1996-5, passed - -1996)




NONCONFORMING USES




§ 155.075  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER TO NONCONFORMING USES CREATED BY
AMENDMENT.



   The provisions of this subchapter apply in the same manner to a use
which may become a nonconforming use due to any amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance passed after its original adoption (3-25-1957).



(1985 Code, § 8-4-1)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.076  CONTINUATION OF PREEXISTING NONCONFORMING USE.



   The lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time of
passage of this chapter may be continued although the use does not conform to
all provisions thereof, except as provided in § 155.078.  Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated
use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and
the construction of which has been diligently prosecuted within 90 days of
the date of the permit and which entire building shall be completed according
to the plans, as filed within three years from the date of passage of this
chapter.  A nonconforming use may be extended throughout a building,
provided no structural alterations are made therein, except those required by
law.  A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the
same or greater restrictions, provided no structural changes are made in the
building.  However, if a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming
use or to a use permitted in a district of greater restrictions, it shall not
thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use or a less restricted one.  In
the event that a nonconforming use of any building or premises ceases for a
period of six months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the
uses permitted in the district in which it is located.



(1985 Code, § 8-4-2)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 2002-5, passed
10-22-2002)



§ 155.077  ERECTION OR RE-ERECTION OF BUILDINGS ON NONCONFORMING PREMISES
PROHIBITED.



   No building shall be erected upon any premises devoted to a
nonconforming use, and no building located upon any such premises which has
been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 75% of its
appraised valuation, shall be repaired or rebuilt, except in conformity with
regulations of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 8-4-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.078  NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND FOR OPEN STORAGE.



   The lawful use of land for open storage purposes which does not conform
to this chapter shall be discontinued within two years from its date of
passage; and the use of land for storage purposes, which may become a
nonconforming use by reason of an amendment thereto, shall be discontinued
within two years from the date of passage of the amendment.



(1985 Code, § 8-4-4)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.079  TEMPORARY COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USE.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize, by written permit, in a
residential district for a period of not more than one year from the date of
the permit, a temporary building for commercial or industrial use incidental
to the residential construction and development of the district.



(1985 Code, § 8-4-5)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)




IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY




§ 155.095  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT REQUIRED; PERMIT FEE.



   Within the city, and the contiguous unincorporated portions of the
county over which the city exercises planning and zoning jurisdiction, no
structure, improvement, or use of land may be altered, changed, placed,
erected, or located on platted or unplatted lands, unless the structure,
improvement, or use, and its locations, conform with the master plan and
ordinances of the city and an improvement location permit for the structure,
improvement, or use has been issued.  It is hereby declared that the intent
of this permit requirement shall not prevail with respect to a structure
which is clearly incidental to agricultural operations; however, a dwelling,
irrespective of location, is not considered incidental to agricultural
operations.  The application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a fee of $2.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-1)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.096  PLAT OR SITE PLAN REQUIRED WITH IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT
APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each application for an improvement location permit shall be
accompanied by a plat or site plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:



      (1)   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon or
improved;



      (2)   The location of the structure, improvement, or use to be
altered, changed, placed, erected, or located, and the manner in which the
location is to be improved;



      (3)   The size of any building to be erected, reconstructed,
or structurally altered;



      (4)   The size of yards and open spaces;



      (5)   Existing or proposed streets and alleys adjoining or
within the lot; and



      (6)   Any other information as shall be necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   A careful record shall be kept of all the applications and
plats or site plans in the office of the Building Inspector.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-2)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.097  ISSUANCE; DENIAL; APPEAL.



   (A)   The Building Inspector shall issue an improvement location
permit, upon written application, when the proposed structure, improvement,
or use and its location conform in all respects to the Master Plan of the
city.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-4)



   (B)   (1)   Any decision of the Building Inspector concerning the
issuance of an improvement location permit may be appealed to the Plan
Commission by any person claiming to be adversely affected by the decision.



      (2)   A decision of the Plan Commission may be reviewed by
certiorari procedure as provided for the appeal of zoning cases from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-5)



(Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.098  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for excavation
for, or for the erection, reconstruction, or alteration of, any building
before application has been made for a certificate of occupancy.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-3)



   (B)   No land shall be occupied or used; no building erected,
reconstructed, or structurally altered shall be occupied or used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose whatsoever; nor shall any change in the use of a
building be made; until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Inspector stating that the building and use comply with all of the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the building or premises or the use
in the district in which it is to be located.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-6)



   (C)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally
with the application for an improvement location permit and shall be issued
within ten days after the lawful erection, reconstruction, or structural
alteration of the building shall have been completed.  A record of all
certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Inspector and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.  A fee of
$1 shall be charged for each original certificate and $.50 for each copy
thereof.



(1985 Code, § 8-5-7)



(Ord. passed 3-25-1957)  Penalty, see § 10.99




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 155.110  ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is hereby designated and authorized to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.  Any decision of the Building Inspector made
in enforcement of this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals
by any person claiming to be adversely affected by the decision.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-4)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.111  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Establishment.  A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby
established in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-901(a).  The Board shall be
composed of five members, all of whom shall be residents of the city, and one
of whom shall hold other elective or appointive office, except that two of
the five members shall be appointed from the Plan Commission’s citizen
membership.  Of the original five members, one shall be appointed to serve
for one year; one for two years; one for three years; and two for four
years.  Terms of these members shall expire on January 1 of the first,
second, third, or fourth year, respectively, following their appointment. 
Thereafter, as terms expire, each new appointment shall be for a term of four
years.  All members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor.



(1985 Code, § 8-6-1)



   (B)   Organization.  At the first meeting of each year, the Board
shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from among its members, and
it may appoint and fix the compensation of a Secretary and the employees as
are necessary for the discharge of its duties, all in conformity to and
compliance with salaries and compensations theretofore fixed by the City
Council.  All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.  The Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, prepare findings, and record the vote of each member
voting upon each question.  All minutes and records shall be filed in the
office of the Board and shall be a public record.



(1985 Code, § 8-6-2)



   (C)   Powers and duties.



      (1)   The Board shall have the following powers and it shall
be its duty to:



         (a)   Adopt rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to effectuate the provisions of this chapter;



         (b)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Building Inspector
in the enforcement of this chapter;



         (c)   Hear and decide on permits for conditional uses,
development plans, or other uses upon which the Board is required to act
under this chapter;



         (d)   Authorize upon appeal in specific cases the
variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest, where owing to special conditions, fully demonstrated on the
basis of the facts presented, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done; however, no variance
in the application of the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the
Board relating to buildings, land or premises now existing or to be
constructed, unless after a public hearing, the Board shall find that the
variance will not:



            1.   Alter the land use characteristics of the
district;



            2.   Impair the adequate supply of light and air
to adjacent property;



            3.   Increase the hazard from fire, flood, and
other dangers of the property;



            4.   Diminish the marketable value of adjacent
land and buildings;



            5.   Increase the congestion in the public
streets; or



            6.   Otherwise impair the public health, safety,
convenience, comfort, or general welfare.



      (2)   In exercising its powers, the Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from as, in its opinion, ought to be done in the
premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Building Inspector
from whom the appeal is taken.  Every decision of the Board shall be subject
to review by certiorari.



(1985 Code, § 8-6-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.112  AMENDMENTS TO ZONING REGULATIONS.



   All amendments to this chapter shall be in conformance with the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-607 through 36-7-4-609, and all acts amendatory
thereto.  Any proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Plan Commission
for report and recommendation prior to any action thereon by the City
Council.  If the Plan Commission recommends against the enactment of any
proposed amendment, it shall become effective only by a three-fourth vote of
the City Council.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-6)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)



§ 155.113  VIOLATIONS.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as set forth in § 10.99.  Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.  In
addition, the Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Building
Inspector, or any designated enforcement official, or any person or person
jointly or severally aggrieved, may institute a suit for injunction in the
County Circuit Court to restrain an individual or a governmental unit from
violating the provisions of this chapter.  The Plan Commission or the Board
of Zoning Appeals may also institute a suit for mandatory injunction
directing a person or a governmental unit to remove a structure erected in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.  Any building erected, raised,
or converted, or land or premise used in violation of any such provisions or
the requirements thereof, is hereby declared to be a common nuisance and as
such may be abated in the manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be
abated under existing law.



(1985 Code, § 8-1-5)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957)




SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS




§ 155.125  PROHIBITED BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Pole barns are prohibited in all districts except:



      (1)   In the Single-Family Residential - Rural or R-B
District; and



      (2)   In the Industrial or I District.



   (B)   Exterior metal panel buildings are prohibited in all districts
except:



      (1)   In the Single-Family Residential - Rural or R-B District;



      (2)   In the Industrial or I District; and



      (3)   In the Local Business-A or LB-A District if:



         (a)   No more than 65% of the total surface area of the
front elevation and any street elevation is covered with metal panels;



         (b)   The building has a ground floor area of at least
20,000 square feet; and



         (c)   The building is not situated upon real estate
adjacent to or within 450 feet of U.S. Highway 50.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 2004-1, passed 1-14-2004; Ord. 2012-1,
passed 2-27-2012)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.126  SIGNS.



   All signs in a local business district shall be either applied or
affixed to an exterior wall of a building, or ground-mounted.  If applied or
affixed to the exterior wall of a building, the sign is limited to a height
not above the exterior wall of the building and a total face area of not more
than the product of two square feet multiplied by each frontage foot facing
the address street of that building.  If ground-mounted, the sign is limited
to not more than one per lot which is permanently affixed to the ground and
has a height no greater than eight feet and width no greater than eight feet,
and the product of the height and width of which is no greater than 48 square
feet, whether single- or double-sided.  Temporary signs shall not be
displayed for more than 30 days in any consecutive 365-day period.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Additional sign provisions, see Ch. 156



§ 155.127  FORM AND COLOR STANDARDS.



   (A)   No building, structure, or land shall be erected, altered, or
enlarged in a local business district unless the exterior thereof shall be of
a traditional form, material, color, and color scheme.  The owner shall
cause to be submitted to the Plan Commission an architectural plan which
shall depict the form, material, color, and color scheme of the building or
structure, along with any additional data required.



   (B)   The architectural plan must be approved by the Plan Commission
prior to the issuance of any improvement location permit.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.128  MINIMUM GREEN AREA REQUIRED.



   No building, structure, or land shall be erected, altered, or enlarged
in a local business district unless it shall provide for and maintain a green
area of at least 15% of the total lot area allocated for the structure or use.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.129  MINIMUM GREEN AREA BUFFER REQUIRED.



   No building, structure, or land shall be erected, altered, or enlarged
in a local business district unless it shall provide for and maintain a green
area buffer between the road right-of-way and any building, structure, or
improvement (excluding a ground-mounted sign) of at least 15 feet in the
front yard and of at least seven and one-half feet in the side yard and rear
yard.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.130  PARKING LOT GREEN AREA ISLANDS REQUIRED.



   No parking lot shall be permitted in a local business district unless
it shall provide for a green area island at each end of an isle of parking
spaces and within a row or isle of parking spaces whenever there are ten
parking spaces adjacent to one another.  Each green area island shall be
equivalent in size to at least one parking space.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 155.131  LANDSCAPING.



   All green areas shall be landscaped with native grass, shrubbery, and
trees and other natural landscaping techniques or devices. No less than 12
trees with a trunk diameter of two and one-half inches one foot above ground
shall be required per acre. At least one native tree compliant with IDNR
Indiana Community Tree Selection Guide recommendations per every 100 feet of
green buffer plus one additional native tree shall be located and evenly
spaced within the green area buffer. All trees shall be in accordance with
applicable INDOT regulations. In case of loss, death, or life-threatening
damage to a tree, that tree shall be replaced in accordance with the above
requirements at the owner’s expense. The owner shall cause to be submitted
to the Planning Commission a landscaping plan which shall depict the type,
size, and location of landscaping items along with any additional data
required. Large, medium, and small trees shall be incorporated in the design.
The landscaping plans must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to
the issuance of any improvement location permit.



(Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002; Ord. 2008-1, passed 4-9-2008)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 155.132  LANDSCAPING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   All residential development shall have a minimum requirement of two
native trees with a trunk diameter of two and one-half inches one foot above
the ground for every lot. At least one of these trees shall be located
between the structure and the street. Existing trees shall be protected where
possible. When new trees must be planted in order to fulfill this
requirement, the trees shall be native trees compliant with IDNR Indiana
Community Tree Selection Guide recommendations. In case of loss, death, or
life- threatening damage to a tree, that tree shall be replaced in accordance
with the above requirements at the owner’s expense.



(Ord. 2008-1, passed 4-9-2008)



APPENDIX A:  PERMITTED USES BY ZONING DISTRICT



Note: Appendix A is available in PDF format for ease of display and printing:
Click HERE



 




Table 1:  Permitted Uses by Zoning District




Zoning District

 

Permitted Principal Uses

 

Conditional Principal Uses**

 

Permitted Accessory Uses***

 

Permitted Contingent Uses



“R-A” and “WP”*
 
Church/temple
 
Apartment house
 
Apartment house:
 
Bulletin board (church or public building)


 
 
College/university
 
Cemetery/crematory
 

   -Private garage

 
Home occupation


 
 
Community center
 
Condominiums
 
Group house:
 
Professional office (in residence)


 
 
Farm/nursery (1)
 
Country club/golf course
 

   -Private garage

 
Railroad right-of-way (3)


 
 
Fraternity house
 
Fire station/police station
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
Temporary sign (sale or lease of premises)


 
 
Government building
 
Group house
 
Other uses:
 
Utility right-of-way (2)


 
 
Public library/museum
 
Nursing home
 

   -Same as for group houses

 
 


 
 
Public park/rec. facility
 
Private club/lodge
 
Single-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
Public/parochial school
 
Two-family dwelling
 

   -Guest house (5)

 
 


 
 
Public utility building (2)
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
Single-family dwelling
 
 
 

   -Servants quarters (4)

 
 


 
 
Student co-op housing
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Two-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


“R-B” and “WP”*
 
Church/temple
 
Apartment house
 
Apartment house:
 
Bulletin board (church or public building)


 
 
College/university
 
Cemetery/crematory
 

   -Private garage

 
Home occupation


 
 
Community center
 
Condominiums
 
Group house:
 
Professional office (in residence)


 
 
Farm/nursery (1)
 
Country club/golf course
 

   -Private garage

 
Railroad right-of-way (3)


 
 
Fraternity house
 
Fire station/police station
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
Temporary sign (sale or lease of premises)


 
 
Government building
 
Group house
 
Other uses:
 
Utility right-of-way (2)


 
 
Public library/museum
 
Nursing home
 

   -Same as for group houses

 
 


 
 
Public park/rec. facility
 
Private club/lodge
 
Single-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
Public/parochial school
 
Two-family dwelling
 

   -Exterior metal panel     buildings

 
 


 
 
Public utility building (2)
 
 
 

   -Guest house (5)

 
 


 
 
Single-family dwelling
 
 
 

   -Pole barn

 
 


 
 
Student co-op housing
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Servants quarters (4)

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
Two-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


“MF” and “WP”*
 
Apartment house:
 
Cemetery/crematory
 
Apartment house:
 
Bulletin board (church or public building)


 
 

   -Single-family

 
Country club/golf course
 

   -Private garage

 
Home occupation


 
 

   -Two-family

 
Fire station/police station
 
Group house:
 
Professional office (in residence)


 
 

   -Three-family

 
Nursing home
 

   -Private garage

 
Railroad right-of-way (3)


 
 
Church/temple
 
Private club/lodge
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
Temporary sign (sale or lease of premises)


 
 
College/university
 
 
 
Other uses:
 
Utility right-of-way (2)


 
 
Community center
 
 
 

   -Same as for group houses

 
 


 
 
Condominiums
 
 
 
Single-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
Farm/nursery
 
 
 

   -Guest house (5)

 
 


 
 
Fraternity house
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
Government building
 
 
 

   -Servants quarters (4)

 
 


 
 
Group home
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 
Public library/museum
 
 
 
Two-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 
Public park/rec. facility
 
 
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 
Public/parochial school
 
 
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 
Public utility building
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Student co-op housing
 
 
 
 
 
 


“LB” and “WP”*
 
Automobile service (17):
 
Airport/landing field
 
Apartment house:
 
Bulletin board (church or public building)


 
 

   -Automobile repair

 
Amusement park
 

   -Private garage

 
Home occupation


 
 

   -Commercial garage

 
Apartment hotel (16)
 
Group house:
 
Professional office (in residence)


 
 

   -Commercial parking lot

 
Apartment house
 

   -Private garage

 
Railroad right-of-way (3)


 
 

   -Filling station

 
Baseball park
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
Temporary sign (sale or lease of premises)


 
 

   -Open auto/trailer sales area

 
Boarding house
 
Other uses:
 
Utility right-of-way (2)


 
 

   -Sales room

 
Cemetery/crematory
 

   -Same as for group houses

 
 


 
 
Business service:
 
Charitable institution
 
Single-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 

   -Bank

 
Condominiums
 

   -Guest house (5)

 
 


 
 

   -Office

 
Country club/golf course
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 

   -Postal station

 
Fire station/police station
 

   -Servants quarters (4)

 
 


 
 

   -Telephone office

 
Golf driving range
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 
Clothing service (17):
 
Group house
 
Two-family dwelling:
 
 


 
 

   -Apparel shop

 
Kindergarten/day nursery
 

   -Private garage

 
 


 
 

   -Dressmaking

 
Mortuary
 

   -Storage (non-commercial)

 
 


 
 

   -Dry cleaning (7)

 
Motel/tourist lodge
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Laundry

 
Nursing home
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Millinery

 
Outdoor theater
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Pressing shop

 
Private club/lodge
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Self-serve laundry

 
Radio/TV tower
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Shoe repair shop

 
Trailer/public camp
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Tailor

 
Two-family dwelling
 
 
 
 


 
 
Commercial:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Billiard room

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Bowling alley

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Dancing academy

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Recreational (9)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Tavern/night club

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Theater

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Education:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -College/university

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Fraternity/student coop housing

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Public/parochial school

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Equipment service:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Computer repair

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Electric appliance shop

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Radio shop

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Food service:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Bakery

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Cold storage lockers (individual use)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Delicatessen

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Grocery

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Meat market

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Restaurant

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Roadside sales stand

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Supermarket

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
General business:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Bus/rail station

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Department store

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Storage warehouse

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Wholesale

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Medical:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Doctor/dentist office

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Health care clinic

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Veterinary office

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Miscellaneous:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Church/temple

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Farm/nursery (1)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Hotel

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Private club/lodge

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Personal service:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Barber/beauty shop

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Photo studio

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Reducing salon

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Public buildings:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Community center

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Governmental

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Library/museum

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Park/recreation facility

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Utility

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Retail generally:
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Drugstore

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Flower shop

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Greenhouse (8)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Hardware store

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Newsdealer

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Show room (retail)

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
Single-family dwelling
 
 
 
 
 
 


“I” and “WP”*
 
Education:
 
Airport/landing field
 
(None specified)
 
Advertising sign


 
 

   -College/university

 
Amusement park
 
 
 
Bulletin board (church or public building)


 
 

   -Fraternity/student coop housing

 
Auto wrecking (13, 17)
 
 
 
Home occupation


 
 

   -Public/parochial school

 
Baseball park
 
 
 
Professional office (in residence)


 
 
Industrial uses (12, 17):
 
Boarding house
 
 
 
Railroad right-of-way


 
 

   -Poultry slaughtering/ wholesaling

 
Cemetery/crematory
 
 
 
Temporary signs (sale or lease of premises)


 
 

   -Bulk fluid storage (14)

 
Charitable institution
 
 
 
Utility right-of-way


 
 

   -Building material storage yard

 
Correctional institution
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Bus line shops or garage

 
Country club/golf course
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Carting/express hauling or storage yard

 
Fire station
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Coal/coke/wood yard

 
Golf driving range
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Contractor’s plant/storage yard

 
Hospital
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Lumber yard

 
Junk storage (13, 17)
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Railroad freight house

 
Kindergarten/day nursery
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Truck terminal

 
Mortuary (17)
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Utility storage yard

 
Motel/tourist lodge
 
 
 
 


 
 
Light industrial uses (12, 17)
 
Nursing home
 
 
 
 


 
 
Local business uses (11, 17)
 
Outdoor theater
 
 
 
 


 
 
Miscellaneous:
 
Radio/TV tower
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Church/temple

 
Sanitary fill/refuse dump (17)
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Farm/nursery (1)

 
Special uses (15, 17):
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Fireworks sales/storage

 

   -Acid manufacturer

 
 
 
 


 
 
Public buildings:
 

   -Arsenal

 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Building material storage yard

 

   -Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of Paris manufacturer

 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Bus line shops or garage

 

   -Distillation of bones, coal, wood

 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Carting/express hauling or storage yard

 

   -Recycling of used building materials, automobile parts and components,
tires, and/or waste materials

 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Community center

 

   -Storage of used building materials, automobile parts and/or
components, tires, and/or waste materials

 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Contractor’s plant/storage yard

 
Trailer/public camp
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Governmental

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Library/museum

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Park/recreation facility

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

   -Utility

 
 
 
 
 
 


NOTES TO TABLE:



*    See §§ 155.050 through 155.060 for “WP” Well Field Protection
Overlay District regulations supplemental to the underlying district.




**   Conditional uses are permitted only if application is made and
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.




***   In the “A” District, an accessory use structure may not be
erected prior to the erection of the principal structure, except strictly for
storage purposes and not for human occupancy.  (Also see definition of
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL in § 155.004.)



(1) - Raising of livestock or poultry, advertising signs, or display of sales
signs are not permitted.  Maintenance of vegetable/flower gardens is
permitted under this classification.


(2) - Including purposes essential to utilities operation, but not including
commercial or industrial structures or uses.


(3) - Including purposes essential to railroad operation, but not including
railroad yards, shops, stations, engine storage, or commercial or industrial
structures or uses.


(4) - Quarters for bona fide servants employed by the occupants of the
dwelling on the same lot, but only on the second floor of the building.


(5) - One guest house with cooking facilities on lots containing not less
than 12,000 square feet.


(6) - Entirely within enclosed buildings.


(7) - Using not more than 2 clothes-cleaning units, neither of which shall
have a rated capacity of more than 40 pounds, using non-explosive and
non-inflammable cleaning fluid.


(8) - Not exceeding 3,000 square feet in area.


(9) - Must be conducted only within buildings so constructed that no noise of
any kind is audible beyond the confines of the building.


(10) - Only in conformity with laws and ordinances governing the use.


(11) - These classifications also include the same specific
sub-classifications as set forth under each in the “LB” District portion
of the table.


(12) - These classifications, in addition to any sub-classifications
expressly set forth thereunder, also include as “permitted uses” any
other uses strictly meeting the definition of GENERAL BUSINESS USE, LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL USE, or INDUSTRIAL USE under § 155.004, respectively, and which
are not otherwise classified in the table.


(13) - Auto scrap yards and junkyards must be either in enclosed buildings or
completely surrounded by solid walls/fences at least 8 feet high.


(14) - May include inflammable liquids in above-ground tanks, but not oil
refinery tanks.


(15) - The conditional use permit application must include a report by the
Health Officer or State Board of Health, and the State Fire Marshal, that the
uses applied for will not be injurious to the public health and safety. 
This classification may also include any other use which may, under some
circumstances, be injurious to public health or safety, but which may with
proper safeguards be designed so as not to be injurious.


(16) - In connection with which no business is conducted, other than interior
facilities located in the lobby, and without outside display or entrance.


(17) - Hazard Material Management Plan required for uses that store materials.




 



(1985 Code, § 8-3-1)  (Ord. 2004-1, passed 1-14-2004)  Penalty, see §
10.99



APPENDIX B:  LOT AND YARD REQUIREMENTS



Note: Appendix B is available in PDF format for ease of display and printing:
Click HERE



 




Table 2:  Lot and Yard Requirements (1)




Building/Use

 

District

 

Min. Lot Area (square feet)

 

Min. Lot Width (feet)

 

Min. Front Yard (feet)

 

Min. Side Yard (feet)

 

Min. Rear Yard (3)



Single- or two-family dwelling
 

“R-A” or “LB”

 

6,000 (2,4)

 

70

 

25 for “R-A” and 50 for “LB” (5,7)

 

4

 

15% of lot depth; min. 15 feet (6)



Apartment house
 

“R-A” or “LB”

 

3,000 per family

 

70

 

25 for “R-A” and 50 for “LB” (5,7)

 

4

 

20% of lot depth; min. 20 feet (6)



Group house
 

“R-A” or “LB”

 

3,000 per family

 

70

 

25 for “R-A” and 50 for “LB” (5,7)

 

4

 

15% of lot depth; min. 15 feet (6)



Local business:
 

“LB” or “I”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

50 for “LB” and 15 for “I” (7)

 

In an “LB” District, along the side street line of a corner lot adjoining
an “R-A” District or where an “LB” District adjoins an “R-A”
District in the same block, minimum side yard is 5 feet.  Otherwise, a side
yard is not required, but, if provided, it must be at least 4 feet

 

10% of lot depth




   -Automobile service

 
 


 


 


 





   -Business service

 
 


 


 


 





   -Clothing service

 
 


 


 


 





   -Community recreation

 
 


 


 


 





   -Equipment service

 
 


 


 


 





   -Food service

 
 


 


 


 





   -Retail generally


 
 
 


 


 


 




General business
 

“I”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

15 (7)

 

None required, but at least 4 feet if provided

 

10% of lot depth



Light Industrial or industrial
 

“I”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

15

 

None required, but at least 4 feet if provided

 

15% of lot depth; max. requirement of 10 feet



Other principal buildings
 

“R-A”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

25 (7)

 

4

 

15% of lot depth; min. 15 feet



Other principal buildings
 

“LB” or “I”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

50 for “LB” and 15 for “I” (7)

 

Same as for local business above

 

10% of lot depth



Accessory buildings
 

“A” or “LB”

 

Not applicable

 

(None specified)

 

None specified for “A”; 50 for “LB”

 

3 (8)

 

3 (8)



NOTES TO TABLE:


(1) - After 3-25-1957, all buildings must be erected on a lot which fronts on
a street.


(2) - In the case of a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area
requirement does not apply if the lot was in single ownership or included in
a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, on or before
3-25-1957.


(3) - One-half of an alley abutting the rear lot may be considered in meeting
the rear yard requirements.


(4) - If a guest house with cooking facilities is included as an accessory
building appurtenant to a single-family dwelling, the minimum lot area is
12,000 square feet.


(5) - Front yard/setback lines established in a recorded subdivision plat
apply if requiring a larger front yard.


(6) - On through lots, a front yard is required on both streets.


(7) - In an “R-A” or “LB” District, where 25% or more of the lots in
a block are occupied by buildings, the average setback of the buildings
determines the dimension of the front yard in the block, but the maximum
front yard need not exceed 40 feet in the “R-A” District; or 15 feet in
the “LB” District.


(8) - Indicates minimum permissible distance of accessory building from
respective front, side, or rear lot line on a normal lot.  Where a reversed
interior lot abuts a corner lot, or on an alley separating the lots, any
accessory building located on the rear lot line of a corner lot shall set
back from the side street as far as the dwelling on the reversed interior
lot; for each foot that the accessory building is placed from the rear line
toward the front line of the corner lot, the accessory building may be set 4
inches closer to the side street line, but in no case closer than 5 feet.




 



(1985 Code, § 8-3-2)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984; Ord. 2002-5, passed 10-22-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX C:  BUILDING HEIGHT, LOT COVERAGE, FLOOR AREA, AND VISION CLEARANCE



Note: Appendix C is available in PDF format for ease of display and printing:
Click HERE



 




Table 3:  Building Height, Lot Coverage, Floor Area, and Vision Clearance




Building Type

 

District

 

Max. Height

 

Min. Height

 

Max. Lot Coverage

 

Min. Ground Floor Area

 

Vision Clearance*




Single-family dwelling

 

“A” or “LB”

 

35 feet or 2–1/2 stories (1)

 

(None specified)

 

40% on corner lot; 35% on interior lot

 

672 square feet

 

8 feet




Two-family dwelling

 

“A” or “LB”

 

35 feet or 2–1/2 stories (1)

 

(None specified)

 

40% on corner lot; 35% on interior lot

 

Double = 900 square feet; Duplex = 672 square feet

 

8 feet




Group house

 

“A” or “LB”

 

35 feet

 

(None specified)

 

50% on corner lot; 40% on interior lot

 

450 square feet per ground floor family

 

8 feet




Apartment house

 

“A” or “LB”

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

60% on corner lot; 50% on interior lot

 

1,200 square feet

 

8 feet




Accessory building

 

“A” or “LB”

 

18 feet or 1–1/2 stories (2)

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified)

 

8 feet




Local business

 

“LB” or “I”

 

45 feet (3)

 

(None specified)

 

90% (4)

 

(None specified)

 

8 feet




Other principal buildings

 

“A”

 

35 feet or 2–1/2 stories

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified) (4)

 

(None specified)

 

8 feet




Other principal buildings

 

“LB”

 

45 feet

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified) (4)

 

(None specified)

 

8 feet




Other principal buildings

 

“I”

 

60 feet

 

(None specified)

 

(None specified) (4)

 

(None specified)

 

8 feet



NOTES TO TABLE:


* - Applies only to corner lots.  Clearance is minimum distance from
building to intersection of property lines at corner.


(1) - Height of principal building may be increased above 35 feet, but not
higher than 45 feet or three stories, if 2 side yards of 15 feet each are
provided.


(2) - The height of accessory buildings may be increased to 25 feet or 2
stories, provided the minimum required 3-foot distance from side and rear lot
lines is increased one foot for each 2 feet above the normal maximum height
permitted.


(3) - Buildings may be erected higher than the normal maximum if they are set
back, from front and rear property lines, one foot for each two feet of
additional height above the normal maximum height in the “LB” or “I”
District, and one foot for each foot of additional height in the “A”
District.  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
penthouses, tanks, water towers, transmission towers, or essential mechanical
appurtenances may be erected to any height not prohibited by other laws or
ordinances.


(4) - Subject to minimum yard requirements where yards are required.




 



(1985 Code, § 8-3-3)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX D:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS



Note: Appendix D is available in PDF format for ease of display and printing:
Click HERE



 




Table 4:  Off-street Parking and Loading Berth Requirements




Use

 

Required Parking Spaces

 

Required Loading/Unloading Berths



Residential:
 

1 per family housed in principal buildings (must be on lot) (1)

 

None




   -Apartment house




   -Group house




   -Single/two-family dwelling



Apartment hotel
 

1 per every 3 sleeping rooms

 

None



Government building, library, or museum
 

1 per 125 square feet ground floor area

 

None



Church/temple
 

1 per every 6 seats in main auditorium (2)

 

None



College/university
 

1 per every 3 students/staff

 

None



Community center
 

1 per 6 seats

 

None



Fraternity/student coop. housing
 

1 per 3 occupants

 

None



Public utility building
 

1 per 3 employees

 

None



Public/parochial school
 

1 per each 3 staff members, plus 1 for each 8 auditorium seats

 

None



Hotel
 

1 per 3 sleeping rooms (4)

 

Gross floor area (square feet)

 

Number berths




100,000 or less

 

1




100,001 - 336,000

 

2




Each 200,000 additional

 

1 additional



Office building
 

1 per 3 employees (4)

 

Same as for hotel above



Theater
 

1 per 6 seats (4)

 

Gross floor area (square feet)

 

Number berths




3,000 - 15,000

 

1




15,001 - 40,000

 

2




Each 200,000 additional

 

1 additional



Wholesale establishment
 

1 per 3 employees (4)

 

Same as for theater above



Other business service:
 

1 per 3 employees  (4)

 

Same as for theater above




   -Bank




   -Postal station




   -Telegraph office



Other commercial recreational:
 

1 per 125 square feet floor area (4)

 

Same as for theater above




   -Billiard room




   -Bowling alley




   -Dance academy




   -Tavern/night club



Other local business (3):
 

1 per 125 square feet floor area (4)

 

Same as for theater above




   -Automobile service




   -Clothing service




   -Equipment service




   -Food service




   -Personal service




   -Private club/lodge




   -Retail service



Other general business (3)
 

1 per 125 square feet floor area (4)

 

Same as for theater above



Light industrial or industrial
 

1 per 3 employees (5)

 

Gross floor area (square feet)

 

Number berths




15,000 or less

 

1




15,001 - 40,000

 

2




40,001 - 100,000

 

3




Each 200,000 additional

 

1 additional



NOTES TO TABLE:


(1) - An additional parking space must be provided for each home occupation
conducted on the premises.


(2) - A church or temple requiring parking area, at times when nearby uses do
not need their parking facilities, may, by agreement approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, utilize those facilities in lieu of providing their own
parking facilities.


(3) - Includes all categories or sub-categories of use as listed in Table 1
(Appendix A) unless the category or sub-category is otherwise specifically
provided for in Table 4 (Appendix D).


(4) - Vehicle parking requirements shall not apply in a block 50% or more of
the area of which was occupied by business or industrial structures as of
3-5-1957.


(5) - Vehicle parking requirements may be waived by the Board of Zoning
Appeals in a block 50% or more of the area of which was occupied by business
or industrial structures as of 3-15-1957.




 



(1985 Code, § 8-3-4)  (Ord. passed 3-25-1957; Ord. 4-1984, passed
2-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 10.99



APPENDIX E:  WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA MAP







 



(Ord. 2003-2, passed 4-9-2003)



CHAPTER 156:  SIGNS



Section



General Provisions



   156.01   Purpose and intent



   156.02   Application of regulations



   156.03   Definitions



Permit Requirements



   156.15   Signs requiring permits



   156.16   Signs not requiring permits



   156.17   Applications



   156.18   Fees



General Regulations



   156.30   Nonconforming signs



   156.31   Abandoned and obsolete signs



   156.32   Moving a sign



   156.33   Use of right-of-way prohibited



   156.34   Offensive signs prohibited



   156.35   Permit/date on sign



   156.36   Illumination



   156.37   Maintenance



   156.38   Appeals



   156.39   Billboards/off-premises signs



   156.40   Prohibited signs



Zoning District Regulations



   156.55   Residential signs



   156.56   Local Business LB-A/Industrial signs



   156.57   Local Business LB-B signs



   156.58   Real estate signs



   156.59   Political signs



Cross-reference:



   Local business and temporary signs, see also § 155.126



   Zoning, see Ch. 155




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 156.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This chapter is established for all signs located on any premises as a
reasonable and impartial means to permit adequate communication; to control
confusing sign display which presents a hazard to pedestrians and motorists
along street and at intersections; to ensure light, air, and open space; to
protect the natural beauty and environment of the city; to safeguard and
enhance property values; to protect public and private investment in
buildings and open spaces; and to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)



§ 156.02  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   No sign shall be erected or altered except as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AWNING.  A temporary or permanent shelter or decorative feature
supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building and composed of rigid
or flexible materials.



   AWNING SIGN.  Any sign that is affixed, painted, or imprinted upon the
vertical face of an awning.



   BANNER.  Any sign made of fabric or other flexible material and
without a frame.



   BILLBOARD.  Any sign which advertises goods, products, services,
facilities, businesses, entertainment, or attractions which are not available
on the premises where the sign is located.



   CENTER OF THE STREET.  The elevation of the public street from which
you enter a property.



   CORNER LOT.  Any parcel of land adjacent to two intersecting public
streets.



   DIRECTIONAL OR INFORMATIONAL SIGN.  Any sign which provides special
information, such as tourist information, entrance/exit, parking, public
restrooms and telephones, or the like, and does not include any business,
product, or service information.



   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD.  Any computer-controlled sign comprised of
multiple individual light sources, liquid crystal display, a monitor, or
other light emitting device that is capable of displaying multiple
intermittent messages.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  Any sign that is supported or held by any sign
structure in or upon the ground.



   GASOLINE PUMP SIGN.  Any sign no larger than either one square foot if
placed atop a gasoline pump or the pump itself if affixed to the pump and
limited to the identification of the brand name, logo, or type of fuel
dispensed from the gasoline pump.



   IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  Any sign identifying the name or address of a
building, institution, or person, or the activity or occupation being
identified.



   ILLEGAL SIGN.  Any sign which does not comply with the provisions of
this chapter and which has not received legal nonconforming status.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign with an artificial light source.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN.  Any sign that provides only incidental information,
such as credit card information, hours of operation, open/closed, no
soliciting, no smoking, full-service, self-service, and the like.



   MAINTENANCE.  The cleaning or repainting of cracked or faded finishes
or replacement of parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the copy,
design, or structure of the sign.



   MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENT SIGNS.  Any sign which identifies only the
name of a multi-family development.



   MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY BUILDING SIGN.  Any sign which identifies only the
building name, project name, property name, and/or address of a multiple
occupancy building.



   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  Any sign which was erected legally but which does
not comply with this chapter or any subsequent sign regulations.



   OCCUPANT SIGN.  Any sign which identifies only the name and address of
the occupant of a residential structure.



   PERMANENT BUSINESS SIGN.  Any sign that identifies only a business or
office.



   PERMANENT SUBDIVISION SIGN.  Any sign which identifies only a
subdivision.



   POLITICAL SIGN.  Any sign which announces the candidacy of a person or
slate of persons running for elective offices, or a political party or issue.



   PORTABLE MARQUEE SIGNS.  Any temporary sign, with or without wheels,
illumination, or a large arrow as part of the sign structure, the purpose of
which is to announce or advertise on a temporary basis.



   PROJECT DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  Any sign which identifies a building under
construction, offers the building or any part thereof for lease, and
identifies a contact by name, address, and telephone number.



   PROJECT FINANCING SIGN.  Any sign which identifies the source of
financing for a building under construction, including a telephone number.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign which is suspended from, attached to, or
supported by a building or structure and extending away from the building or
structure.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN.  Any sign which advertises or announces the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.



   SALE SIGN.  Any sign which advertises a garage sale, yard sale, moving
sale, or the like.



   SIGN.



      (1)   Any writing, pictorial representation, emblem flag, or
any other figure of similar character which is a structure or part thereof or
is attached or in any manner represented on a building or structure, and is
used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise and is visible from
outside a building.



      (2)   The word SIGN includes the word BILLBOARD, but does not
include flag, pennant, or insignia, of any nation, state, city, or other
political unit, or any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic,
civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement, or event.



      (3)   Further, this definition shall not be held to include
any board, sign, or surface used to display any official notices issued by
any court or public office or posted by a public officer in the performance
of a public duty.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  Any structure which supports, holds, has supported,
or is capable of supporting a sign.



   TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGN.  Any sign that advertises a sale, service,
occurrence, or event that is limited in duration.



   WINDOW SIGN.



      (1)   Any lettering affixed to, displayed from, or installed
upon a window for purposes of viewing from outside the premises.



      (2)   This does not include merchandise and other displays
located in a window.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)




PERMIT REQUIREMENTS




§ 156.15  SIGNS REQUIRING PERMITS.



   Except as authorized by § 156.16, no person shall erect or alter
(except for maintenance) any sign or sign structure without first obtaining a
sign permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.16  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS.



   The following types of signs shall be permitted in any zoning district
and shall not require a permit:



   (A)   Real estate signs;



   (B)   Directional or informational signs;



   (C)   Identification signs;



   (D)   Incidental signs;



   (E)   Garage and yard sale signs;



   (F)   Gasoline pump signs;



   (G)   Political signs; and



   (H)   Valid nonconforming signs.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)



§ 156.17  APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a sign permit shall be made to the Code Enforcement
Officer upon a form prescribed by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall
contain all information necessary to enable the Code Enforcement Officer to
determine whether the sign conforms with this chapter, including the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner and/or lessee of the sign and of
the land upon which the sign and sign structure is to be located, and a site
plan which shall contain the following:



   (A)   Scale and north arrow;



   (B)   Address of site;



   (C)   All relevant property lines;



   (D)   Proposed ingress and egress to the site showing traffic flow;



   (E)   Location of all buildings and other structures on the site;



   (F)   Location and height of the sign;



   (G)   Dimensions of the sign;



   (H)   A drawing of the sign; and



   (I)   Any other information that the Code Enforcement Officer may
reasonably require.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)



§ 156.18  FEES.



   A fee of $25 per sign shall be paid at the time of application.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 156.30  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   It is the intent of this section to permit the continuation of
those nonconforming signs that may exist at the time of adoption of or
amendment to this chapter until they are removed but not to encourage their
survival.



   (B)   Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, structurally altered, redesigned, or modified unless the
activity brings the sign into conformity with this chapter and the activity
is pursuant to the issuance of any required permits.  If any nonconforming
sign is discontinued for six months or more, any future use must be of a
conforming nature as set out in this chapter.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.31  ABANDONED AND OBSOLETE SIGNS.



   Signs and sign structures shall be removed when:  the sign no longer
identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner,
product, or activity; no legal owner can be found; the sign has a message or
display that is unreadable, obsolete, or is no longer functional as
advertising or identification; and/or the sign structure is no longer used to
support or hold a sign.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)



§ 156.32  MOVING A SIGN.



   Any sign that is moved to another location either on the same premises
or on different premises shall be considered a new sign and a permit shall be
secured for any work performed in connection therewith.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.33  USE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.



   No sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way, except publicly
owned signs, such as welcome signs, traffic-control signs, and directional
signs.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.34  OFFENSIVE SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   Sign content shall not contain language or symbols that are offensive
to the morals of the general community.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.35  PERMIT/DATE ON SIGN.



   All signs that require a permit shall bear the permit number and the
date the sign was installed on the lower right-hand corner of the sign in
print capable of being read from the ground adjacent to the sign.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.36  ILLUMINATION.



   (A)   Only permanent subdivision signs, multi-family development
signs, permanent business signs, and multiple occupancy building signs may be
illuminated.  Permanent subdivision signs and multi-family development signs
may only be illuminated externally.  All illumination must be with a light
of constant color and intensity.  No sign shall be illuminated by or contain
flashing, intermittent, rotating, or moving light.



   (B)   No illuminated sign or lighting device shall be placed or
directed so as to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed
or beamed upon a public thoroughfare, highway, sidewalk, or adjacent premises
so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.37  MAINTENANCE.



   All signs must be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all
hazards, such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose fastenings, and
must be maintained at all times in the safe condition so as not to be
detrimental to the public health or safety.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.38  APPEALS.



   (A)   (1)   Any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person claiming to be
adversely affected by the decision.



      (2)   Any appeal must be made within 30 days of the adverse
decision.



   (B)   A decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to
review by certiorari.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)



§ 156.39  BILLBOARDS/OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.



   Billboards and off-premises signs are prohibited.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.40  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   All signs not herein expressly authorized are prohibited.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99




ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS




§ 156.55  RESIDENTIAL SIGNS.



   (A)   Generally.  Within the Residential R-A and the Residential
R-B Zoning Districts, the following regulations shall apply.



   (B)   Occupant signs.  One occupant sign is permitted for each
residence but must be no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches.  Occupant signs
may not advertise or identify a home occupation.



   (C)   Sale signs.  One sale sign is permitted but must be no larger
than six square feet in total area and located on the premises of the sale. 
Sale signs may be erected for no more than two days and no more than two
times per year.



   (D)   Permanent subdivision signs.  Permanent subdivision signs are
permitted, but only in conformity with the following:



      (1)   Each subdivision shall have no more than one sign per
entrance which must be located at the entrance(s) to the subdivision;



      (2)   The signs shall identify only the name of the
subdivision;



      (3)   The signs shall be freestanding and part of a decorative
sign structure made of wood, brick, stone, or masonry with an overall design
compatible with the character of the neighborhood;



      (4)   The signs may be illuminated only externally from below
and in a manner so that the light, reflection, or glare does not travel onto
adjoining premises or streets;



      (5)   The signs shall be limited to a height of no greater
than six feet, including the decorative sign structure, and a width of no
greater than eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is
no greater than 32 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way; and



      (6)   Provisions shall be made in the subdivision covenants
for permanent maintenance of the sign and of the surrounding area, even if
the area has been dedicated to public use.  If not properly maintained, the
city may remove the sign at the expense of those bound by the covenants to
maintain the sign and surrounding area, and its relocation made only with the
approval of the Plan Commission.



   (E)   Multi-family development signs.  Multi- family development
signs are permitted, but only in conformity with the following:



      (1)   Each development shall have no more than one sign per
entrance which must be located at the entrance(s) to the development;



      (2)   The signs shall be freestanding and part of a decorative
sign structure made of wood, brick, stone, or masonry with an overall design
compatible with the colors and materials used in the residential buildings;



      (3)   The signs may be illuminated only externally from below
and in a manner so that the light, reflection, or glare does not travel onto
adjoining premises or streets; and



      (4)   The signs shall be limited to a height of no greater
than six feet, including the decorative sign structure, and a width of no
greater than eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is
no greater than 32 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.56  LOCAL BUSINESS LB-A/ INDUSTRIAL SIGNS.



   Within the Local Business LB-A and Industrial Zoning Districts, the
following regulations apply.



   (A)   Single-occupancy buildings.  Where a single business or
office is the sole occupant of a building, the business or office may be
permitted the following permanent business signs:



      (1)   One freestanding sign limited to a height of no greater
than eight feet, including the sign structure, and a width of no greater than
eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is no greater
than 48 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer than ten
feet to any street right-of-way.  There shall be only one freestanding sign
per parcel of land.  A single-occupancy building freestanding permanent
business sign may include an electronic message board.  However, an
electronic message board may not be permitted where an electronic message
board already exists within a 2,640-foot radius of the proposed electronic
message board of where a permit has already been issued for an electronic
message board within a 2,640-foot radius of the proposed electronic message
board; and



      (2)   (a)   In addition to one freestanding sign, one of
the following signs affixed to the side of the building:



            1.   A wall-mounted sign limited to a height not
above 12 feet per each story of the building with as many square feet as the
ground floor of the building and the product of the height and width of which
is no greater than the lesser of:



               a.   Ten percent of the surface area of the
wall of building to which the sign is affixed; or



               b.   One hundred and fifty square feet.



            2.   A projecting sign, not exceeding 24 square
feet, projecting no more than four feet from the building wall, and no less
than eight feet above a sidewalk;



            3.   An awning sign not exceeding 20 square feet
and only on the vertical face of the awning; or



            4.   A window sign not exceeding the lesser of:



               a.   Forty-five percent of the window glass
area; or



               b.   Twenty square feet.



         (b)   Unless, however, the business or office is located
on a corner lot in which case the business or office may be permitted a
second wall-mounted sign, projecting sign, awning sign, or window sign which
may not be displayed from the same side of the building as the first sign.



   (B)   Multiple-occupancy buildings.  Multiple- occupancy buildings
may be permitted:



      (1)   One freestanding sign consisting of a multiple occupancy
building sign and a permanent business sign for each business located within
the multiple-occupancy building.  This freestanding sign shall be limited to
a height of no greater than eight feet from the center of the street,
including the sign structure, and a width of no greater than eight feet and
the product of the height and width of which is no greater than 64 square
feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer than ten feet to any
street right-of-way.  All permanent business signs affixed to this
freestanding sign shall be of equal dimensions and shall conform to one color
and font standard.  There shall be only one freestanding sign per parcel of
land or project (regardless of the number of buildings situated upon the
parcel or in the project);



      (2)   (a)   In addition to a freestanding sign, first-floor
tenants of a multiple-occupancy building having their own exterior entrance
shall be allowed one of the following permanent business signs:



            1.   One wall-mounted sign limited to a height not
above 12 feet per each story of the building with as many square feet as the
ground floor of the building and the product of the height and width of which
is no greater than the lesser of:



               a.   Ten percent of the surface area of the
wall of the unit of the building to which the sign is affixed; or



               b.   Thirty-two square feet.



            2.   One projecting sign, not exceeding 24 square
feet, projecting no more than four feet from the building wall, and no less
than eight feet above a sidewalk;



            3.   One awning sign, not exceeding 20 square
feet, and only on the vertical face of the awning; or



            4.   One window sign not exceeding the lesser of:



               a.   Forty-five percent of the window glass
area; or



               b.   Twenty square feet.



         (b)   Where more than one wall-mounted, projecting, or
awning sign is displayed upon the same side of a building, the total group is
to be related in an orderly and integrated manner in a single horizontal row
with a common centerline.



      (3)   First-floor tenants of a multiple- occupancy building
without their own exterior entrance and upper level tenants shall be
permitted one identifying plaque not exceeding three square feet.  All
plaques shall be placed immediately adjacent to the building entrance. 
Where more than one plaque is placed at an entrance, the total group is to be
related in an orderly and integrated manner in one or more vertical columns
with common vertical centerlines.  The horizontal centerline of each group
must be five feet above the entrance threshold.



   (C)   Temporary business signs (not including portable marquee
signs).



      (1)   Temporary business signs may be permitted in the
following instances, and shall not exceed 30 days per any consecutive 365-day
period:



         (a)   Sale;



         (b)   Announcing the opening of a new business; and



         (c)   Business promotion.



      (2)   Temporary signs may be attached to a building or window
or be a portable sandwich sign.  If attached to a building or window, the
sign shall be no larger than 30 square feet or 10% of the window glass
area.  If a portable sandwich sign, the sign shall be located immediately in
front of a store, provided it is no higher than four feet and no wider than
three feet and does not impede pedestrian movement.



   (D)   Fuel-price signs.  A gasoline station is permitted one
2-sided fuel price sign, the total area of which shall not exceed an
aggregate of 12 square feet.



   (E)   Portable marquee signs.  Portable marquee signs are
prohibited.



   (F)   Incidental signs.  Incidental signs are permitted but shall
not exceed three square feet.  The signs may not be illuminated.



   (G)   Community events.  Temporary signs, banners, portable signs,
and portable marquee signs announcing or promoting community events and
programs, sponsored by nonprofit, public, educational, religious, and
charitable organizations can be displayed by businesses in addition to
temporary business signs.  Other signs or banners must be approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer relative to placement within or over public
rights-of-way.  The signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 21
days per any consecutive 365-day period.



   (H)   Proposed development signs.  Proposed development signs shall
be limited to a height of no greater than six feet, and a width of no greater
than eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is no
greater than 32 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way.  The signs may be displayed from
the date of the issuance of a building permit to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy but not for more than nine months.



   (I)   Project financing signs.  Project financing signs shall be
limited to a height of no greater than six feet, and a width of no greater
than six feet and the product of the height and width of which is no greater
than 16 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer than ten
feet to any street right-of-way.  The signs may be displayed for a period
not to exceed three months.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.57  LOCAL BUSINESS LB-B SIGNS.



   Within the Local Business LB-B Zoning District, the following
regulations apply.



   (A)   Single-occupancy buildings.  Where a single business or
office is the sole occupant of a building, the business or office may be
permitted one freestanding permanent business sign limited to a height of no
greater than six feet, including the sign structure, and a width of no
greater than eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is
no greater than 32 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way.  This freestanding permanent
business signs may be illuminated externally, from below, in the same manner
as provided for permanent subdivision signs and multi-family development
signs in §§ 156.36 and 156.55(E)(3).  There shall be only one freestanding
sign per parcel of land.



   (B)   Multiple-occupancy buildings.  Multiple- occupancy buildings
may be permitted:



      (1)   One freestanding sign consisting of a multiple-occupancy
building sign and a permanent business sign for each businesses located
within the multiple-occupancy building.  This freestanding sign shall be
limited to a height of no greater than six feet, including the sign
structure, and a width of no greater than eight feet and a height and width
of which the product is no greater than 32 square feet per side, limited to
two sides, and no closer than ten feet to any street right-of-way.  All
permanent business sign affixed to this freestanding sign shall be of equal
dimensions and shall conform to one color and font standard.  This
freestanding sign may be illuminated externally, from below, in the same
manner as provided for permanent subdivision signs and multi-family
development signs in §§ 156.36 and 156.55(E)(3).  There shall be only one
freestanding sign per parcel of land or project (regardless of the number of
buildings situated upon the parcel or in the project);



      (2)   (a)   In addition to a freestanding sign, first-floor
tenants of a multiple-occupancy building having their own exterior entrance
shall be allowed one of the following permanent business signs:



            1.   One wall-mounted sign limited to the height
of the unit of the building to which the sign is affixed and the product of
the height and width of which is no greater than 24 square feet;



            2.   One projecting sign, not exceeding 24 square
feet, projecting no more than four feet from the building wall, and no less
than eight feet above a sidewalk;



            3.   One awning sign, not exceeding 20 square feet
and only on the vertical face of the awning; or



            4.   One window sign not exceeding the lesser of:



               a.   Forty-five percent of the window glass
area; or



               b.   Twenty square feet.



         (b)   Where more than one wall-mounted sign, projecting
sign, or awning sign is displayed upon the same side of a building, the total
group is to be related in an orderly and integrated manner in a single
horizontal row with a common centerline.



      (3)   First-floor tenants of a multiple- occupancy building
without their own exterior entrance and upper level tenants shall be
permitted one identifying plaque not exceeding three square feet.  All
plaques shall be placed immediately adjacent to the building entrance. 
Where more than one plaque is placed at an entrance, the total group is to be
related in an orderly and integrated manner in one or more vertical columns
with common vertical centerlines.  The horizontal centerline of each group
must be five feet above the entrance threshold.



   (C)   Temporary business signs (not including portable marquee
signs).



      (1)   Temporary business signs may be permitted in the
following instances, and shall not exceed 30 days per any consecutive 365-day
period:



         (a)   Sale;



         (b)   Announcing the opening of a new business; and



         (c)   Business promotion.



      (2)   Temporary signs may be attached to a building or window
or be a portable sandwich sign.  If attached to a building or window, the
sign shall be no larger than 30 square feet or 10% of the window glass
area.  If a portable sandwich sign, the sign shall be located immediately in
front of a store, provided it is no higher than four feet and no wider than
three feet and does not impede pedestrian movement.



   (D)   Fuel-price signs.  A gasoline station is permitted one
2-sided fuel price sign, the total area of which shall not exceed an
aggregate of 12 square feet.



   (E)   Portable marquee signs.  Portable marquee signs are
prohibited.



   (F)   Incidental signs.  Incidental signs are permitted but shall
not exceed three square feet.  The signs may not be illuminated.



   (G)   Community events.  Temporary signs, banners, portable signs,
and portable marquee signs announcing or promoting community events and
programs, sponsored by nonprofit, public, educational, religious, and
charitable organizations can be displayed by businesses in addition to
temporary business signs.  Other signs or banners must be approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer relative to placement within or over public
rights-of-way.  The signs shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 21
days per any consecutive 365-day period.



   (H)   Proposed development signs.  Proposed development signs shall
be limited to a height of no greater than six feet, and a width of no greater
than eight feet and the product of the height and width of which is no
greater than 16 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer
than ten feet to any street right-of-way.  The signs may be displayed from
the date of the issuance of a building permit to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy but not for more than nine months.



   (I)   Project financing signs.  Project financing signs shall be
limited to a height of no greater than six feet, and a width of no greater
than six feet and the product of the height and width of which is no greater
than 12 square feet per side, limited to two sides, and no closer than ten
feet to any street right-of-way.  The signs may be displayed for a period
not to exceed three months.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.58  REAL ESTATE SIGNS.



   Real estate signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts as follows:



   (A)   For sale/for rent/for lease signs.  For sale/for rent/for
lease signs shall be permitted on any property provided that they not exceed
six square feet in area, and they advertise a sale, rental, or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located.  The signs shall not be located
within any street right-of-way and shall be located only on the property for
sale, rent, or lease.



   (B)   Open house signs.  Open house signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area and may be used for directions to the open house event
only.  An open house sign shall be erected no more than 48 hours prior to
the scheduled event and shall be removed within one hour of the end of the
event.  Signs shall be erected only on private property and only with the
consent of the owner.



   (C)   Directional signs.  Directional signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area and may be used for directions to a property for sale
only.  Directional signs shall be erected no more than 48 hours prior to the
scheduled event and shall be removed within one hour of the end of the
event.  Signs shall be erected only on private property and only with the
consent of the owner.



   (D)   Sold signs.  Sold signs may be erected in place of the for
sale signs as permitted herein.  The sold sign shall be removed by the
listing realtor within ten days after the date of closing.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.59  POLITICAL SIGNS.



   Political signs, not to exceed six square feet in area, shall be
permitted in all zoning districts as follows:



   (A)   Political signs pertaining to the election of one or more
persons to public office or to one or more public issues, shall be erected
not sooner than 30 days prior to the election and shall be removed within
five days following the election.



   (B)   Political signs pertaining to an issue shall be displayed for
no more than 30 days in any consecutive 365-day period.



   (C)   Signs shall be placed only on private property and only with
the permission of the property owner.



   (D)   Only one political sign per public office and only one
political sign per issue shall be allowed per parcel of real estate.



(Ord. 2004-10, passed 11-10-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   BONDS



      III.   FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



      IV.   VACATIONS



      V.   ZONING AMENDMENTS



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1-1963
 
2-12-1963
 
Annexing certain described territory, being about 2.519 acres


15-1978
 
11-14-1978
 
Annexing certain territory in Lawrenceburg Township, being property is
located in part of Section 2 and 3, Township 5 North, Range 1 West, in
Lawrenceburg Township, Dearborn County


4-1990
 
6-12-1990
 
Annexing a part of the northeast quarter of Section 2, Township 5 North,
Range 1 West of the first principal meridian located in Lawrenceburg Township
of Dearborn County, commencing at the northeast corner of Section 2, Township
5 North, Range 1 West, the tract containing 50.016 acres


1-1994
 
1-9-1994
 
Annexing territory beginning at a point where the south line of the property
owned by the city, located in Section 10, Lawrenceburg Township, intersects
the centerline of Tanners Creek


2-1994
 
1-10-1994
 
Annexing territory beginning at the point of intersection of the northern
corporate boundary with the westerly right-of-way line of State Route 1


3-1994
 
12-29-1993
 
Annexing territory beginning at the point of intersection of the existing
northern corporate boundary with the westerly right-of-way line of U.S. Route
50 in Section 2 of Lawrenceburg Township


5-1997
 
8-4-1997
 
Revising annexed territory upon suit and consent by Lawrenceburg, being parts
of Sections 1, 2, and 3, Township 5 North, Range 1 West; and parts of
Sections 25, 34, 35, and 36, Township 6 North, Range 1 West of the first
principal meridian located in Lawrenceburg Township, Dearborn County


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1997-2
 
3-12-1997
 
Revising certain terms regarding the 1997 bonds for the city’s waterworks
improvements and extensions


2006-10
 
11-28-2006
 
Authorizing issuance of waterworks refunding revenue bonds of 2006, amending
Ord. 12-1996


2011-2
 
4-18-2011
 
Authorizing the issuance of taxable economic development revenue bonds and
lending the proceeds to Fortis Security Products, Inc.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III:  FRANCHISES, CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1996-4
 
3-5-1996
 
Granting a cable television franchise to Fairbanks Communications, Inc.


- -
 
9-10-2008
 
Agreement between District Lodge No. 34/Local Lodge NO. 1391 of the
International Association of Machinist’s Union and the city.


2009-14
 
12-9-2009
 
Authorizing city to participate in retrofit program, approve funds for grant
project and enter into contract with Indiana Municipal Power Agency.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE IV:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


10-1995
 
12-12-1995
 
Vacating a portion of Glenn Drive


1997-3
 
5-14-1997
 
Vacating unimproved and abandoned portions of a street and alley within lots
owned by Theodore G. Von Holle and S & B Miller, L.L.C., as shown on the plat
of Findley’s Addition to the Town of Hardinsburg, and the plat of
Hardinsburg


2004-7
 
7-14-2004
 
Vacating 0.2096 acres of North Street between Craig Avenue and U.S. Highway 50


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE V:  ZONING AMENDMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


2002-6
 
10-22-2002
 
Changing certain real property being part of the land of Marie J. Guard from
residential to local business.


2003-5
 
8-13-2003
 
Changing part of the southwest corner of Section 36, Township 6 North, Range
1 West from residential to local business.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Indiana Code





References to 1985 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

I.C. Section
 
Code Section




1-1-1-5
 
10.04


1-1-1-7
 
10.12


1-1-1-8
 
10.06


1-1-4-5
 
10.05


1-1-5-1
 
10.11


1-1-6-1
 
10.08


5-10.3-1-1 et seq.
 
31.03


5-13-9-1
 
32.19


5-14-1.5-5
 
30.35


5-14-3
 
30.65


8-1-2.2 et seq.
 
51.26


8-1.5-3
 
30.03


8-1.5-3-3(a)(2)
 
50.01


8-1.5-3-4 et seq.
 
30.03


8-1.5-3-5
 
30.03


8-1.5-3-8
 
54.20


8-1.5-3-8(e)
 
54.21


8-1.5-3-11(b)
 
34.24, 50.03


8-1.5-3-11(c)
 
34.24, 50.03


8-1.5-3-13
 
50.02


Title 9
 
75.05


9-13-2 et seq.
 
72.20


9-13-2-1
 
90.01, 90.06


9-13-2-14
 
72.20


9-13-2-31
 
70.01, 71.03


9-13-2-73
 
75.02


9-13-2-109
 
72.15, 72.20


9-13-2-137
 
75.02


9-21-5-2
 
70.04


9-21-5-6
 
70.04


9-21-5-13
 
70.04


9-21-18
 
70.04


9-22-1-11
 
90.03


9-22-1-13
 
90.03


9-22-1-14
 
90.03


9-22-1-16
 
90.01, 90.03


9-22-1-19
 
90.03


9-22-1-30(1)
 
90.04


9-25-4
 
75.05


9-30-4-6
 
32.06


9-30-4-9
 
32.06


10-17-5-1
 
112.17


10-17-5-2
 
112.17


16-41-27 et seq.
 
152.02, 152.03


22-1-1-10(c)
 
152.03


22-13-2-7
 
150.17


22-13-2-7(b)
 
150.02


22-15-3-1
 
150.05


22-15-4 et seq.
 
150.03


31-37-3-2(b)
 
130.02


31-37-3-3(b)
 
130.02


33-37-7-8
 
32.19


35-33-1-4
 
33.40


35-33-3-1
 
33.40


35-33-10-3
 
33.40


35-46-3-1
 
91.01


36-1-3 et seq.
 
30.03, 33.40


36-1-3-8(a)(10)
 
10.99


36-1-4-16
 
50.01


36-1-6-2
 
32.18, 90.06, 94.17


36-1-6-4
 
32.18, 90.06, 94.17


36-1-7 et seq.
 
33.40


36-1-11 et seq.
 
32.19


36-1-11-9
 
34.27


36-4-5 et seq.
 
30.02


36-4-6 et seq.
 
30.03


36-4-6-9
 
30.03


36-4-6-24
 
30.02


36-4-7 et seq.
 
30.03


36-4-9-7
 
30.02


36-4-9-8
 
30.02


36-4-9-12
 
30.02


36-4-10 et seq.
 
30.04


36-4-11 et seq.
 
30.02


36-5-2-2
 
10.15


36-7-4 et seq.
 
30.04, 151.01


36-7-4-200
 
153.01


36-7-4-205(f)
 
153.02


36-7-4-215
 
153.02


36-7-4-405(b)
 
153.25


36-7-4-607 - 36-7-4-609
 
155.112


36-7-4-901(a)
 
155.111


36-7-4-1106(1)
 
152.03, 152.06


36-7-9-1 et seq.
 
150.32


36-7-10.1-4
 
94.17


36-7-12 et seq.
 
30.04, 30.50, 50.05


36-7-14 et seq.
 
30.04


36-7-14-12.2
 
30.51


36-7-18 et seq.
 
30.04, 92.01


36-7-18-7
 
92.01


36-7-18-8
 
92.01


36-7-19-3
 
92.01


36-8-3 et seq.
 
30.02


36-8-4-6 et seq.
 
30.02


36-8-4-6.5
 
30.02


36-8-6 et seq.
 
30.04, 31.06


36-8-6-1
 
31.06


36-8-6-2(c)
 
31.06


36-8-6-15
 
31.06


36-8-6-16
 
31.06


36-8-7 et seq.
 
30.04


36-8-8 et seq.
 
30.04, 31.06


36-8-12
 
33.09


36-8-13-3(a)(2)
 
33.29


36-9-1-8
 
53.22


36-9-15.5
 
34.17


36-9-15.5 et seq.
 
34.17


36-9-16 et seq.
 
34.16


36-10-3 et seq.
 
93.01


36-10-3-4
 
30.02


36-10-3-13
 
30.02


36-10-3-14
 
30.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1985 CODE



 

1985 Code Section
 
2009 Code Section




1-2-3
 
10.05


1-2-6
 
10.17


1-2-8
 
10.18


1-3-1
 
32.01


1-3-2
 
32.02


1-3-3
 
32.03


1-3-4
 
32.04


1-3-5
 
32.05


1-3-6
 
32.06


1-3-7
 
32.07


1-3-8
 
32.08


1-3-9
 
32.09


1-3-10
 
32.10


1-3-11
 
32.11


1-3-12
 
32.12


1-3-13
 
32.13


1-3-14
 
32.14


1-3-15
 
32.15


1-3-16
 
32.16


1-3-17
 
32.17


1-3-18
 
32.18


1-3-19
 
32.19


1-3-20
 
32.20


1-4-1
 
30.05


1-4-2
 
30.06


2-1-1
 
11.01


3-1-1
 
30.50


3-1-2
 
30.50


3-1-3
 
30.50


3-1-4
 
30.50


3-1-5
 
30.50


3-1.1-1
 
30.51


3-1.1-2
 
30.51


3-1.1-4
 
30.51


3-1.1-5
 
30.51


3-1.1-6
 
30.51


3-2-1
 
111.07


3-3-1
 
112.15


3-3-2
 
112.16


3-3-3
 
112.17


3-3-4
 
112.18


3-3-5
 
112.19


3-3-6
 
112.16


3-3-7
 
112.20


3-3-8
 
112.21


3-4-1
 
111.01


3-4-2
 
111.02


3-4-3
 
111.03


3-4-4
 
111.04


3-4-5
 
111.05


3-4-6
 
111.06


4-1-1
 
53.03


4-1-2
 
53.03


4-1-3
 
53.03


4-1-4
 
53.03


4-1-5
 
53.03


4-1-6
 
53.03


4-1-7
 
53.03


4-1-8
 
53.03


4-1-9
 
53.03


4-2-1
 
130.01


4-3-1
 
130.02


4-3-2
 
130.03


4-4-1
 
91.01


4-4.5-1
 
91.15


4-4.5-2
 
91.16


4-4.5-3
 
91.17


4-4.5-4
 
91.18


4-4.5-5
 
91.19


4-4.5-6
 
91.20


4-5-1
 
94.15


4-5-2
 
94.16


4-5-3
 
94.17


4-6-1
 
112.01


5-1-1
 
94.01


5-1-2
 
94.02


5-1-3
 
94.03


5-1-4
 
94.04


5-2-1
 
93.02


5-2-2
 
93.03


5-2-3
 
93.04


5-2-4
 
93.05


5-3-1
 
130.04


5-3-2
 
130.05


5-4-1
 
92.01


5-4-2
 
92.02


6-2-1
 
52.01


6-2-2
 
52.02


6-2-3
 
52.03


6-2-7
 
52.05


6-2-8
 
52.06


6-2-9
 
52.07


6-3-1
 
50.01


6-3-2
 
50.02


6-3-3
 
50.03


6-3-4
 
50.04


6-3-11
 
50.05


6-3-12
 
50.05


6-4-1
 
54.01


6-4-2
 
54.02


6-4-3
 
54.03


6-4-4
 
54.04


6-4-5
 
54.05


6-4-6
 
54.05


6-4-7
 
54.06


6-4-8
 
54.07


6-4-9
 
54.08


6-4-10
 
54.08


6-4-11
 
54.09


6-5-1
 
54.20


6-6-2
 
53.58


6-6-3
 
53.59


6-7-1
 
53.01


6-7-2
 
53.02


6-7-3
 
53.15


6-7-4
 
53.15


6-7-5
 
53.16


6-7-6
 
53.17


6-7-7
 
53.18


6-7-8
 
53.19


6-7-9
 
53.20


6-7-10
 
53.20


6-7-11
 
53.21


6-7-12
 
53.55


6-7-13
 
53.55


6-7-14
 
53.56


6-7-15
 
53.57


6-8-1
 
53.35


6-8-2
 
53.36


6-8-3
 
53.37


6-8-4
 
53.38


6-8-5
 
53.39


6-8-6
 
53.40


6-8-7
 
53.41


6-8-8
 
53.42


6-9-1
 
51.25


6-9-2
 
51.26


6-9-3
 
51.27


6-9-4
 
51.28


6-9-5
 
51.29


6-9-6
 
51.30


6-9-7
 
51.31


6-10-1
 
51.45


6-10-2
 
51.46


6-10-3
 
51.47


6-10-4
 
51.48


6-10-5
 
51.49


6-10-6
 
51.49


6-10-7
 
51.50


6-10-8
 
51.51


6-10-9
 
51.52


6-11-1
 
51.01


6-11-2
 
51.02


6-11-3
 
51.03


6-11-4
 
51.04


7-1-1
 
72.01


7-1-2
 
72.02


7-1-3
 
72.03


7-1-4
 
72.04


7-2-1
 
72.15


7-2-2
 
72.16


7-2-3
 
72.17


7-2-4
 
72.18


7-2-5
 
72.19


7-2-6
 
72.20


7-3-1
 
71.01


7-3-2
 
Ch. 74 Sch. I


7-3-3
 
Ch. 74 Sch. II


7-3-4
 
71.02


7-3-4.5
 
71.03


7-3-5
 
71.04


7-3-6
 
71.05


7-3-7
 
71.08


7-3-9
 
71.07


7-4-1
 
Ch. 73 Sch. IV


7-5-1
 
Ch. 73 Sch. I


7-5-2
 
Ch. 73 Sch. II


7-5-3
 
70.03


7-5-4
 
70.02


7-6-1
 
70.01


7-6-2
 
70.01


7-6-3
 
70.01


7-7-1
 
90.01


7-7-2
 
90.02


7-7-3
 
90.03


7-7-4
 
90.04


7-7-5
 
90.05


7-7-6
 
90.06


7-8-1
 
71.06


7-9-1
 
70.04


7-9-2
 
70.04


7-9-3
 
Ch. 73 Sch. III


7-9-4
 
70.05


7-9-5
 
70.06


7-10-1
 
110.01


7-10-2
 
110.02


7-10-3
 
110.03


7-10-4
 
110.04


7-10-5
 
110.05


7-10-6
 
110.06


7-10-7
 
110.07


7-10-8
 
110.08


7-10-9
 
110.09


7-10-10
 
110.10


7-10-11
 
110.11


7-10-12
 
110.12


7-10-13
 
110.13


7-10-14
 
110.14


8-1-1
 
155.001


8-1-2
 
155.002


8-1-3
 
155.003


8-1-4
 
155.110


8-1-5
 
155.113


8-1-6
 
155.112


8-1-7
 
155.004


8-2-3
 
155.022


8-2-5
 
155.024


8-3-1
 
155.035, Ch. 155 Appx A


8-3-2
 
155.036, Ch. 155 Appx B


8-3-3
 
155.037, Ch. 155 Appx C


8-3-4
 
155.038, Ch. 155 Appx D


8-3-5
 
155.039


8-3-6
 
155.054


8-3-6A.
 
155.050


8-3-6B.
 
155.050


8-3-6C.
 
155.052


8-3-6D.
 
155.053


8-3-6F.
 
155.051


8-3-6G.
 
155.055


8-3-6H.
 
155.056


8-3-6I.
 
155.057


8-3-6J.
 
155.058


8-3-6K.
 
155.059


8-3-6L.
 
155.060


8-4-1
 
155.075


8-4-2
 
155.076


8-4-3
 
155.077


8-4-4
 
155.078


8-4-5
 
155.079


8-5-1
 
155.095


8-5-2
 
155.096


8-5-3
 
155.098


8-5-4
 
155.097


8-5-5
 
155.097


8-5-6
 
155.098


8-5-7
 
155.098


8-6-1
 
155.111


8-6-2
 
155.111


8-6-3
 
155.111


8-7-1
 
154.01


8-7-2
 
154.02


8-7-3
 
154.03


8-7-4
 
154.04


8-7-5
 
154.05


8-7-6
 
154.06


8-7-7
 
154.07


8-8-1
 
152.01


8-8-2
 
152.02


8-8-3
 
152.03


8-8-4
 
152.04


8-8-5
 
152.05


8-8-6
 
152.05


8-8-7
 
152.06


8-8-8
 
152.07


8-8-9
 
152.08


8-11-1
 
153.01


8-11-2
 
153.02


8-12-1
 
153.25


8-12-2
 
153.15


9-1-1
 
33.01


9-1-2
 
33.02


9-1-3
 
33.03


9-1-4
 
33.04


9-1-5
 
33.05


9-1-6
 
33.06


9-1-7
 
33.07


9-1-8
 
33.08


9-1-9
 
33.09


9-1-10
 
33.10


9-1-11
 
33.10


9-1-12
 
33.10


9-1-13
 
33.11


9-1-14
 
33.12


9-2-1
 
33.25


9-2-2
 
33.26


9-2-3
 
33.27


9-2-4
 
33.28


9-2-5
 
33.29


9-2-6
 
33.30


9-3-2
 
33.41


9-3-3
 
33.41


9-3-4
 
33.41


9-4-1
 
30.15


9-4-2
 
30.16


9-4-3
 
30.17


9-5-1
 
30.30


9-5-2
 
30.31


9-5-3
 
30.32


9-5-4
 
30.33


9-5-5
 
30.34


9-5-6
 
30.35


9-5-7
 
30.36


9-6-1
 
31.01


9-6-2
 
31.02


9-6-3
 
31.03


9-6-4
 
31.04


9-6-6
 
31.06


9-6-7
 
31.07


9-6-8
 
31.08


9-6-9
 
31.09


9-7-1
 
31.20


9-7-2
 
31.21


9-7-3
 
31.22


9-7-4
 
31.23


9-7-5
 
31.24


9-7-6
 
31.25


9-7-7
 
31.26


9-7-8
 
31.27


9-7-9
 
31.28


9-7-10
 
31.29


9-7-11
 
31.30


9-7-12
 
31.31


9-7-13
 
31.32


9-7-14
 
31.33


9-8-1
 
34.15


9-8-2
 
34.16


9-8-2.5
 
34.17


9-8-3
 
34.20


9-8-4
 
34.18


9-8-5
 
34.01


9-8-6
 
34.02


9-8-8
 
34.19


9-8-9
 
34.21


9-8-10
 
34.22


9-8-11
 
34.23


9-8-12
 
34.22


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
11-1-1952
 
153.25


-
 
1-12-1960
 
33.30


-
 
12-7-1964
 
54.09


-
 
6-30-1966
 
50.03


-
 
8-13-1968
 
34.16


-
 
10-13-1970
 
31.03


-
 
12-29-1970
 
31.03


-
 
7-10-1973
 
153.15


-
 
3-14-1978
 
31.04


-
 
6-10-1980
 
72.20


-
 
1-26-1981
 
92.01


-
 
2-9-1981
 
92.02


-
 
6-8-1982
 
130.05


1988-
 
5-10-1988
 
34.17


-
 
6-14-1988
 
155.004


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1-1962
 
- -
 
130.01


3-1962
 
6-18-1962
 
11.01


13-1984
 
- -
 
30.30, 30.31, 31.03, 31.04, 31.06


1994-9
 
- -
 
30.30, 30.31


1997-8
 
- -
 
30.31


-
 
11-3-1915
 
94.04


-
 
10-3-1916
 
94.03


-
 
1-7-1919
 
94.02


-
 
5-13-1946
 
30.15 - 30.17


1-1947
 
6-10-1947
 
111.01 - 111.06


-
 
8-11-1947
 
50.04


-
 
1-17-1951
 
130.04


-
 
6-10-1952
 
94.15 - 94.17


-
 
11-10-1953
 
31.01, 153.01, 153.02


100
 
5-9-1955
 
54.20


-
 
3-25-1957
 
155.001 - 155.004, 155.022, 155.024, 155.035 - 155.039, 155.075 - 155.079,
155.095 - 155.098, 155.110 - 155.113, Ch. 155 Appx B, C, D


7-1958
 
- -1958
 
94.01


1-1959
 
2-9-1959
 
54.01 - 54.08


1A-1959
 
- -1959
 
54.01 - 54.08


4-1959
 
5-12-1959
 
111.07


2-1962
 
2-26-1962
 
53.35 - 53.42


5-1962
 
10-9-1962
 
130.03


1-1963
 
2-12-1963
 
TSO Table I


3-1963
 
8-27-1963
 
30.30 - 30.36


3-1965
 
7-13-1965
 
34.15


1965-1
 
5-9-1967
 
154.01 - 154.07


4-1968
 
11-12-1968
 
112.15 - 112.21


5-1968
 
12-10-1968
 
33.41


1-1969
 
2-11-1969
 
31.06


1969-2
 
3-12-1969
 
30.50


2-1971
 
- -1971
 
52.01 - 52.07


4-1971
 
5-11-1971
 
155.022, 155.024


11-1971
 
12-29-1971
 
53.58


4-1972
 
12-28-1972
 
34.18


1-1973
 
4-10-1973
 
71.01, 71.02, 71.04, 71.05, 71.07, 71.08, Ch. 73 Sch. IV, Ch. 74 Sch. I and II


5-1973
 
11-13-1973
 
53.01 - 53.03, 53.15 - 53.21, 53.55 - 53.57


2-1974
 
7-9-1974
 
91.01


2-1976
 
5-11-1976
 
72.01 - 72.04


6-1976
 
8-10-1976
 
71.01, 71.02, 71.04, 71.05, 71.07, 71.08, Ch. 74, Sch. I and II


11-1976
 
9-14-1976
 
155.022, 155.024


5-1977
 
6-14-1977
 
53.35, 53.38 - 53.42


3-1977
 
7-12-1977
 
72.01 - 72.04


2-1978
 
2-14-1978
 
51.45 - 51.52


6-1978
 
5-31-1978
 
50.05


8-1978
 
6-30-1978
 
93.02, 93.03


9-1978
 
6-30-1978
 
130.02


15-1978
 
11-14-1978
 
TSO Table I


18-1978
 
12-26-1978
 
31.04, 31.05, 33.01 - 33.12


4-1979
 
9-11-1979
 
155.022, 155.024


1-1980
 
5-13-1980
 
51.25 - 51.30


4-1981
 
6-9-1981
 
33.25 - 33.28


6-1981
 
7-14-1981
 
31.07


13-1981
 
12-8-1981
 
53.35, 53.37 - 53.42


1-1982
 
2-8-1982
 
51.01 - 51.04


3-1982
 
3-9-1982
 
51.31


12-1982
 
12-14-1982
 
31.08, 31.09


12-1984
 
12-14-1982
 
31.20 - 31.33


2-1983
 
6-14-1983
 
31.02


5-1983
 
9-13-1983
 
34.03


9-1983
 
12-13-1983
 
34.20


4-1984
 
2-14-1984
 
155.035 - 155.039, Ch. 155 Appx B, C, D


6-1984
 
4-15-1984
 
70.01


6A-1984
 
- -1984
 
111.01 - 111.06, 112.15 - 112.21


1984-6A
 
- -1984
 
30.50


7A-1984
 
- -1984
 
91.01, 94.15 - 94.17, 130.01 - 130.03


8-1984
 
7-10-1984
 
93.05


8A-1984
 
- -1984
 
92.01, 92.02, 93.04, 130.04, 130.05


8B-1984
 
- -1984
 
93.05


9-1984
 
- -1984
 
50.01 - 50.03, 53.01 - 53.03, 53.15 - 53.21, 53.35, 53.37 - 53.42, 53.55 -
53.57, 54.09


10-1984
 
- -1984
 
71.01, 71.02, 71.04, 71.05, 71.07, 71.08, 72.01 - 72.04, Ch. 73 Sch. IV, Ch.
74 Sch. I and II


10A-1984
 
- -1984
 
72.15 - 72.20, Ch. 73 Sch. I and II


10B-1984
 
- -1984
 
70.02, 70.03


11-1984
 
- -1984
 
153.01, 153.02, 153.15, 153.25


11A-1984
 
- -1984
 
152.01 - 152.08


12-1984
 
- -1984
 
Ch. 74 Sch. I and II


13-1984
 
- -1984
 
30.32, 30.34, 30.36, 33.29, 33.30, 33.41, 34.01 - 34.03, 34.15, 34.16, 34.18,
53.03, 71.01, 71.02, 71.04, 71.05, 71.07, 71.08, 72.01 - 72.04, 94.02 -
94.04, 130.02 - 130.04


14A-1984
 
- -1984
 
33.09


14B-1984
 
- -1984
 
71.03


14C-1984
 
- -1984
 
91.15 - 91.20


14D-1984
 
- -1984
 
94.16


14E-1984
 
- -1984
 
30.34 - 30.36


14F-1984
 
- -1984
 
90.01 - 90.06


14G-1984
 
- -1984
 
52.05


C2-1985
 
- -1985
 
91.15 - 91.19, 94.02


C3-1985
 
- -1985
 
70.04, Ch. 73 Sch. III


1-1985
 
- -1985
 
71.06


5-1985
 
8-13-1985
 
91.16, 94.02


6-1985
 
- -1985
 
93.01


-
 
12-2-1985
 
33.40


1-1987
 
- -1987
 
34.24


1989-1
 
2-14-1989
 
112.01


4-1990
 
6-12-1990
 
TSO Table I


5-1990
 
9-11-1990
 
112.02


1-1991
 
2-12-1991
 
91.02


2-1991
 
7-9-1991
 
33.29


1-1992
 
- -1992
 
53.36


1992-2
 
- -1992
 
51.02, 51.04


3-1992
 
4-14-1992
 
Ch. 73 Sch. I


1992-4
 
- -1992
 
34.17


-
 
12-15-1992
 
34.19


1993-1
 
- -1993
 
52.05


3-1993
 
7-13-1993
 
93.01


4-1993
 
9-14-1993
 
151.01 - 151.05, 151.20 - 151.27


1993-5
 
- -1993
 
51.01, 51.02, 51.04


1993-6
 
12-13-1993
 
51.01 - 51.04


3-1994
 
12-29-1993
 
TSO Table I


1-1994
 
1-9-1994
 
TSO Table I


2-1994
 
1-10-1994
 
TSO Table I


1994-4
 
3-28-1994
 
53.36


1994-8
 
7-12-1994
 
52.05


1994-9
 
- -1994
 
30.33


11-1994
 
12-13-1994
 
151.21, 151.23


1994-18
 
- -1994
 
30.32, 30.33


1-1995
 
2-14-1995
 
70.04 - 70.06


1995-2
 
2-14-1995
 
51.03


6-1995
 
8-15-1995
 
34.24


7-1995
 
10-10-1995
 
155.004


1995-8
 
11-14-1995
 
34.21


1995-9
 
12-12-1995
 
110.01 - 110.14


10-1995
 
12-12-1995
 
TSO Table IV


1996-1
 
- -1996
 
30.35


1996-2
 
3-5-1996
 
34.22


1996-3
 
- -1996
 
30.34


1996-4
 
3-5-1996
 
TSO Table III


1996-5
 
- -1996
 
155.050 - 155.060


3-1996
 
5-15-1996
 
30.01 - 30.04


7-1996
 
5-15-1996
 
150.08


8-1996
 
5-15-1996
 
53.15


1996-10
 
7-22-1996
 
30.35


1996-11
 
7-29-1996
 
34.17


1996-13
 
8-14-1996
 
30.51


14-1996
 
8-14-1996
 
150.01 - 150.18


1996-15
 
8-14-1996
 
51.03


1996-18
 
10-9-1996
 
70.04, Ch. 73 Sch. III


1996-19
 
12-11-1996
 
110.02, 110.06 - 110.10, 110.13, 110.14


1997-1
 
1-13-1997
 
110.01, 110.02, 110.07, 110.08, 110.11


1997-2
 
3-12-1997
 
TSO Table II


1997-3
 
5-14-1997
 
TSO Table IV


5-1997
 
8-4-1997
 
TSO Table I


1997-7
 
- -1997
 
Ch. 73 Sch. III


1997-8
 
11-12-1997
 
30.33


1997-9
 
- -1997
 
34.23


1997-10
 
- -1997
 
70.04, Ch. 73 Sch. III


1997-12
 
- -1997
 
53.36, 53.37


1998-1
 
- -1998
 
34.22


1998-3
 
- -1998
 
130.01


1998-5
 
10-15-1998
 
51.01 - 51.04


1998-6
 
11-12-1998
 
34.20


1998-7
 
11-12-1998
 
31.01 - 31.10


2000-2
 
3-8-2000
 
34.23


2000-4
 
4-12-2000
 
34.17


2000-5
 
4-12-2000
 
91.02


2000-6
 
4-12-2000
 
34.04


2000-10
 
9-13-2000
 
34.03


2000-8
 
9-13-2000
 
34.05


2000-12
 
11-8-2000
 
53.36


2001-1
 
3-14-2001
 
34.22


2001-6
 
5-9-2001
 
150.30 - 150.32


2001-7
 
6-13-2001
 
110.09, 110.11, 110.99


2001-9
 
8-15-2001
 
114.01


11
 
8-15-2001
 
TSO Table III


2001-8
 
9-12-2001
 
113.01 - 113.04, 113.15 - 113.41, 113.99


2001-15B
 
12-12-2001
 
34.25


2002-5
 
10-22-2002
 
155.004, 155.076, 155.125 - 155.131, Ch. 155 Appx B


2002-6
 
10-22-2002
 
TSO Table V


2002-9
 
12-11-2002
 
30.32


2003-2
 
4-9-2003
 
155.050, Ch. 155 Appx E


2003-5
 
8-13-2003
 
TSO Table V


2003-9
 
9-10-2003
 
30.65


2003-10
 
12-10-2003
 
95.01 - 95.21, 95.99


2003-12
 
12-29-2003
 
53.15, 53.36


2004-1
 
1-14-2004
 
155.004, 155.020 - 155.023, 155.125, Ch. 155 Appx A


2004-3
 
3-10-2004
 
130.06


2004-7
 
7-14-2004
 
TSO Table IV


2004-8
 
8-11-2004
 
34.26


2004-10
 
11-10-2004
 
156.01 - 156.03, 156.15 - 156.18, 156.30 - 156.40, 156.55 - 156.59


2004-11
 
11-10-2004
 
53.15


2005-6
 
9-14-2005
 
34.27


2005-7
 
9-14-2005
 
70.07


2005-8
 
10-12-2005
 
155.020, 155.021


2005-9
 
10-12-2005
 
70.07


2006-1
 
7-12-2006
 
54.21 - 54.24


2006-2
 
8-30-2006
 
53.15


2006-3
 
8-30-2006
 
53.22


2006-4
 
8-30-2006
 
53.23


2006-8
 
9-19-2006
 
53.22


2006-10
 
11-28-2006
 
TSO Table II


2006-11
 
11-28-2006
 
50.06


2008-1
 
4-9-2008
 
155.131, 155.132


-
 
9-10-2008
 
TSO Table V


2008-6
 
10-8-2008
 
91.16


2008-7
 
10-8-2008
 
52.01 - 52.07


2008-5
 
12-10-2008
 
53.15, 53.36


2009-1
 
4-8-2009
 
51.06


2009-2
 
4-8-2009
 
54.25


2009-4
 
6-10-2009
 
94.17


2009-11
 
10-14-2009
 
51.04


2009-12
 
11-12-2009
 
54.22


2009-13
 
11-12-2009
 
53.40


2009-14
 
12-9-2009
 
TSO Table III


2010-1
 
1-13-2010
 
110.08


2010-2
 
5-12-2010
 
150.40


2010-3
 
8-11-2010
 
75.01 - 75.08, 75.99


2011-1
 
4-13-2011
 
75.01 - 75.08, 75.99


2011-2
 
4-18-2011
 
T.S.O. II


2011-3
 
5-11-2011
 
112.01, 112.02


2012-1
 
2-27-2012
 
155.125


 
 
 
 
 




 


