
Kokomo, IN Code of Ordinances


CITY OF KOKOMO, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-44 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 6932 passed 4-29-19; and
State legislation current through Legislative Service, 2018 Acts, Pamphlet
No. 5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS
OF
KOKOMO, INDIANA



 




COUNCIL



PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL
 
Bob Hayes


FIRST DISTRICT COUNCILMAN
 
Mike Wyant


SECOND DISTRICT COUNCILMAN
 
Bob Cameron


THIRD DISTRICT COUNCILWOMAN
 
Janie Young


FOURTH DISTRICT COUNCILMAN
 
Donnie Haworth


FIFTH DISTRICT COUNCILWOMAN
 
Cindy Sanders


SIXTH DISTRICT COUNCILMAN
 
Tom Miklik


COUNCILMAN-AT-LARGE
 
Bob Hayes


COUNCILMAN-AT-LARGE
 
Mike Kennedy


COUNCILMAN-AT-LARGE
 
Steve Whikehart


COUNCIL ATTORNEY
 
Corbin King




 



 


CITY OFFICIALS



MAYOR
 
Gregory Goodnight


CORPORATION COUNSEL   
 
Beth Garrison


CITY CLERK
 
Brenda Ott


CITY CONTROLLER
 
Randy Morris



 



ADOPTING ORDINANCES



ORDINANCE NO. 5146



ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF KOKOMO,
INDIANA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SAID CODE.



   WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Kokomo are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classi-fication and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and



   WHEREAS, the Acts of the General Assembly of the State of Indiana
empower and authorize the common council for every city to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or pub-lished and to incoroporate said
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



   WHEREAS, the Common Council of the City of Kokomo has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book
form.



   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Common Council of the City of
Kokomo, Indiana, that:



   Section l.  The general ordinances of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, as
herein revised, amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of
Kokomo, Indiana."



   Section 2.  Said Code as adopted in Section l shall consist of the
following titles, to- wit:



   TITLE I                     GENERAL PROVISIONS



   TITLE III                     ADMINISTRATION



   TITLE V                     PUBLIC WORKS



   TITLE VII                     TRAFFIC CODE



   TITLE IX                     GENERAL REGULATIONS



   TITLE XI                     BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   TITLE XIII                  GENERAL OFFENSES



   TITLE XV                     LAND USAGE



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



   INDEX



   Section 3.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
said Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of said
Code except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in said
Code; provided such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty
incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of said Code,
nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes,
appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises
or granting special right to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use, naming or
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public places,
nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained therein.



   Section 4.  Said Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Mayor, and the Clerk of the City of Kokomo is
hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of said Code in the Office of
the Clerk.



   Section 5.  Said Code shall be in full force and effect two weeks from
the date of its publication and filing thereof in the Office of the Clerk,
and said Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by the law have been given.



   PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Common Council of the City of Kokomo,
Indiana, this 25 day of January, l982.



                               John D. Kennedy 
 



                               Presiding
Officer   



ATTEST:



    Carol L. Moberly   



        City Clerk       



(Ord. 5146, passed 1-25-82)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Definitions



   10.05   Rules of construction



   10.06   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Severability



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Ordinances repealed



   10.12   Ordinances unaffected



   10.13   Unauthorized alterations or tampering with code



   10.14   Recordation and publication



   10.15   Effective date



   10.16   Offenses punishable under separate provisions



   10.17   Jurisdiction



 



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
municipality as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections shall be known and
designated as the City Code of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, for which
designation "codified ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.  Code,
title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.  ('75 Code, § 1-1)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
('75 Code, § 1-4)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to codify, see IC 36-1-5-1 et seq.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the Indiana Code.



   (B)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Indiana Code, the reference indicates that the section is analogous or
similar to the cited sections in the Indiana Code. Footnotes,
cross-references, and other comments are by way of explanation only and
should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this code
shall apply only within the city.  ('75 Code, § 1-12)



   (D)   Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I not incompatible with future legislation
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AND."  May be read "OR," and "OR" may be read "AND," if the sense
requires it.



   "ANOTHER."  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   "CITY," "MUNICIPAL CORPORATION," or "MUNICIPALITY."  The City of
Kokomo, Indiana.



   "CORPORATE LIMITS" or "CITY LIMITS."  The legal boundaries of the City
of Kokomo, except as otherwise provided by law.



   "COUNCIL."  The Common Council of the city.



   "COUNTY."  Howard County, Indiana.



   "IC."  Refers to the Indiana Code.



   "KEEPER" or "PROPRIETOR."  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   "LAND" or "REAL ESTATE."  Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.



   "MAY."  The act referred to is permissive.



   "MONTH."  A calendar month.



   "OATH."  Includes an affirmation.



   "OWNER."  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, or tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.



   "PERSON."  Individual, firm, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  (IC 8-1.5-1-9)



   "PERSONAL PROPERTY."  Includes all property except real.



   "PRECEDING" or "FOLLOWING."  The next before or the next after,
respectively.



   "PREMISES."  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   "PROPERTY."  Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.



   "PUBLIC AUTHORITY."  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   "QUORUM."  A majority of the members of a board, commission, or
committee holding office, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.



   "REAL PROPERTY."  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   "REGISTERED MAIL."  Includes certified mail.



   "SHALL."  The act referred to is mandatory.



   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   "STATE."  The State of Indiana.



   "STREET."  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads,
highways, viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the city.



   "SUBCHAPTER."  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by an
underlined heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   "TENANT" or "OCCUPANT."  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of such premises, alone or with others.



   "WRITING."  Includes any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



   "YEAR."  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed."  (IC 1-1-4-5)



('75 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.  (IC
1-1-4-1)



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary, and
usual sense.  But technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.  (IC-1-1-4-1)



   (B)   As used in the code, unless the context otherwise requires:



      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.



      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future.



   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.



      (1)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by
these rules, by order of the court, or by any applicable statute, the day of
the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to
run shall not be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included unless it is:  a Saturday; a Sunday; a legal holiday as defined by
state statute; or a day the office in which the act is to be done is closed
during regular business hours.  In any event, the period runs until the end
of the next day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day
on which the office is closed.  When the period of time allowed is less than
seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and days on
which the office is closed shall be excluded from the computations.  (Trial
Rule 6(A))



      (2)   When a public office in which an act required by law is
to be performed is closed to the public for the entire day which constitutes
the last day for doing such act or before its usual closing time on such day,
then such act may be performed on the next succeeding day which is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday.



      (3)   When a law is to take effect or become operative from
and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.



      (4)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the
months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in
the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is
begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which
case the period ends on the last day of that month.



      (5)   In all cases where the law requires any act to be done
in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time
or notice shall mean the time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



   (D)   Act by assistants.  When a statute requires an act to be done
which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an
authorized agent or deputy.



(IC 1-1-4-1)



   (E)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



   (F)   Joint authority.  Words importing joint authority to three or
more persons shall be construed as authority to a majority of such persons
unless otherwise declared in the law giving such authority. (IC l-l-4-l)



   (G)   Officers generally.  Whenever any officer is referred to by
title, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words, "of the
City of Kokomo."



   (H)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law may be repugnant thereto.



('75 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.06  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to
revive such former ordinance, clause, or provision unless it shall be therein
so expressly provided.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.



('75 Code, § 1-9)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code is now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.  (IC 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the City of Kokomo exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be
corrected, and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.13  UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATIONS OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in
any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.



('75 Code, § 1-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.14  RECORDATION AND PUBLICATION.



   The ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Common Council shall be
recorded by the City Clerk in the minute books of the Council, and a copy
kept in an ordinance file.  Due proof of publication of all ordinances
requiring publication together with the affidavit of the printer or publisher
shall be obtained by the Clerk and attached to the original of each ordinance
adopted by the Common Council in the minute book of the Council.



('75 Code, § 1-7)



Statutory reference:



   Recording of adopted ordinances, see IC 36-4-6-17



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Each ordinance adopted by the Common Council shall, if directed by the
Council, be published by the City Clerk in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city and printed in the English language, in two publications, each
one week apart, and each ordinance shall take effect two weeks subsequent to
the date of the first publication, unless another date is later stated in
such ordinance in which event it shall take effect on the date so stated. 
Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect on the date of their
adoption unless a different date is stated in such ordinance.



('75 Code, § 1-8)



§ 10.16  OFFENSES PUNISHABLE UNDER SEPARATE PROVISIONS.



   In all cases where the same offenses may be made punishable or may be
created by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the city, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense.



('75 Code, § 1-11)



§ 10.17  JURISDICTION.



   Except as otherwise provided, the provisions of this code shall apply
only within the city.



('75 Code, § 1-12)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the city, or rule or
regulation promulgated by an officer or agency thereof under the authority
invested by law or ordinance, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty
is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code,
ordinance, rule, or regulation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.



('75 Code, § 1-10)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



         30.   ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION



         30A.   COMMON COUNCIL



         31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



         32.   DEPARTMENTS



         33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



         34.   EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY



         35.   FINANCE



         36.   PURCHASING



         37.   COMPENSATION DURING ACTIVE DUTY



         38.   CITY POLICIES



CHAPTER 30:  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Three branches of government established



   30.02   Additional staff and operating expenses



   30.03   Intradepartmental organization authorized



   30.04   Adoption of organizational chart



Executive Branch



   30.10   Mayor



   30.11   Executive departments established



   30.12   Department of Law



   30.13   Department of Finance



   30.14   Department of Human Resources



   30.15   Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services



   30.16   Department of Aviation



   30.17   Department of Parks and Recreation



   30.18   Department of Public Works and Safety



   30.19   Department of Economic Development



   30.20   Department of Development



   30.21   Deputy Mayor



Legislative Branch



   30.30   Common Council as legislative branch



   30.31   Composition



   30.32   Qualifications, selection of members



   30.33   Compliance with state law



   30.34   Powers



   30.35   Council Attorney



   30.36   City Clerk



Autonomous Boards and Commissions



   30.45   Statement of policy



   30.46   Various autonomous boards, commissions established



   30.47   Board of Cemetery Trustees



   30.48   Traffic Commission



   30.49   Plan Commission



   30.50   Board of Zoning Appeals



   30.51   Kokomo and Howard County Governmental Coordinating Council



   30.52   Human Rights Commission



   30.53   Kokomo Housing Authority



Cross-reference:



   Department of Redevelopment, see § 154.01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  THREE BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED.



   The government of the city shall consist of three branches, those being:



   (A)   Executive branch.



   (B)   Legislative branch.



   (C)   Autonomous boards and commissions.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.02  ADDITIONAL STAFF AND OPERATING EXPENSES.



   Subject to the appropriation power of the Common Council, all city
departments and all boards and commissions where appropriate, shall have the
ability to hire such employees, and purchase or contract for such materials
or services, as the Board of Public Works and Safety or other governing board
or commission deems necessary to perform their public functions.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.03  INTRADEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION AUTHORIZED.



   The heads of the various city departments shall have the prerogative of
developing such intradepartmental organization plans as are necessary and
conducive to providing more efficient service to the public.  All such
intradepartmental organization shall be approved by the Mayor.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.04  ADOPTION OF ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.



   An organizational chart depicting the city reorganization effected by
this chapter is hereby made a part hereof by reference as if fully set forth
herein.  Should inconsistences occur between the organizational chart and
the chapter text, the chapter text will be controlling.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



EXECUTIVE BRANCH



§ 30.10  MAYOR.



   (A)   The Mayor is the city executive and head of the executive
branch.  He or she shall faithfully perform the duties and responsibilities
contained in IC 36-4-5-1 et seq. and other state statutes.



   (B)   The Mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by state law.



   (C)   The Mayor shall serve for a term of four years, with the term
commencing from the hour of 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January
following his election and continuing until his successor is elected or
qualified.



   (D)   The Mayor shall approve and disapprove in writing, within ten
days of receiving the same, every ordinance, resolution, or order of the
Common Council, and he shall transmit to the Council, within such time, a
message announcing an approval or veto.  In case of a veto, he shall state
in writing his reason therefor.  If the Mayor fails to approve or veto such
legislation, such failure shall be deemed a veto.



   (E)   In addition to those powers and duties provided for in this
code, the Mayor shall have those powers and duties provided for by state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.11  EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.



   There are hereby established within the executive branch of the city
the following city executive departments:



   (A)   Department of Law



   (B)   Department of Finance



   (C)   Department of Human Resources



   (D)   Department of Development



   (E)   Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services



   (F)   Department of Aviation



   (G)   Department of Public Works and Safety



   (H)   Department of Economic Development



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5412, passed 10-9-84; Am. Ord. 6060,
passed 8-25-97; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97)



§ 30.12  DEPARTMENT OF LAW.



   (A)   Position of Corporation Counsel established.  The head of the
Department of Law shall be the Corporation Counsel, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and shall serve at his pleasure.



   (B)   Duties.  Acting under the direction of the Corporation
Counsel, the Department of Law shall perform all duties set out in state law
(IC 36-4-9-12) and as that state law, from time to time, may be amended.  In
addition, the Department of Law shall have such other powers and duties as
may be determined by the Mayor or by ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.13  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.



   (A)   Position of City Controller established.  The head of the
Department  of Finance  shall  be  the  City  Controller  who  shall
be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his pleasure.  In addition,
such deputy controllers and support staff shall be appointed as are necessary
to perform the duties of the Department of Finance.



   (B)   Duties of the Department of Finance.  The Department of
Finance, acting under the authority of the City Controller as chief fiscal
officer of the city and head of the Department of Finance, shall have the
powers and duties provided by state law (IC 36-4-10-5) and, in addition, have
such other powers and duties as may be determined by the Mayor or by
ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.14  DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.



   (A)   Position of Director of Human Resources established; duties. 
The head of the Department of Human Resources shall be the Director of Human
Resources, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his
pleasure.  The Department of Human Resources, under the direction of the
Director of Human Resources, bears primary responsibility for labor relations
between the city and its employees.  These duties include, but are not
necessarily limited to:  preparation of uniform employment application
forms; accepting of employment applications and the evaluation thereof;
preparation, administration, and evaluation of testing materials for
prospective employees; notification of applicants of testing results or
evaluations; maintenance of employee records, including periodic updating of
job applicants on file; preparation and revision of job descriptions; posting
of employment opportunities; representation of the city in dealings with
employee unions; preparation and implementation of employee safety programs;
serve as point of contact with all insurance carriers for al municipally
funded employee health, accident, and workman's compensation polices of
insurance; participation in labor contract negotiations with city employee
unions; preparation and implementation of employee safety programs; assure
compliance with all applicable state and federal labor and employment
regulations; and respond to inquiries from parties outside the city
government concerning past and present employees.



   (B)   Position of Affirmative Action Officer established.  There is
created in the Department of Human Resources an official position designated
as the Affirmative Action Officer.  The Director of Human Resources may also
serve as the Affirmative Action Officer.  If the Director does not so serve,
the Affirmative Action Officer should preferably have training or experience
in human resource management or the social and behavioral sciences.  The
Affirmative Action Officer should preferably have training or experience in
personnel management or the social behavioral sciences.  If the Affirmative
Action Officer is an individual other than the Director, he or she shall work
under the immediate supervision of the Director of Human Resources. 
Expenses unique to the implementation and maintenance of programs
administered by the Affirmative Action Officer shall be paid out of municipal
or other available sources, as are appropriated by the Common Council.



      (1)   Functions.  The functions of the Affirmative Action
Officer shall be those set out in § 34.04 of this code.



      (2)   Powers and duties.  The Affirmative Action Officer
shall have those powers and duties set out in § 34.05 of this code.



      (3)   Relationship to other city departments.  The
relation-ship of the Affirmative Action Officer to other city departments
shall be as set out in § 34.06 of this code.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6060, passed 8-25-97)



§ 30.15  DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING, TRAFFIC AND INSPECTION SERVICES.



   (A)   Establishment of Department.  There is established within the
executive branch of the city the Department of Engineering, Traffic and
Inspection Services.



   (B)   Position of Director established.  The head of the Department
of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services shall be the Director of
Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services. The Director shall be appointed
by the Mayor and shall serve at his pleasure.  The Director shall be
responsible for the administration of the Department and shall be responsible
for the efficient operation thereof.



   (C)   Duties of the Department.  The Department of Engineering,
Traffic and Inspection Services shall be responsible for the following
governmental functions of the city:



      (1)   In conjunction with the city Board of Public Safety and
the Mayor, the Department shall be responsible for the proper execution of
all engineering and engineering related functions undertaken by the city as
set out in local ordinance and state or federal statute.



      (2)   The Department shall be responsible for all oversight
duties imposed by state statute or local ordinance including, but not limited
to, engineering inspections, accepting construction related permit and
license applications, processing the same, and assuring compliance with all
applicable codes and regulations specified in state law, federal laws and
regulations, and local ordinance.



      (3)   Issuance of all building and electrical permits and all
inspections related thereto.



      (4)   Engineering oversight of municipal street and sewer
systems.



      (5)   Engineering, survey, and design for all municipal
projects.



      (6)   Supervision of municipal traffic systems.



      (7)   Infrastructure Planning and Development.



      (8)   The Department shall be the lead city agency in
coordinating both voluntary and involuntary municipal annexations.



      (9)   Within the areas of responsibility herein described, the
Department shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable state,
federal, or local laws, rules, regulations or ordinances.



      (10)   The Department shall carry out all such other duties as
assigned by the Mayor.



   (D)   City Civil Engineer.



      (1)   Position of City Civil Engineer Established.  There is
established within the Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection
Services the position of City Civil Engineer.  The City Civil Engineer shall
be appointed by the Mayor and serve at his pleasure.  The City Civil
Engineer shall be a qualified engineer or architect registered in accordance
with state law.



      (2)   Power and Duties of City Civil Engineer.  The City
Civil Engineer may serve as Director of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection
Services. If the City Civil Engineer does not serve as Director, he shall
work under the administrative supervision of the Director.  The City Civil
Engineer shall have the powers and duties prescribed by state law and such
additional powers and duties as may be delegated to him by the Director,
Mayor, or by ordinance.



   (E)   Division of Building Standards.



      (1)   Establishment of Division of Building Standards.  There
is established within the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection
Services a division of Building Standards.



      (2)   Duties of the Division of Building Standards.  The
Division of Building Standards shall perform all duties imposed by state
statute or local ordinance in the area of building code enforcement and
supervising all demolitions performed within the city. The Division of
Building Standards shall perform such other duties as prescribed by the
Director, Common Council, the Mayor, or the Board of Public Works and Safety.
The duties of the Division of Building Standards include, but are not limited
to, primary enforcement responsibilities for all building and electrical
codes prescribed by state law or local ordinance, administration and
enforcement of local ordinances pertaining to building or electrical
licensing and permits, installation and maintenance of electrical equipment
and service in municipally owned facilities where feasible.



      (3)   Department heads.  The Director of the Department of
Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services shall also serve as the head of
the division of Building Standards. The Director may delegate the duties of
head of the Division of Building Standards to an employee, or employees, of
the department if such delegation is in the interest of departmental
efficiency.



      (4)   Duties of the Electrical Inspector.  Within the
Division of Building Standards shall be an Electrical Inspector. It shall be
the obligation of the Electrical Inspector to perform all duties imposed by
state statute or local ordinance in the area of electrical code enforcement.
The Electrical Inspector shall serve concurrently as a Building Standards
Inspector and Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector may be used as a
Building Standards Inspector should the Director of the Department of
Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services, or his or her designee, deem it
necessary.



      (5)   All inspectors performing inspections of construction,
remodeling of existing buildings or inspections from the addition or
modification of buildings requiring a building or electrical permit shall be
certified by a sanctioning body recognized by the Indiana Department of
Homeland Security, Division of Fire and Building Safety.



(Ord. 5412, passed 10-9-84; Am. Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6477, passed 4-23-07)



Cross-reference:



   Schedule of charges and fees for services of Department of Engineering,
Traffic and Inspection Services, see § 150.04



   Department of Development, see § 30.20



§ 30.16  DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION.



   (A)   Board of Aviation Commissioners.  The Department  of 
Aviation  shall  operate  under  the  control  and  supervision of 
the Board of Aviation Commissioners.  The Board of Aviation Commissioners
shall be constituted and operate as set out in §§ 32.21 through 32.29 of
this code.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  The Board of Aviation Commissioners
shall, in the operation of the Department of Aviation, have all powers and
duties provided by state law and local ordinance and shall comply with all
applicable federal regulations concerning the operation of aviation
facilities.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.17  DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   Board of Park Commissioners.  The Department of Parks and
Recreation shall operate under the control and supervision of the Board of
Park Commissioners, which shall be constituted and operate under the
provisions of § 96.01 of this code.  It is the intent of the Common Council
to confirm that the Department of Parks and Recreation established within the
executive branch of the city by this section be governed in its activities by
the provisions of IC 36-10-3-1 et seq. and as that statute may from time to
time be amended.



   (B)   Position of Superintendent established.  There is established
within the Department of Parks and Recreation, the position of Superintendent
of Parks and Recreation.  The Superintendent shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the approval of the Board of Park Commissioners, and shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor.  The Superintendent shall be responsible for
the day-to-day management of the Department of Parks and Recreation, subject
to the general supervision and control of the Board of Park Commissioners.



   (C)   Powers of the Board of Park Commissioners.  The Board of Park
Commissioners operating pursuant to the provisions of IC 36-10-3-1 et seq.,
shall have all powers granted by local ordinance and applicable state law.



   (D)   Duties.  The Department of Parks and Recreation shall be
responsible for the planning, development, and maintenance of all park
facilities of the city.  The Department shall also be responsible for the
development and administration of a year-around recreational program for the
citizens of the city.  To this end, the Department may enter into
co-operative agreements with other entities to further such recreational
programs.  The Department may schedule and operate athletic leagues, and
participate in long-range planning of recreational activities for youths and
adults.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5417, passed 11-5-84)



§ 30.18  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   (A)   (1)   Establishment of Board of Public Works and Safety. 
The Department of Public Works and Safety shall be under the control and
supervision of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (2)  Members.  The Board of Public Works and Safety shall be
composed of three members who shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at
his pleasure.  Members of the Board of Public Works and Safety shall have
been a voter of the city for at least one year immediately preceding their
appointment.  The Mayor may also appoint ex officio, non-voting, advisors to
the Board as are necessary to enable the Board to carry out its
responsibilities.



   (B)   Police Department.



      (1)   Position of Chief of Police established.  The Police
Department shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Chief of
Police, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his
pleasure subject to provisions of state law.  All other members of the
Police Department shall be appointed by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (2)   Powers and duties of Department.  All police officers,
including the Chief of Police, shall, in addition to the powers and duties
provided by this code, have the powers and duties provided by state law.



   (C)   Fire Department. 



      (1)   Position of Fire Chief established.  The Fire
Department shall be under the direct control and supervision of the Fire
Chief, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his
pleasure subject to provisions of state law.  All other members of the Fire
Department shall be appointed by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (2)   Powers and duties of Department.  The Fire Department
shall perform those functions normally associated with fire prevention and
extinguishment, with the primary objective of minimizing injury to life and
property within the city.  In addition, the Fire Department shall have all
powers and duties specified in state law.



      (3)   Establishment of Bureau of Fire Prevention.  There is
established within the Fire Department a Bureau of Fire Prevention which
shall operate under the general supervision of the Fire Chief.



         (a)   Position of Chief of Fire Prevention Bureau
established.  There is established the position of Chief of the Fire
Prevention Bureau.  The Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be a
member of the City Fire Department, shall be appointed to his position of
Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau by the Mayor, and shall serve at his
pleasure subject to provisions of state law.  The Mayor's appointment shall
be based on the results of examinations determining the qualifications of the
nominee for the position.



         (b)   Duties of the Chief of Fire Prevention Bureau. The
Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall, under the general supervision of
the Fire Chief, be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the Fire
Prevention Bureau.



         (c)   Duties of the Fire Prevention Bureau.  It shall
be the duty of the Fire Prevention Bureau to enforce the provisions of the
Uniform Fire Code (1979 Edition), as that code may from time to time be
amended.  In addition, the Bureau shall be responsible for enforcing any
other fire prevention provisions as hereinafter provided.



         (d)   Additional personnel.  The Fire Chief may detail
such members of the Fire Department to the Bureau of Fire Prevention and
inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary.  The Fire Chief shall
recommend to the Mayor and Board of Public Works and Safety the employment of
technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected
through examinations to determine their fitness for such positions. 
Successful applicants shall serve under the day- to-day supervision of the
Chief of Fire Prevention Bureau.



         (e)   Annual report.  A report of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall be prepared annually and transmitted to the Mayor. If shall
contain all proceedings under the Uniform Fire Code (1979 Edition), with such
statistics as the Fire Chief and the Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau may
wish to include therein.  The Chief of the Fire Department shall also
recommend any amendments to the Uniform Fire Code (1979 Edition), which in
his judgment shall be desirable.



   (D)   [Reserved.]



   (E)   Sanitation Department.



      (1)   Function of Board of Public Works and Safety.  In
addition to the general supervisory function described in division (A)(2) of
this section, the Board of Public Works and Safety shall make and enforce
whatever bylaws, rules, and regulations it may deem necessary for the safe,
economical, and efficient management of the Sanitation Department, for the
construction and use of sewers and connections to the sewage system, for the
regulation, collection, and refunding of the rates and charges for sewerage
served, and, in general, for the implementation of the provisions of this
code of ordinances and applicable state law concerning sewers and sewage
disposal.



      (2)   Powers and duties.  The Sanitation Department will be
responsible for the efficient operation of the municipal sewage works; for
the collection of fees imposed by the Common Council for sewer services; for
the implementation of rules and regulations promulgated by the Board of
Public Works and Safety for the operation of the sewer and sewage systems;
and for coordination with other city departments for the maintenance of
municipal sewer and sewage lines.



      (3)   Division of Plant Operations established.  There is
established within the Sanitation Department a Division of Plant Operations.



         (a)   Powers and duties.  The Division of Plant
Operations shall be responsible for the operation of the municipal sanitation
plant and for the collection, treatment, and disposal of waste water and
waste residues.



         (b)   Position of Plant Sanitation Superintendent
established.  The Division of Plant Operations shall be headed by the
Sanitation Plant Superintendent, which position is now established. The
Sanitation Plant Superintendent shall be appointed by the Board of Public
Works and Safety, shall serve at the pleasure of the Board, and shall have
such qualifications as required by law or state or federal regulations.  The
Sanitation Plant Superintendent shall be responsible for all aspects of the
operation of the municipal sanitation plant.  He shall be responsible for
the conduct of all necessary testing and sampling required under federal,
state, or local law or ordinance.  He shall be the city employee responsible
for assuring compliance with all applicable rules or regulations promulgated
by federal or state agencies, as well as applicable state or federal laws. He
will consult with the sewer engineer, the Street Department head, and the
Board of Public Works and Safety, and shall recommend to the Board measures
expediting the more efficient operation of the municipal sanitation facility.



      (4)   Division of Financial Administration established. There
is established within the Sanitation Department the Division of Financial
Administration.



         (a)   Powers and duties. The Division of Financial
Administration will act as the business office of the Sanitation
Department.  In this capacity, the Division will be responsible for the
financial management of the Sanitation Department, subject to the supervision
of the Board of Public Works and Safety.  These duties shall include, but
not be limited to maintenance of all customer records; customer billings;
collection of delinquent charges; maintenance of all financial records of the
Department, monitoring, in cooperation with the Department of Finance, all
bond obligations of the Department; and auditing of operational expenses of
the Department.



         (b)   Supervision of the Division of Financial
Administration. Supervision of the operation of the Division of Financial
Administration shall be the responsibility and duty of the City Controller. 
In the furtherance of such responsibility and duty, the City Controller shall
assign such employees as are required to administer the daily operations and
functions of the Division of Financial Administration as set forth in this
division (E)(4)(b).  In addition, the City Controller shall, in cooperation
with the Sanitation Plant Superintendent, prepare an annual budget for the
operation of the Sanitation Department established under this section as
required by law.  The City Controller shall keep the City Board of Public
Works and Safety apprised of all matters falling within the jurisdictional
responsibilities of the Division of Financial Administration, and in matters
pertaining to that Division only, shall be subject to the authority granted
to the City Board of Public Works and Safety under divisions(A)(2) and (E)(l)
and (2) of this section to supervise the operations of the Sanitation
Department.



   (F)   Department of Streets.



      (1)   Position of Street Commissioner established.  The
Department of Streets will be headed by the Street Commissioner who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his pleasure.



      (2)   Powers and duties of Department.  The Department of
Streets, under the supervision of the Street Commissioner, and in conjunction
with the Department  of  Public  Works  and  Safety,  shall supervise
the cleaning, repair, and maintenance of all streets, alleys, rights-of-way,
sanitary sewers, and storm drains.  The Department of Streets shall also be
responsible for the supervision of municipal trash collection within the city.



   (G)   Senior Citizens Department. 



      (1)   Position of Senior Citizens Director established.  The
Senior Citizens Department will be headed by the Senior Citizens Director,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and who shall serve at his pleasure.



      (2)   Powers and duties of Department.  The Senior Citizens
Department, under the supervision of the Director, and in conjunction with
the Department of Parks and Recreation, shall oversee programs designed to
benefit the senior citizens of the community.  To this end, the Department
will manage such senior citizens centers as may be, from time to time,
established within the city.  The Department may apply for available grants
from federal, state, or private sources designed primarily to benefit senior
citizens.  The Department shall also perform such other duties as assigned
by the Mayor in the area of senior citizen programming.



   (H)   Department of Community Day Care Centers.



      (1)   Community Day Care Center Board.  The Department of
Community Day Care Centers shall operate under the control and supervision of
the Community Day Care Center Board as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Position of Day Care Center Director established. There
is established within the Department of Community Day Care Centers the
position of Day Care Center Director.  The Director shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the approval of the Community Day Care Center Board, and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.  The Director shall be responsible
for the day-to-day management of the Department of Community Day Care
Centers, subject to the general supervision and control of the Community Day
Care Center Board.



      (3)   Establishment of Community Day Care Center Board. There
is established the Kokomo Community Day Care Center Board.



         (a)   Composition.  The Board shall consist of seven
members.



         (b)   Appointment.  The members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Common Council.



         (c)   Qualifications.  The members of the Board shall
be residents of the city.



         (d)   Terms.  The initial members of the Board shall be
the members of the Carver Community Day Care Center Governing Board appointed
under former § 113.21 of this code (now repealed).  Upon passage of this
chapter, the Carver Community Day Care Center Governing Board shall cease to
exist as hereinafter set forth.  As the terms of the members of the former
Carver Community Day Care Center Governing Board expire, replacement
appointments to the Kokomo Community Day Care Center Board shall be made for
a three-year period.



         (e)   Removal.  The members of the Board may be removed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Common Council.



         (f)   Vacancies.  In the event of the death, removal,
or resignation of any members of the Board, a successor shall be appointed by
the Mayor with consent of the Common Council to serve the unexpired term of
the former member.



         (g)   Selection of officers.  The Board shall elect
from its membership, on an annual basis, a president, vice president, and
secretary.



         (h)   Compensation.  The members of the Board shall
serve without pay.



         (i)   Meetings.  The Board shall hold meetings as
requested by the Early Learning Center Director.



         (j)   Majority vote.  A majority vote shall be required
of all members of the Board for an official action by it.



      (4)   Function.  It shall be the duty of the Kokomo Community
Day Care Center Governing Board established herein to:



         (a)   Operate and maintain the Kokomo Early Learning
Center, and have and discharge final responsibility for the establishment and
enforcement of all policies of such center. However, such policies shall be
in conformity with all other policies applicable to other city departments
generally.



         (b)   Operate the center within the limits of any funds
made available to the center by proper appropriation by the Common Council or
from other sources.



         (c)   Accept contributions from other sources to carry
on its work generally, or for specific purposes.



         (d)   Determine, subject to Common Council approval,
charge, and collect patrons fees which shall be based on a scale adopted
annually.  This scale shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations.



         (e)   Solicit patrons fees and grants in assistance from
the State Department of Public Welfare as determined by the County Department
of Public Welfare and from all other appropriate agencies of the United
States.



         (f)   In cooperation with the Director, prepare a budget
for the operation of the center and submit this to the City Fiscal Officer
for forwarding to the Common Council on or before May 1 of each year.



         (g)   Determine the eligibility for admission in the
center of any child and determine the continued eligibility of that child
based upon the economic condition of the family of the child and the conduct
and demeanor of the child while in attendance at the center.  Admission
standards shall comply with all applicable state and federal regulations.



         (h)   Establish rules of conduct required to be adhered
to by all children attending the center.



         (i)   Investigate and develop methods of financing the
center through sources other than local government.



         (j)   Prepare reports as requested by the Mayor and the
Common Council.



         (k)   Act in an advisory capacity to, and otherwise
cooperate with, the County Welfare Department and the Department of Public
Welfare of the state.  The Governing Board shall comply with the provisions
of IC 12-7.4 and the minimum requirements and recommended standards for day
care centers issued by the State Department of Public Welfare.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5412, passed 10-9-84; Am. Ord. 5662,
passed 11-14-88; Am. Ord. 6371, passed 3-14-05; Am. Ord. 6492, passed
7-30-07; Am. Ord. 6690, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 6897, passed 5-21-18)



Cross-reference:



   Labor relations, see § 38.01



§ 30.19  DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Establishment.  There is established the Department of
Economic Development under the control of the Kokomo Economic Development
Commission.



   (B)   Operation.  The composition and proceedings of the Kokomo
Economic Development Commission shall be as set out in §§ 154.25 through
154.31 of this code.



   (C)   Powers and duties.  The Department of Economic Development
and the Kokomo Economic Development Commission shall have the powers and
duties provided by state law and local ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Cross-reference:



   Economic development target areas, see T.S.O. VII



§ 30.20  DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Establishment of Department.  There is established within the
executive branch of the city the Department of Development with such duties
and responsibilities as are hereinafter set forth.



   (B)   Position of Development Director established.  The head of
the Department of Development shall be the Development Director.  The
Development Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve at his
pleasure.  The Director shall be responsible for the administration of the
Department and shall be responsible for the efficient operation thereof.



   (C)   Duties of the Department of Development.  The Department of
Development shall be responsible for the following governmental functions of
the city:



      (1)   Coordination, implementation, and supervision of all
city programs in the area of economic and community planning and development.



         (a)   Identify and pursue available state, federal, and
private grants in the name of the city or other eligible entities.



         (b)   With the prior consent of the Common Council, the
Department may make application for such available loan funds as may be
appropriate.  Working in conjunction with other city departments where
appropriate, the Department may act as recipient or administrator of such
state, federal, or private financial assistance.



      (2)   The Department is authorized to provide technical and
administrative services to other eligible community groups.



         (a)   Should such services be provided, the Department
is authorized to charge a reasonable fee for its services, which funds shall
revert to the General Fund of the city.



         (b)   No such fees shall be charged without prior
approval, by resolution, of the Common Council of the city.



      (3)   The Department shall have primary responsibility for all
public relation efforts undertaken by the city.



      (4)   The Department shall be the primary city contact for all
community economic development efforts requiring or requesting the
participation of local government. By way of illustration and not limitation,
such efforts would include community revolving loan funds; urban enterprise
associations; tax abatement programs; flood mitigation programs.



      (5)   The Department shall liaise with private and public
economic development entities. By way of illustration and not limitation,
such entities would include the Chamber of Commerce; the Kokomo-Howard County
Development Corporation; the Economic Development Commission; and the Indiana
State Department of Commerce.



      (6)   The Department shall be the lead city agency in any
municipal effort to attract or retain businesses to or in the city
metropolitan area.



      (7)   Within the areas of responsibility herein described, the
Department shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable state,
federal or local laws, rules, regulations, or ordinances.



      (8)   The Department shall carry out all such other duties as
assigned by the Mayor.



(Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97)



Cross-reference:



   Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services, see §
30.15



§ 30.21  DEPUTY MAYOR.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-4-9-7, the Office of Deputy Mayor is
hereby established in the City of Kokomo.



   (B)   The position of Deputy Mayor shall be appointed by and serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Deputy Mayor may exercise all the powers
granted to the Mayor by Indiana law when the Mayor is unavailable to exercise
his or her duties.



   (C)   The Deputy Mayor may serve as president of the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Fire Pension Fund, in any instance in which the
Mayor is unable to attend a meeting or is unable to serve for any other
reason.



   (D)   The position of Deputy Mayor may be held by a current employee
of the city.



(Ord. 5821, passed 3-14-16)



LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



§ 30.30  COMMON COUNCIL AS LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.



   The Common Council shall be the legislative body of the city.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.31  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Common Council shall be composed of nine members, three of
whom shall be elected on an at-large basis and six of whom shall represent
the districts in which they reside.



   (B)   The six districts referred to shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of state law; however, nothing in this section
shall be construed to invalidate the redistricting set out in Ordinance 5115
(§ 30A.02 of this code) of the Common Council.  For the purpose of
redistricting required by state law, January 1, 1982 shall be considered to
constitute the base year and date of the most recent redistricting of the
councilmanic districts of the city.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Council election districts in second-class cities, see IC 36-4-6-3



§ 30.32  QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION OF MEMBERS.



   All members of the Common Council shall be elected in the manner
provided by state law and shall meet all qualification requirements as
provided by state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Qualification, election requirements, see IC 36-4-6-2



§ 30.33  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   In the course of its proceedings, the Common Council shall comply with
all applicable provisions of state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.34  POWERS.



   The Common Council shall have all the powers provided by state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.35  COUNCIL ATTORNEY.



   (A)   The position of Council Attorney is hereby established.  The
Council Attorney shall be appointed by the majority vote of the Common
Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Common Council.



   (B)   The Council Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Council on
all matters of Council business and shall perform such other duties as are
assigned by the Council.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.36  CITY CLERK.



   (A)   There is established the position of City Clerk.  The City
Clerk shall be elected in the manner provided by state law.  The City Clerk
shall serve a term of office of four years, with the term commencing from the
hour of 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January following his election and
continuing until his successor in office is elected and qualified.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall have such powers and duties as may be
provided by state law, and in addition, shall have such powers and duties as
may be provided by local ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Election, see IC 36-4-10-2



   Powers and duties, see IC 36-4-10-4 through 36-4-10-6



AUTONOMOUS BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



§ 30.45  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   (A)   It is the intent of the Council to confirm the existence of
existing boards and commissions as part of an overall reorganization of city
government.  However, this chapter is intended to be a codification and
restatement of applicable or corresponding provisions of previous ordinances
repealed.  If this chapter repeals and replaces an ordinance in the same
form or in a restated form, the substantive effect of that ordinance
continues uninterrupted.



   (B)   This chapter does not affect any:  right or liabilities
accrued; penalties incurred; proceedings begun; or terms of board or
commission members commenced before the effective date of this chapter. 
Such rights, liabilities, penalties, proceedings, and terms of office shall
continue unaffected unless specifically excepted herein.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.46  VARIOUS AUTONOMOUS BOARDS, COMMISSIONS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There shall be established in the city the following
autonomous boards and commissions which shall constitute a separate branch of
the government of the city.



      (1)   Board of Cemetery Trustees



      (2)   Traffic Commission



      (3)   Plan Commission



      (4)   Board of Zoning Appeals



      (5)   Kokomo Historic Review Board



      (6)   Kokomo and Howard County Coordinating Council



      (7)   Kokomo Housing Authority



      (8)   Kokomo-Howard County Civil Defense



      (9)   Kokomo Human Rights Commission



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
addition or termination of boards and commissions as may be necessary and
appropriate after passage of this chapter.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.47  BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES.



   There is established a Board of Cemetery Trustees.  The composition,
procedures, powers, and duties of the Board of Cemetery Trustees shall be
those set out in § 92.01(A) through (J) of the city code, and as provided by
state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Board of Cemetery Trustees, see IC 23-14-65-1 et seq.



§ 30.48  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   Establishment.  There is established a Traffic Commission.



   (B)   Composition.  The Traffic Commission shall consist of the
Head of the City Police Department Accident Investigation Division; the Chief
of Police, or, in his absence, the Assistant Chief of Police; a member of the
Common Council of the city chosen by the Council; the Corporation Counsel;
the City Civil Engineer; a member appointed by the Mayor, with such member
being a city resident and serving for a term of one year; and a member
appointed by the Council, with such member being a city resident, and serving
for a term of one year.



   (C)   Chairman.  The members of the Traffic Commission shall
annually elect one of its members to serve as the Commission's chairman.



   (D)   Compensation.  The members of the Traffic Commission shall
serve without compensation.



   (E)   Powers and duties.  It shall be the duty of the Traffic
Commission to coordinate traffic activities, carry on educational activities
in traffic matters, supervise the preparation and  publication of traffic
reports, receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to
recommend to the Common Council ways and means for improving traffic
conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations.



      (1)   The Traffic Commission may determine and designate by
proper signs, distances not exceeding 90 feet at places where the stopping of
any vehicle would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause
unusual delay to traffic.



      (2)   The Traffic Commission may make temporary rules
regarding traffic or intersection control devices under actual conditions of
traffic.  No such temporary rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect
for more than 30 days.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



§ 30.49  PLAN COMMISSION.



   There is established a Plan Commission.  The composition, proceedings,
powers, and duties of the Plan Commission shall be those set out in §§
154.05 and 154.06 through 154.17 of the city code and state law.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal plan commissions, see IC 36-7-4-200 et seq.



§ 30.50  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment.  Under the provisions of applicable state law
and Ordinance 5067, the Board of Zoning Appeals, as established by Ordinance
5067, is continued, and shall be maintained as to membership in accordance
with such ordinance.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have
those powers and duties specified by applicable state law and the Zoning
Ordinance as adopted by reference and on file in the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   Enforcement.  Enforcement of rulings of the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be carried out pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



Statutory reference:



   Board of Zoning Appeals, see IC 36-7-4-900 et seq.



§ 30.51  KOKOMO AND HOWARD COUNTY GOVERNMENTAL COORDINATING COUNCIL.



   (A)   Establishment.  There is established the Kokomo and Howard
County Governmental Coordinating Council which shall have as its purpose the
operation of a continuing, cooperative, and comprehensive planning and
coordinating effort for the City of Kokomo and Howard County in all areas of
mutual concern relating to transportation, planning, and any other
governmental functions where joint cooperation is necessary and desired.



   (B)   Operation.  The composition, proceedings, powers, and duties
of the Kokomo and Howard County Governmental Coordinating Council shall be as
set out in state statute and §§ 33.41 through 33.47 of the city code.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5645, passed 7-25-88)



Statutory reference:



   Interlocal cooperation, see IC 36-1-7-1 et seq.



§ 30.52  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   There is established the Human Rights Commission, which shall report
directly to the Mayor.  The composition, proceedings, powers, and duties of
the Human Rights Commission shall be as set out in state law and §§ 33.10;
33.11; 33.12; 33.13; 33.14; 33.15; 33.17; 33.18; 33.19; and 33.20 of the city
code.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03)



§ 30.53  KOKOMO HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   There is established the Kokomo Housing Authority.  The composition,
proceedings, powers, and duties of the Kokomo Housing Authority shall be as
set out in state law (IC 36-7-18-1 et seq.) and local ordinance.



(Ord. 5289, passed 8-29-83)



CHAPTER 30A:  COMMON COUNCIL



Section



General Provisions



   30A.01   Term of office



   30A.02   Councilmanic districts



   30A.03   Public meetings required



   30A.04   Regular meetings



   30A.05   Special meetings



   30A.06   Presiding officer



   30A.07   Chief of Police to attend meetings



   30A.08   Minutes



   30A.09   Expenditure of funds



Procedure



   30A.20   Adoption of Robert’s Rules



   30A.21   Order of business



   30A.22   Matters to be submitted to City Clerk



   30A.23   Quorum



   30A.24   Call to order



   30A.25   Standing committees



   30A.26   Select committees



   30A.27   Passing ordinance on day introduced



   30A.28   Number of readings required



   30A.29   Passing ordinance to next reading



   30A.30   Overriding veto of Mayor



Cross-reference:



   Common Council as legislative branch of city, see §§ 30.30 through
30.36



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30A.01  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The members of the Common Council shall serve for a term of four years
with the term commencing from the hour of 12:00 noon on the first Monday in
January following their election and continuing until their successors are
elected and qualified.



('75 Code, § 2-51)



§ 30A.02  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   As used in this section: “CITY” refers to the City of
Kokomo; “COUNCIL” refers to Common Council of the city; “PRECINCT”
refers to the precinct as established by the Board of Commissioners of the
County of Howard as approved by the State Election Board.



   (B)   The Council is composed of nine members. Six members are
elected from the districts established under this section. Three members of
the Council are elected at large by the voters of the whole city.



   (C)   The Council divides the city into the following districts for
conducting elections of the Council members:



      (1)   District One - that part of the city located in
Precincts 1 Clay 1, 1 Clay 2, 1 Howard 1, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107,
108, 109 and 110.



      (2)   District Two - that part of the city located in
Precincts 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206 and 207.



      (3)   District Three - that part of the city located in
Precincts 3 Howard 1, 3 Taylor 1, 3 Taylor 2, 3 Taylor 3, 3 Taylor 4, 301,
302, 303, 304, 305, 306 and 3 Harrison 1.



      (4)   District Four - that part of the city located in
Precincts 401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406 and 4 Taylor 1.



      (5)   District Five - that part of the city located in
Precincts 501, 502, 503, 5 Taylor 1, 5 Harrison 1 and 5 Harrison 2.



      (6)   District Six - that part of the city located in
Precincts 6 Harrison 1, 6 Harrison 2, 601, 602, 603, 604 and 605.



   (D)   The Council adopts a map depicting the districts established
under this section and incorporates the map by reference into this section. 
Two copies of this map are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public
inspection as required by IC 36-1-5-4.  If a conflict exists between the
districts as depicted on the map and described in this section, the
description in this section prevails.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall forward a signed copy of this section to
the Clerk of Howard County and shall request the Clerk to include the copy of
this section in the records of the Howard County Election Board.



(Ord. 5853, passed 12-14-92; Am. Ord. 6779, passed 11-6-14; Am. Ord. 6802, As
Amended, passed 6-29-15)



Statutory reference:



   Councilmanic districts, see IC 36-4-6-2 through 36-4-6-5



§ 30A.03  PUBLIC MEETINGS REQUIRED.



   All meetings of the Common Council shall be public.



('75 Code, § 2-53)



Statutory reference:



   Indiana open door law, see IC 5-14-1.5-1 et seq.



   Public meetings required, see IC 36-4-6-7



§ 30A.04  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The members-elect of the Common Council shall hold their first regular
meeting on the first Monday in January after their election at 7:30 p.m. in
the Council chamber.  Thereafter the Common Council shall meet on the second
and last Monday of each month, except that when the regular scheduled meeting
occurs on a legal holiday or if the last Monday  in any  given month  is
also  the last  day of  the  month,  the regular  meeting shall be 
held  on the  previous  Monday  of  that particular month or at such
other time as the Council may direct.



('75 Code, § 2-54) (Ord. 4157, passed 12-11-72)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see IC 36-4-6-7



§ 30A.05  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Common Council shall be held on the
call of the Mayor, or the presiding officer of the Common Council, or any six
of its members-elect.



   (B)   All such calls shall be in writing and when issued shall be
sealed with the city seal and attested to with the signature of the City
Clerk and shall separately enumerate the purposes for which the meeting is
being called.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall thereupon issue certified copies of the
call to the Chief of Police who shall serve them personally on each member of
the Common Council.



   (D)   The Chief of Police shall make a return of the service of the
notice of the call to the City Clerk and such notice and service shall then
be made a part of the minutes of such special meeting.



('75 Code, § 2-55)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see IC 36-4-6-7



§ 30A.06  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Common Council at its first meeting shall choose from among its
members a presiding officer and a presiding officer pro tempore, both of whom
shall serve until noon of the first Monday in January of the next succeeding
year when their respective successors shall be chosen to serve for one year
in a like manner.



('75 Code, § 2-56)



Statutory reference:



   Presiding officer, see IC 36-4-6-8



§ 30A.07  CHIEF OF POLICE TO ATTEND MEETINGS.



   The Chief of Police or an officer or patrolman chosen by him shall
attend all meetings of the Common Council, and the officer or patrolman
attending such Council meeting shall be the sergeant-at-arms of such meeting
to preserve order and carry out all orders of the presiding officer.



('75 Code, § 2-57)



§ 30A.08  MINUTES.



   The City Clerk shall mail the minutes of all meetings of the Common
Council to each Councilman prior to its next regular meeting.



('75 Code, § 2-58)



§ 30A.09  EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.



   (A)   The Common Council is authorized to appropriate from the
various funds of the city sums devoted to improve the operations of the
various departments of the city and to promote the betterment of the
municipality.



   (B)   The appropriations may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Expenses incurred in the promotion of economic or
industrial development for the municipality including meeting room rental,
decorations, preparation of displays or promotional materials, rental of
booth space, meals, and travel.



      (2)   Commemorative plaques, certificates, or objects such as
commemorative keys.



      (3)   Other purposes which are deemed by the Mayor or the
Common Council to directly relate to the promotion or betterment of the city.



      (4)   Membership dues for the city and the elected and
appointed officials and members of the municipality's boards, council,
departments, or agencies in local, regional, state, and national associations
of a civic, educational, or governmental nature, which have as their purpose
the betterment and improvement of municipal operations.



      (5)   Tuitional fees for training sessions, seminars, or other
educational programs which have as their purpose the betterment and
improvement of municipal operations and necessary travel expenses.



      (6)   Direct expenses for travel, meals, and lodging in
conjunction with municipal business or meetings of organizations to which the
municipality belongs.



(Ord. 5275, passed 5-9-83)



PROCEDURE



§ 30A.20  ADOPTION OF ROBERT'S RULES.



   For the purpose of governing meetings of the Common Council and any
committees thereof, there is adopted that certain publication known as
Robert's Rules of Order, newly revised, to the extent the same is not in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter.  Two copies of this
publication are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection.



('75 Code, § 2-66)



Statutory reference:



   Power of Common Council to prescribe its rules, see IC 36-3-4-18



§ 30A.21  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   All items of business at meetings of the Common Council shall be
considered in the order of their appearance on an agenda prepared by the City
Clerk and approved by the presiding officer of the Common Council in advance
of the meetings.



('75 Code, § 2-67) (Ord. 3948, passed 7-8-68)



§ 30A.22  MATTERS TO BE SUBMITTED TO CITY CLERK.



   All matters to be considered by the Common Council at one of its
regular meetings shall be submitted to the City Clerk not later than noon on
the Thursday previous to it.



('75 Code, § 2-68) (Ord. 3948, passed 7-8-68)



§ 30A.23  QUORUM.



   A majority of the members-elect of the Common Council shall constitute
a quorum.



('75 Code, § 2-69)



§ 30A.24  CALL TO ORDER.



   The presiding officer of the Common Council shall take the chair
precisely at the hour fixed for the opening of the meeting and shall
immediately call the Common Council to order on the appearance of a quorum.



('75 Code, § 2-70)



§ 30A.25  STANDING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise especially ordered by the Common
Council, the presiding officer shall appoint the following standing
committees:



      (1)   Finance.



      (2)   Public works and improvements.



      (3)   Public safety and welfare.



      (4)   Resolutions.



   (B)   Composition.  Unless otherwise ordered by the Common Council,
each standing committee of the Common Council shall consist of not less than
three members.



   (C)   Appointments.  All appointments to standing committees of the
Common Council shall be made at the first meeting in January of any year, or
as soon thereafter as possible, unless specifically ordered otherwise by the
Common Council.



   (D)   Chairman.  The first named member of each standing committee
of the Common Council shall be the chairman, and in his absence or being
excused by the Council, the next named member, and so on, as often as the
case may happen, unless the committee by a majority of its number elect a
chairman, and in case of the death of a chairman, the presiding officer shall
appoint another.



   (E)   Meetings.  It shall be the duty of a standing committee of
the Common Council to meet on the call of any two of its members in case its
chairman is absent or declines to appoint a time for such meetings.



('75 Code, §§ 2-71 through 2-75)



§ 30A.26  SELECT COMMITTEES.



   (A)   Generally.  The presiding officer of the Common Council shall
appoint all select committees of the Common Council which the Council may
order from time to time.



   (B)   Longevity.  A select committee when its report is disposed of
and if it has no other business shall stand dissolved without the necessity
of a motion, but an affirmative vote on recommitment of any matter to the
committee shall have the effect of reviving the committee.



('75 Code, §§ 2-76 and 2-77)



§ 30A.27  PASSING ORDINANCE ON DAY INTRODUCED.



   No ordinance shall be passed by the Common Council on the same day, or
at the same meeting that it is introduced, except by unanimous consent, and
then only in case there are present and voting at least  two-thirds of all
the members-elect of the Common Council.



('75 Code, § 2-78)



Statutory reference:



   Passage of ordinance on day introduced, see IC 36-4-6-13



§ 30A.28  NUMBER OF READINGS REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided, each ordinance shall be read two times
before the Common Council votes on whether or not to enact it into law.



('75 Code, § 2-79) (Am. Ord. 6666, passed 4-9-12)



Statutory reference:



   Ordinance enactment, see IC 36-4-6-14



§ 30A.29  PASSING ORDINANCE TO NEXT READING.



   A vote of the majority of the duly elected members of the Common
Council present, provided there is a quorum, shall be required to advance or
pass an ordinance on any reading.



('75 Code, § 2-80)



Statutory reference:



   Majority vote for passage, see IC 36-3-4-10 and 36-4-6-11



§ 30A.30  OVERRIDING VETO OF MAYOR.



   No ordinance, order, or resolution of the Common Council which has been
vetoed by the Mayor shall become a law unless at its next regular meeting
after the time named for the Mayor's action, the Common Council shall again
pass the same by a two-thirds vote of the members-elect.



('75 Code, § 2-81)



Statutory reference:



   Veto by Mayor, see IC 36-3-4-16 and 36-4-6-16



CHAPTER 31:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Qualifications



   31.02   Oath



   31.03   Bond



   31.04   Vacancy in office



   31.05   Filling vacancies



   31.06   Surrender of office



   31.07   Handling funds



Mayor



   31.10   Head of executive branch of city



Deputy Mayor



   31.15   Establishment



City Clerk



   31.20   Establishment



   31.21   Term of office



   31.22   Powers and duties



City Controller



   31.25   Establishment



City Civil Engineer



   31.35   Establishment



Council Attorney



   31.40   Establishment



Development Director



   31.45   Establishment



   31.46   Duties



Other Officials



   31.50   Affirmative Action Director



   31.51   Director of Planning, Development, and Engineering Services



   31.52   Corporation Counsel



   31.53   Commissioner of Buildings



   31.54   Fire Chief



   31.55   Inspector of Weights and Measures



   31.56   Personnel Director



   31.57   Police Chief



   31.58   Street Commissioner



   31.59   Superintendent of Parks and Recreation



   31.60   City Electrician



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person shall be eligible
to any city office unless he shall have been a resident of the city or an
area being annexed thereto for at least one year immediately preceding his
selection.



('75 Code, § 2-16)



Statutory reference:



   Residency requirement, see IC 36-4-5-2 and 36-4-6-2



§ 31.02  OATH.



   Every elected or appointed officer of the city before entering on the
duties of his office, shall take and subscribe an oath, to be endorsed on his
certificate of election or certificate of appointment as appropriate, before
the City Clerk or some other officer authorized to administer oaths, that he
will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of Indiana, and that he will faithfully discharge all his official
duties.  The oath shall also be filed with the City Clerk.



('75 Code, § 2-17)



Statutory reference:



   Oath, see IC 5-4-l-l.2 and 5-4-l-4



§ 31.03  BOND.



   Except as otherwise provided by state law, every city officer, except
the Mayor and members of the Common Council shall execute a bond, to the
approval of the Mayor in such penal sum as the Common Council may enact by
ordinance covering such cases, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties of his office and for the payment to the proper person of moneys
received by him as such officer.



('75 Code, § 2-18)



Statutory reference:



   Bond, see IC 5-4-1-8 and 5-4-1-9



§ 31.04  VACANCY IN OFFICE.



   Except as otherwise provided by state law, any city officer who shall
not file the required oath of office, or oath and bond of office, as the case
may be, with the proper officer within ten days after the beginning of the
term for which he shall have been elected or appointed shall be deemed to
have refused to serve, and the office shall be deemed to be vacant.



('75 Code, § 2-19)



Statutory reference:



   Removal for failure to file oath or bond, see IC 5-4-1-1.2 and 5-4-1-9



§ 31.05  FILLING VACANCIES.



   All vacancies in any city office shall be filed in the manner provided
by law.



('75 Code, § 2-20)



Statutory reference:



   Filling vacancies, see IC 3-13-8



§ 31.06  SURRENDER OF OFFICE.



   Every city officer or employee, on the termination of his employment or
service as such, whether by resignation or otherwise, shall surrender to his
successor in office all the effects of his office or position.



('75 Code, § 2-21)



§ 31.07 HANDLING FUNDS



   Except as provided otherwise, every city official shall turn over at
least once each week all moneys coming into his hands which are the property
of the city.



('75 Code, § 2-22)



MAYOR



§ 31.10  HEAD OF EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF CITY.



   For provisions concerning the Mayor, see § 30.10.



DEPUTY MAYOR



§ 31.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For Provisions concerning the Deputy Mayor, see § 30.21.



CITY CLERK



§ 31.20  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the City Clerk, see § 30.36.



§ 31.21  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The City Clerk shall serve for a term of office of four years with the
term commencing from the hour of 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January
following his election and continuing until his successor in office is
elected and qualified.



('75 Code, § 2-110)



Statutory reference:



   Election of City Clerk; term of office, see IC 36-4-10-2



§ 31.22  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Clerk shall have the powers and duties provided by state law,
and in addition shall have such powers and duties as may be provided by this
code.



('75 Code, § 2-111)



Statutory reference:



   City Clerk as Clerk of Council, see IC 36-4-6-9



   Deputies and employees, see IC 36-4-11-4



   Powers and duties, see IC 36-4-10-4



CITY CONTROLLER



§ 31.25  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the City Controller, see § 30.13.



CITY CIVIL ENGINEER



§ 31.35  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the City Civil Engineer, see§ 30.15(D).



COUNCIL ATTORNEY



§ 31.40  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Council Attorney, see § 30.35.



DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR



§ 31.45  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Development Director, see § 30.20(B).



(Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97)



Cross-reference:



   Planning and development, see Ch. 154



§ 31.46  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Development Director to coordinate capital
improvements in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and to advise the Mayor on
such other matters as the Mayor deems proper.



('75 Code, § 2-181) (Ord. 4225, passed 8-13-73)



OTHER OFFICIALS



§ 31.50  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION DIRECTOR.



   Provisions regarding the Affirmative Action Director are contained in
§ 30.14.



§ 31.51  DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING, TRAFFIC AND INSPECTION SERVICES.



   Provisions regarding the Director of Engineering, Traffic and
Inspection Services are contained in § 30.15(B).



§ 31.52  CORPORATION COUNSEL.



   Provisions regarding the Corporation Counsel are contained in § 30.12.



§ 31.53  COMMISSIONER OF BUILDINGS.



   Provisions regarding the Commissioner of Buildings are contained in §
30.15(E)(3).



§ 31.54  FIRE CHIEF.



   Provisions regarding the Fire Chief are contained in § 30.18(C).



§ 31.55  INSPECTOR OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.



   Provisions regarding the Inspector of Weights and Measures are
contained in § 30.18(D).



§ 31.56  PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.



   Provisions regarding the Personnel Director are contained in § 30.14.



§ 31.57  POLICE CHIEF.



   Provisions regarding the Police Chief are contained in § 30.18(B).



§ 31.58  STREET COMMISSIONER.



   Provisions regarding the Street Commissioner are contained in §
30.18(F).



§ 31.59  SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   Provisions regarding the Superintendent of Parks and Recreation are
contained in § 30.17.



§ 31.60  CITY ELECTRICIAN.



   Provisions regarding the City Electrician are contained in §
30.15(F)(3).



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS



Section



Fire Department



   32.01   Established



   32.02   Establishment of position of Fire Chief



   32.03   Membership



   32.04   Pension Fund and Trustees



Police Department



   32.10   Establishment



Department of Aviation



   32.20   Established



   32.21   Board of Aviation Commissioners



   32.22   Eligibility



   32.23   Appointments and terms



   32.24   Oath



   32.25   Removal of members



   32.26   Filling vacancies



   32.27   Meetings



   32.28   Quorum; voting



   32.29   Officers



   32.30   Fuel and Lubricants Rotary Fund



Department of Law



   32.40   Established



Department of Parks and Recreation



   32.50   Established; composition



   32.51   Board of Parks and Recreation



   32.52   Advisory Council; special committees



   32.53   Budget; gifts



Additional Departments



   32.60   Department of Public Works and Safety



   32.61   Department of Economic Development



   32.62   Department of Finance



   32.63   Department of Personnel



   32.64   Department of Streets



   32.65   Sanitation Department



Cross-reference:



   Department of Redevelopment, see § 154.01



   Labor relations, see § 38.01



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.01  ESTABLISHED.



   There is established a Fire Department, as set forth in § 30.18(C).



('75 Code, § 10-29)



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish firefighting unit, see IC 36-8-2-3



§ 32.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION OF FIRE CHIEF.



   For provisions concerning the position of Fire Chief, see § 30.18(C).



§ 32.03  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Any person desiring a position in the Fire Department shall
file a written application, approved in form by the Fire Chief, stating his
residence, the names of his dependents, his physical condition, and such
other information as may be required by the Board of Public Works and Safety
or the Fire Chief.  ('75 Code, § 10-33)



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety and the Fire Chief shall
investigate every applicant to be a fireman, and shall have the applicant
take a physical examination, and shall inquire into and determine his fitness
to be a fireman.  ('75 Code, § 10-34)



   (C)   No person under the age of 21 years or over the age of 35
years, shall become a fireman or assistant fireman in the Fire Department. 
('75 Code, § 10-35)



   (D)   No person shall be appointed to be a member of the Fire
Department who is not of good character.  ('75 Code, § 10-36)



Statutory reference:



   Residence requirement, see IC 36-8-4-2



§ 32.04  PENSION FUND AND TRUSTEES.



   A Firemen's Pension Fund and a Board of Trustees of the Firemen's
Pension Fund are established under the provisions of IC 36-8-7-1 et seq.



('75 Code, § 10-37)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.10  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Police Department, see § 30.18(B).



DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION



§ 32.20  ESTABLISHED.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Aviation, see § 30.16.



§ 32.21  BOARD OF AVIATION COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   There is established a Board of Aviation Commissioners. ('75
Code, § 2-214)



   (B)   The Board of Aviation Commissioners shall consist of four
members.  ('75 Code, § 2-215)



   (C)   Political affiliation.  No more than two members of the Board
of Aviation Commissioners shall be of the same political party. ('75 Code, §
2-216)



Statutory reference:



   Composition, see IC 8-22-2-1



§ 32.22  ELIGIBILITY.



   To be eligible to be a member of the Board of Aviation Commissioners, a
person must:



   (A)   Be at least 18 years of age;



   (B)   Be a resident of Howard County;



   (C)   Not be actively engaged or employed as:



      (1)   A principal owner;



      (2)   A majority member or majority shareholder;



      (3)   A director;



      (4)   An officer; or



      (5)   An employee with managerial or supervisory
responsibilities;



of any entity engaged in commercial aeronautics;



   (D)   Not hold any other governmental office (by appointment or
election) that has statutory fiscal or management review of the Board’s
actions;



   (E)   Not serve as a member of any other agency, board, commission,
department, or other governmental entity that:



      (1)   Is located within the jurisdiction of the department of
aviation; and



      (2)   Has statutory fiscal or management review of the
Board’s actions.



(IC 8-22-2-2)



§ 32.23  APPOINTMENTS AND TERMS.



   (A)   The members of the Board of Aviation Commissioners shall be
appointed by the Mayor.  ('75 Code, § 2-218)



   (B)   The terms of the members of the Board of Aviation
Commissioners shall be for four years and until their respective successors
in office are appointed and qualified.  ('75 Code, § 2-219)



Statutory reference:



   Appointments and terms, see IC 8-22-2-1 and 8-22-2-3



§ 32.24  OATH.



   (A)   Each member of the Board of Aviation Commissioners before
entering on his duties shall take and subscribe the usual oath of office, to
be indorsed on the certificate of his appointment, and shall cause the same
to be filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Any person who shall not file such oath with the City Clerk
within 30 days after the beginning of the term for which he has been
appointed, or at the date of his appointment, if appointed after the
beginning of such term, shall be deemed to have refused to serve and the
office shall become vacant.



('75 Code, § 2-220)



Statutory reference:



   Oath of office, see IC 8-22-2-1



§ 32.25  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   The Mayor may, at any time, remove any Aviation Commissioners from
office, but only on his filing in writing with the City Clerk his reasons for
such removal.



('75 Code, § 2-221)



Statutory reference:



   Removal of members, see IC 8-22-2-3



§ 32.26  FILLING VACANCIES.



   If any vacancy should occur in the membership of the Board of Aviation
Commissioners by resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint a person
to fill the residue of the vacant term.



('75 Code, § 2-222)



Statutory reference:



   Filling vacancies, see IC 8-22-2-3



§ 32.27  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board of Aviation Commissioners shall fix a time for
holding its regular meetings.  ('75 Code, § 2-223)



   (B)   Special meetings of the Board of Aviation Commissioners may be
called at any time by its president, or by any two of its members, on a
written request to the secretary.  Whenever in the opinion of its president,
or of any two members, a special meeting is necessary or advisable, he or
they shall cause the secretary to notify the members by mailing written
notice of the time of such meeting, at least one day before such meeting. 
Any member may waive such notice in writing and the presence of any member at
a special meeting shall be deemed a waiver of such notice.  ('75 Code, §
2-224)



   (C)   All meetings of the Board of Aviation Commissioners shall be
open to the public.  ('75 Code, § 2-225)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see IC 8-22-2-4



§ 32.28  QUORUM; VOTING.



   (A)   A majority of the members of the Board of Aviation
Commissioners shall constitute a quorum, but no action of the Board shall be
binding unless authorized by a majority of its members at a regular or duly
called special meeting thereof.  ('75 Code, § 2-226)



   (B)   In the case of a tie vote of the members of the Board of
Aviation Commissioners on any question, the Mayor shall decide the issue. 
('75 Code, § 2-227)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum; voting, see IC 8-22-2-4



§ 32.29  OFFICERS.



   The Board of Aviation Commissioners shall choose, annually, at its
first regular meeting in January, one of its members president and another of
its members vice-president, who shall perform the duties of the president
during the absence or disability of the president.



('75 Code, § 2-228)



Statutory reference:



   Officers, see IC 8-22-2-4



§ 32.30  FUEL AND LUBRICANTS ROTARY FUND.



   (A)   Establishment of Rotary Fund.  Pursuant to the provisions of
IC 8-22-2-7(c) there is created within the Department of Aviation a Fuel and
Lubricants Rotary Fund to be used exclusively for the purchase of fuels and
lubricants to be sold to the general public in the operation of the airport.



   (B)   Funding.  The Rotary Fund established in division (A) hereof
shall be funded by separate appropriations or transfers as maybe authorized
from time to time by the Common Council as a fiscal body.



   (C)   Accounting procedures for monies received.  All funds
received from the sale of fuels and lubricants purchased with Rotary Fund
monies shall be turned over to the Office of the City Controller at least
once a month for deposit into the Fuel and Lubricants Rotary Fund.  Such
funds shall be disbursed by the Board of Aviation Commissioners solely for
the purpose of purchasing fuels and lubricants for sale to the public in the
operation of the airport.



   (D)   Annual reconciliation.  At the end of each fiscal year, the
Board of Aviation Commissioners shall make a detailed report to the Common
Council, as fiscal body, showing the amount of money received and paid over
to the Controller to the credit of the Fuel and Lubricants Rotary Fund, and
also showing the amount and value of fuels and lubricants on hand.



   (E)   Treatment of excess funds.  If at the end of the fiscal year
the accumulated Fuel and Lubricants Rotary Fund balance, plus the value of
inventory of fuels and lubricants on hand, exceeds the total previous
appropriation to the fund by 25%, the excess shall be transferred to the
General Aviation Fund.



(Ord. 6415, passed 3-13-06)



DEPARTMENT OF LAW



§ 32.40  ESTABLISHED.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Law, see § 30.12.



DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION



§ 32.50  ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.



   There is established a Department of Parks and Recreation (as described
more particularly in § 30.17) composed of the Board of Parks and Recreation,
a Superintendent, and such other personnel as the Board shall determine.



(Ord. 4483, passed 3-8-76)



Cross reference:



   Parks and Recreation, see Ch. 96



Statutory reference:



   Park and Recreation Law, see IC 36-10-3-l et seq.



§ 32.51  BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   The Board shall be composed of four members, and a member of
the Board of School Trustees, and the Library Board ex officio.  The Mayor
shall select the regular members on the basis of their interest in and
knowledge of parks and recreation but not more than two members shall be of
the same political party.  The ex officio members shall be selected by their
respective boards.



   (B)   On the establishment of a Board, the terms of the members
initially appointed shall be one, two, three, and four years. Thereafter as a
term expires, each new appointment shall be for a four- year term.  All
terms shall expire on the first Monday of January, but an appointee shall
continue in office until his successor is appointed.



   (C)   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall
elect a president and a vice-president shall have authority to act as the
president of the Board during the absence or disability of the president.



   (D)   The Board shall have the general power to perform all acts
necessary to acquire and develop sites and facilities to conduct such
programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation functions,
including powers and duties listed in IC 36-10-3-10 through 36-10-3-12.



(Ord. 4483, passed 3-8-76)



§ 32.52  ADVISORY COUNCIL; SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   The Board may create an Advisory Council and special committees
composed of citizens interested in the problems of parks and recreation in
accordance with IC 36-10-3-17.



(Ord. 4483, passed 3-8-76)



§ 32.53  BUDGET; GIFTS.



   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of the city government.  The Board may accept gifts,
donations, and subsidies for park and recreation purposes.



(Ord. 4483, passed 3-8-76)



ADDITIONAL DEPARTMENTS



§ 32.60  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Public Works and Safety,
see § 30.18.



§ 32.61  DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Economic Development, see
§ 30.19.



§ 32.62  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Finance, see § 30.13.



§ 32.63  DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Personnel, see § 30.14.



§ 32.64  DEPARTMENT OF STREETS.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Streets, see § 30.18(F).



§ 32.65  SANITATION DEPARTMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Sanitation Department, see § 30.18(E).



CHAPTER 33:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Board of Public Works and Safety



   33.01   Establishment



   33.02   Claims against city



   33.03   Claim payments in advance



Human Rights Commission



   33.10   Definitions



   33.11   Establishment



   33.12   Members



   33.13   Filling vacancies



   33.14   Meetings



   33.15   Majority vote required



   33.16   Officers



   33.17   Principal office; expense of Commission



   33.18   Unlawful discriminatory practices



   33.19   Powers and duties



   33.20   Procedure; enforcement



   33.21   Exceptions under disabled provisions



   33.22   Penalties



   33.23   Judicial review



   33.24   City employment and city contracts; contractors



   33.25   Pending actions



   33.26   Referral



   33.27   Relations with city departments



Kokomo City Hall Citizen's Review Commission



   33.30   Establishment; members



   33.31   Meetings; compensation



   33.32   Duties and responsibilities



   33.33   Board of Public Works and Safety approval required



   33.34   Relationship of Kokomo City Hall Building Corporation



   33.35   Emergency repairs



Kokomo and Howard County Governmental Coordinating Council



   33.40   Purpose



   33.41   Organization



   33.42   Composition and nature



   33.43   Functions of the Policy Board



   33.44   Powers of the Policy Board



   33.45   Manner of financing



   33.46   Budget



   33.47   Duration; termination



Additional Boards and Commissions



   33.50   Board of Cemetery Trustees



   33.51   Board of Zoning Appeals



   33.52   Board of Parks and Recreation



   33.53   Board of Aviation Commissioners



   33.54   Bureau of Fire Prevention



   33.55   Economic Development Commission



   33.56   Historic Review Board



   33.57   Kokomo Housing Authority



   33.58   Kokomo-Howard County Civil Defense Organization



   33.59   Plan Commission



   33.60   Traffic Commission



Kokomo Community Arts Commission



   33.75   Establishment



   33.76   Purpose



   33.77   Composition; term



   33.78   Organization



   33.79   Grants to the arts administered by Board of Public Works and
Safety



   33.80   Duties



Cross-reference:



   Affirmative Action Director, see § 34.03



   Building Inspector, see § 150.16



   City Electrician, see § 150.17



   City Traffic Supervisor, see § 70.17



   Department of Development, see § 154.20



   Department of Redevelopment, see § 154.01



   Street Commissioner, see § 97.01



   Sewer Engineer, see § 50.02



BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Board of Public Works and Safety, see §
30.18.



§ 33.02  CLAIMS AGAINST CITY.



   (A)   The Common Council delegates to the Board of Public Works and
Safety the authority to review and approve or disapprove claims made against
the city and in the case of approval, to authorize issuance of warrants for
the payment of the claims.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to delegate to the
Board the authority to approve or disapprove claims which by law are required
to be approved or disapproved by another entity or governing board.



   (C)   The  Board shall consider  and act upon claims as part of
its regular agenda, or at special meetings, provided that all the special
meetings are in compliance with applicable state statutes concerning the
meetings.



(Ord. 5274, passed 4-25-83)



§ 33.03  CLAIM PAYMENTS IN ADVANCE.



   (A)   With the prior written approval of the municipal board having
jurisdiction over the allowance of claims, the City Controller may make claim
payments in advance of board allowance for the following kinds of expenses:



      (1)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United
States government, its agencies, or its political subdivisions.



      (2)   License or permit fees.



      (3)   Insurance premiums.



      (4)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.



      (5)   General grant programs where advance funding is not
prohibited and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the
amount advanced.



      (6)   Grants of state funds authorized by statute.



      (7)   Maintenance or service agreements.



      (8)   Leases or rental payments.



      (9)   Bond or coupon payments.



      (10)   Payroll.



      (11)   State, federal, or county taxes.



   (B)   Each payment of expenses authorized by this section must be
supported by a fully itemized claim.



   (C)   The municipal board having jurisdiction over the allowance of
claims shall review and allow the claim at its next regular or special
meeting following the preapproved payment of the expense.



   (D)   By way of example, and not of limitation, the following are
municipal boards having jurisdiction over the allowance of claims:  Board of
Public Works and Safety; Board of Aviation Commissioners; Board of Park
Commissioners; Plan Commission; and Board of Cemetery Trustees.



   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the "prior written approval"
of the various boards having jurisdiction over the allowance of claims shall
be deemed to have been given by passage of a resolution by the respective
board, granting approval for the prepayment of claims by the Controller as
provided at IC 36-4-8-14.  The resolution shall be recorded in the minutes
of the respective board.  The  City  Controller shall keep all such
resolutions on file.  The resolutions shall remain in full force and effect
until revoked by the respective boards.



(Ord. 5863, passed 3-8-93)



Statutory reference:



   Claim payments in advance of board allowance, see IC 36-4-8-14



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 33.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AFFIRMATIVE ACTION."  Those acts that the Commission and the city
determines necessary to assure compliance with the Kokomo Human Rights
Ordinance.



   "COMMISSION."  The Kokomo Human Rights Commission.



   "COMMISSION ATTORNEY."  The City of Kokomo's Corporation Counsel, or
such other attorneys as may be engaged by the Commission.



   "COMPLAINANT."



      (1)   Any individual charging on his own behalf to have been
personally aggrieved by a discriminatory practice; or



      (2)   The person who files a complaint charging that a
discriminatory practice was committed against a person other than himself or
a class of people in order to vindicate the public policy of the City as
defined in this subchapter.



   "COMPLAINT."  Any written grievance filed by a complainant with the
Commission. The original shall be signed and verified before a notary public
or other person authorized by law to administer oaths and take
acknowledgments. Notary service shall be furnished by the Commission without
charge.



   "CONSENT AGREEMENT."  A formal agreement entered into by the parties
in lieu of adjudication.



   "DIRECTOR."  The director of the Kokomo Human Rights Commission.



   "DISABLED" or "DISABILITY."  With respect to an individual:



      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits at least one of the major life activities of the individual;



      (2)   A record of an impairment described in division (1) of
this definition; or



      (3)   Being regarded as having an impairment described in
division (1) of this definition.



   The term does not include current illegal use of or addiction to a
controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances
Act (21 U.S.C. § 802)).



   "DISCRIMINATION."  Any difference in treatment based on race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation,
gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial status, or age and
shall include segregation, except that it shall not be discrimination for any
religious or denominational institution to prefer members of its own religion
or denomination for purposes of employment and housing.



   "DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE."



      (1)   The exclusion of a person from equal opportunities or a
system which excludes persons from equal opportunity in employment,
education, public conveniences, and accommodations because of race, religion,
color, sex, familial status, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, or age;



      (2)   The refusal to sell or rent after the making of a bona
fide offer; the refusal to negotiate for the sale or rental or otherwise
making unavailable or denying, or otherwise discriminating against any person
in the terms, conditions, privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in
providing services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a
dwelling because of a person's race, religion, color, sex, familial status,
disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
Veteran status, marital status, or age;



      (3)   Advertising for the sale or rental of a dwelling in a
manner that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination because
of race, religion, color, sex, familial status, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital
status, or age;



      (4)   Falsely representing that a dwelling is not available
for inspection, sale or rental based on race, religion, color, sex, familial
status, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, Veteran status, marital status, or age;



      (5)   Coercion, intimidation, threats, or interference with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise of enjoyment of any right granted
or protected by the provisions of this chapter;



      (6)   Blockbusting based on representations regarding the
entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a
particular race, religion, color, sex, familial status, disability, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, Veteran status,
marital status, or age;



      (7)   Discrimination because of race, religion, color, sex,
familial status, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, or age by persons or
entities whose business includes engaging in residential real estate
transactions in the making of a loan or the granting of financial assistance
for residential real estate, in the selling, brokering or appraisal of
residential real estate, or by the denial of access to or participation in a
multiple-listing service or other real estate broker organization or services;



      (8)   The promotion of segregation or separation in any
manner, including but not limited to, the inducing or attempting to induce
for profit any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry in the neighborhood of a person or
persons of a particular race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial
status, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
Veteran status, marital status, or age; or



      (9)   A violation of state statutes relating to civil rights,
age discrimination, fair housing, or employment discrimination against
disabled persons unless specifically exempted by this subchapter or state
statutes.



   "DWELLING."



      (1)   Any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residency by one or more families; or



      (2)   Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building
or structure described by division (1) of this definition.



   "EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION."  All public and private schools and
training centers except those affiliated with religious institutions, only
insofar as they may give preference to members of their religious group in
selecting their students.



   "EMPLOYEE."  Any person employed by another for wages or salary.
However, the term does not include any individual employed:



      (1)   By his or her parents, spouse or child; or



      (2)   In the domestic service of any person.



   "EMPLOYER."  The City of Kokomo, or any department thereof, and any
person employing six or more employees within the city; the term shall not
include:



      (1)   Any bona fide private membership club (other than a
labor organization) which is except from taxation under Section 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954;



      (2)   Any school, educational or charitable institution owned,
conducted by, or affiliated with a church or religious institution; or,



      (3)   Any office, board, commission, department, division,
bureau, committee, fund, agency, and, without limitation by reason of any
enumeration herein, any other instrumentality of the State of Indiana, any
hospital, any penal institution and any other institutional enterprise and
activity of the State of Indiana, wherever located; the universities
supported in whole or in part by State funds; and the Judicial Department of
the State of Indiana.



   "EMPLOYMENT AGENCY."  Any person, corporation, partnership, or
association undertaking with or without compensation to procure, recruit,
refer, or place employees.



   "FAMILIAL STATUS."  The person who is the subject of discrimination is:



      (1)   Pregnant;



      (2)   Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of
age in regard to whom the person:



         (a)   Is the parent or legal custodian; or



         (b)   Has the written permission of the parent or legal
custodian for domicile with that person; or



      (3)   In the process of obtaining legal custody of an
individual younger than 18 years of age.



   "GENDER IDENTITY."  An individual having or being perceived as having
a gender-related self-identity, self-image, appearance, expression or
behavior, regardless of whether it is the same or different from those
characteristics traditionally associated with the individual's assigned sex
at birth.



   "LABOR ORGANIZATION."  Any organization that exists for the purpose,
in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms and conditions of employment, or for other
mutual aid or protection in relation to employment.



   "MARITAL STATUS."  A person's state of being single, married,
separated, divorced, or widowed.



   "PROTECTED CLASS."  Those characteristics of a person that cannot be
targeted for discrimination and include race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
Veteran status, marital status, familial status, and age.



   "PERSON."  One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, labor organizations, cooperatives, legal
representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, unincorporated organizations, receivers, fiduciaries,
and other organized groups of persons.



   “PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION."  Any establishment, organization, or
authority that caters or offers its services or facilities or goods to the
general public, including, but not limited to, motels, hotels, theatres,
stores, public restaurants, public library services, and public recreational
services and facilities.



   "RELIGIOUS OR DENOMINATIONAL INSTITUTION."  An institution which is
operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious or denominational
organization.



   "RESPONDENT."  Any person against whom a charge is filed.



   "SEX."  As it applies to segregation or separation in this section,
applies to all types of employment, education, public accommodations and
housing. However:



      (1)   It shall not be a discriminatory practice to maintain
separate rest rooms;



      (2)   It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an
employer to hire and employ employees; for an employment agency to classify
or refer for employment any individual; for a labor organization to classify
its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual; or for
an employer, labor organization, or joint labor management committee
controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit
or employ any other individual in any program on the basis of sex in those
certain instances where sex is a bona fide occupational qualification
reasonably necessary to the normal operation of that particular business or
enterprise; and



      (3)   It shall not be a discriminatory practice for a private
or religious educational institution to continue to maintain and enforce a
policy of admitting students of one sex only.



   "SEXUAL ORIENTATION."  An individual's actual or perceived identity or
practice as a lesbian woman, gay man, bisexual person or heterosexual person.



   "TO RENT."  Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, or to otherwise
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant.



   "VETERAN STATUS."



      (1)   A veteran of the armed forces of the United States;



      (2)   A member of the Indiana National Guard; or



      (3)   A member of a reserve component.



('75 Code, § 2-268) (Ord. 3938, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 5925, passed
8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6127, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13- 03; Am.
Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.11  ESTABLISHMENT.



   For provisions concerning the Human Rights Commission, see § 30.53.



(Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.12  MEMBERS.



   (A)   Appointment. The Human Rights Commission shall consist of
seven members, four of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and three of whom
shall be appointed by the Common Council. The Commissioners shall be broadly
representative of the religious, racial, ethnic, economic, educational, and
other groups existing within the community.  ('75 Code, § 2-271)



   (B)   Term. The term of the initial commissioners will be staggered
with three of the commissioners being appointed for three year terms; three
for two year terms; and one with a one year term. All subsequent appointments
will be for a fixed term of office of three years. No commissioner may be
reappointed to the Human Rights Commission until the expiration of one
calendar year from the termination date of their previous appointment.



   (C)   Removal. Members of the Human Rights Commission may be removed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Common Council.  ('75 Code, § 2-274)



   (D)   Compensation. The members of the Human Rights Commission shall
serve without compensation, although they may be reimbursed for out of pocket
expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.  ('75 Code, § 2-275)



(Ord. 3938, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252,
passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.13  FILLING VACANCIES.



   In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of any member of the
Human Rights Commission, a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Common Council to serve for the unexpired period of
the term for which such member had been appointed. Members of the Commission
may be removed by the appointing authority for just cause.



('75 Code, § 2-273) (Ord. 3938, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 5925, passed
8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.14  MEETINGS.



   The Human Rights Commission shall hold one regular meeting each month
and such special meetings as the chairperson may deem necessary.



('75 Code, § 2-276) (Ord. 3938, passed 5-13-68; Am. Ord. 5925, passed
8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.15  MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED.



   A majority vote of all the members of the Human Rights Commission shall
be required for there to be any official action by it.



('75 Code, § 2-277)  (Am. Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed
1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.16  OFFICERS.



   The Human Rights Commission shall elect from its membership once each
year, a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary.



('75 Code, § 2-278)  (Am. Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed
1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.17  PRINCIPAL OFFICE; EXPENSES OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Human Rights Commission shall establish a principal office
in the city, but it may meet and exercise any or all of its powers at any
other place in any part of the city.



   (B)   The expenses for carrying on the Human Rights Commission's
activities shall be budgeted for and paid out of the funds in the city
treasury and appropriated by the Common Council for such purposes pursuant to
the laws of the state.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820,
passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.18  UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the public policy of the City of Kokomo to
provide all of its citizens equal opportunity for education, employment,
access to public conveniences and accommodations, and acquisition through
purchase or rental of real property including, but not limited to, housing,
and to eliminate segregation or separation based on race, religion, color,
sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial status, and age, since
such segregation is an impediment to equal opportunity. Equal education and
employment opportunities and equal access to and use of public accommodations
and equal opportunity for acquisition of real property including, but not
limited to, housing are hereby declared to be civil rights. The exclusion of
a person from or failure or refusal to extend to a person equal opportunities
because of a protected class status or the promotion of racial segregation in
any manner, is hereby declared to be unlawful discriminatory practices and is
hereby declared to be illegal.



   (B)   Prohibited conduct.



      (1)   No person shall discriminate against any other person in
education, employment, access to public conveniences and accommodations based
on a protected class status. Such discrimination or denial of equal
opportunity shall be an unlawful practice.



      (2)   Unlawful discriminatory practices shall include, but are
not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Housing. It is an unlawful discriminatory practice
for a person to violate fair housing provisions as set forth in the City Fair
Housing Code, Chapter 151 of this code of ordinances, adopted by the Common
Council on July 25, 1994, or state or federal statutes regulating fair
housing practices.



         (b)   Financial. It is an unlawful discriminatory
practice for a financial institution or an individual employed by or acting
on behalf of a financial institution as set forth in the city's Fair Housing
Code:



            1.   To use a form of application for financial
assistance or to make or keep a record of inquiry in connection with
applications for financial assistance which indicates directly a limitation,
specification or discrimination as to a protected class status or, an intent
to make such a limitation, specification or discrimination;



            2.   To discriminate on the basis of a protected
class status against any applicant in the fixing of amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of a loan or other financial
assistance, or to make a lower appraisal evaluation because of a protected
class status of any applicant.



         (c)   Employment. It is discrimination for an employer:



            1.   To fail or refuse to hire, promote or
upgrade, or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against
any individuals with respect to their compensation, tenure, terms, conditions
or privileges of employment because of such individual's protected class
status;



            2.   To limit, segregate or classify their
employees in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individuals
of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect their status as an
employee because of such individual's protected class status;



            3.   To publish or cause to be published any
notice or advertisement with respect to employment which indicates any
specification, limitation, preference or discrimination based on an
individual's protected class status; or



            4.   To fail to provide reasonable accommodation
for an otherwise qualified disabled employee or prospective employee, unless
an employer can demonstrate that the accommodation would impose an undue
hardship on the conduct of an employer's business.



         (d)   Labor organizations. It is discrimination for a
labor organization:



            1.   To exclude or to expel from its membership,
or otherwise to discriminate against, any members or applicants for
membership because of his/her protected class status;



            2.   To limit, segregate or classify its
membership, or to classify or fail or refuse to refer for employment any
individuals, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive these
individuals of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect their
status as employees or as applicants for employment because of such
individual's protected class status;



            3.   To cause or attempt to cause an employer to
discriminate against an individual in violation of this action; or



            4.   To discriminate against any individuals or to
limit, segregate or qualify its membership in any way which would tend to
deprive such individuals of employment opportunities, or would limit their
employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affect their status as
employees or as applicants for employment or would affect adversely their
wages, hours of employment conditions because of such individual's protected
class status.



         (e)   Apprenticeship or training. It is an unlawful
discriminatory practice for an employer, labor organization or joint labor
management committee controlling apprenticeship or apprentice training or
retraining, including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against
any individuals because of a protected class status in admission to, or
employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other
training.



         (f)   Employment agencies. It is an unlawful
discriminatory practice for an employment agency to fail or refuse to
classify properly, refer for employment, or otherwise, to discriminate
against any individual because of his/her protected class status, or to
conduct business under a name which directly or indirectly expresses any
limitation, specification, or discrimination, as to a protected class.



         (g)   Public accommodations. It is an unlawful
discriminatory practice for any person who is the owner, lessor, proprietor,
manager, superintendent or employee of any place of public accommodation or
amusement:



            1.   To discriminate against any person because of
such individual's protected class status, by refusing, withholding or denying
to such person any of the services, accommodations or amusement, in any
manner that conflicts with state or federal statutes.



            2.   To publish, circulate, issue, display, post
or mail, directly or indirectly, any written or printed communication, notice
or advertisement to the effect that any of the services, accommodations,
advantages, facilities or privileges of any place of public accommodations or
amusement will be refused, withheld or denied to any person on account of
his/her protected class status, or that the patronage of any person of any
protected class is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable.



         (h)   Educational institutions. It is an unlawful
discriminatory practice for any educational institution to deny admittance to
any prospective student or enrollee, or to deny any service offered by such
institution to any person, otherwise qualified for such service, on the
ground of his/her protected class status.



         (i)   Other unlawful practices.



            1.   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for
any person, including but not limited to, any employer, employment agency,
labor organization, educational institution, financial institution or any
owner or any real estate operator to discharge, expel or penalize any
individuals in any manner because they have filed a complaint, assisted or
participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under
this subchapter.



            2.   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for
any person to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any act
declared unlawful by this subchapter;



            3.   It is an unlawful discriminatory practice for
any person to knowingly obstruct the fair, equal and lawful enforcement of
this subchapter by coercing or intimidating any complainant or prospective
complainant, or any witness to any act made unlawful herein, or by destroying
or altering any records, documents or other evidence relevant to any alleged
unlawful discriminatory practice as defined herein, after such person had
received actual notice of a discrimination complaint or has been served with
notice of a complaint filed.



   (C)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Protections herein against discriminatory practices with
regard to sexual orientation or gender identity shall not apply to decisions
of a person or an employer which is a religious society or order,
association, organization, institution or related entity or business that is
organized under 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code when such protections
affect the definition, advancement of the mission(s), practice(s) or
belief(s) of such religious society or order, association, organization,
institution or related entity or business charged with the implementation of
such decision or decisions, and no requirement of this Article shall compel
any person to act in a manner contrary to that which has been granted
specific protection by the United States Supreme Court in Boy Scouts of
America and Monmouth Council, et al. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000).



      (2)   The protections in this Article against discriminatory
practices regarding sexual orientation or gender identity in employment shall
not be construed to require that health care plans, insurance, pension, or
similar additional benefits provided by employers and benefitting the spouses
of employees be extended to non-married domestic partners of any employee.



      (3)   (a)   The denial of housing rights and opportunities
based on familiar status as prohibited by this article shall not apply to
housing intended for and solely occupied by persons over 62 years of age or
older or which is designed and operated to assist elderly persons under a
federal or state program.



         (b)   If there are persons living in such housing under
age 62, this exception applies provided that:



            1.   All occupants after September 13, 1988 are at
least 62 years old;



            2.   Any unoccupied units are reserved for
occupancy by persons at least 62 years old; and



            3.   Any persons under age 62 occupying said
housing after September 13, 1988 are employees of the housing and their
family members residing in the same unit, and such employees perform
substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the
housing.



      (4)   The determination of whether any housing unit falls
within the exception created by this section shall be made by the Commission
and shall be consistent with any determinations already made by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6127, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6820,
passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.19  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Human Rights Commission shall have the power to:



   (A)   Formulate and promulgate a mission statement embodying the
purposes of the commission, to-wit; promoting diversity and improving quality
of life within the city;



   (B)   Recommend to the Mayor for appointment an executive director,
or such personnel as it may deem necessary, and to prescribe their duties.



   (C)   Adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind such rules and
regulations, procedural and substantive, as may be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and state laws. Such rules and regulations shall
be adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as it may
hereafter be amended.



   (D)   Formulate policies to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and make recommendations to the City to effectuate such policies. The several
departments, commissions, boards, authorities, divisions, and officers of the
city may furnish the Commission, upon its request, all records, papers, and
information in their possession relating to any matter before the Commission.



   (E)   Receive and investigate complaints of discriminatory
practices. The Commission shall not hold hearings in the absence of a
complaint as herein defined. All investigations of complaints shall be
conducted by staff members of the Commission.



   (F)   Issue such publications and such results of investigations and
research which in its judgment will tend to minimize or eliminate
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, Veteran status,
familial status, marital status, or age.



   (G)   Prepare and issue a report annually to the Common Council and
Mayor, describing in detail the investigation and conciliation proceedings it
has conducted and their outcomes, the progress made and any other work
performed and achievements towards the elimination of discrimination.



   (H)   Prevent any person from discharging, expelling or otherwise
discriminating against any other person because he filed a complaint or has
testified in any hearing before this Commission, or has in any way assisted
the Commission in any matter under investigation.



   (I)   Appoint hearing officers, hold hearings, subpoena witnesses,
compel their attendance, administer oaths, take the testimony of any such
person under oath, and require the production for examination of any books
and papers relating to any matter under investigation or in question before
the Commission. The Commission shall have the exclusive power to subpoena,
but it shall consult with the Department of Law concerning the issuance of a
subpoena. The Department of Law may veto the issuance of a subpoena if and
only if such an issuance would be an abuse of the Commission's subpoena
power. Abuse of the Commission's subpoena power shall include, but not be
limited to, use of such subpoena power for harassment purposes, issuance of a
subpoena for information clearly irrelevant to the investigation being
conducted, and issuance of a subpoena for information over an excessively
broad span of time. Contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued pursuant
to this section shall constitute a contempt. All hearings shall be held
within the City of Kokomo at a location determined by the Commission. A
citation of contempt may be issued upon application by the Commission to the
Circuit or Superior Court, or judge thereof, in the county in which the
hearing is held or in which the witness resides or transacts business.



   (J)   Reduce the terms of conciliation agreed to by the parties in a
consent agreement, which the parties and a majority of the Commissioners
shall sign and when so signed, the consent agreement shall have the same
effect as a final decision of the Commission. If the Commission determines
that a party to a consent agreement is not complying with the agreement, the
Commission may obtain enforcement of the consent agreement in a circuit or
superior court upon showing that the party is subject to the Commission's
jurisdiction.



   (K)   Institute actions in the Howard County Superior or Circuit
Court for appropriate or equitable relief.



   (L)   Conduct programs and activities to carry out the public policy
of the State, as provided in state statutes, within the City's territorial
boundaries;



   (M)   Develop and perform such activities as will assist the city's
compliance as a Community Development Block Grant grantee and with federal
regulations and guidelines to affirmatively further fair housing in the city
and keep adequate documentation of such activities;



   (N)   Subject to the provisions of the Indiana Open Records law,
declare materials acquired in the course of an investigation to be
confidential and to maintain the confidentiality thereof;



   (O)   Retain all materials, papers, documents, reports and other
records produced in the course of an investigation for at least two years
after a complaint has been administratively closed by the Commission,
whereupon, subject to the provisions of state law concerning public records,
such materials, papers, documents, reports, and other records may be disposed;



   (P)   Accept contributions, grants, and gifts from sources other
than the city to carry on its work generally or for a particular function; and



   (Q)   Recommend to the Mayor and the Common Council legislation to
aid in carrying out the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6127, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6252,
passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.20  PROCEDURE; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No complaint may be accepted by the Commission unless it
substantially complies with the following requirements:



      (1)   The complaint must sufficiently show the full name and
address of the complainant; the full name and address of the person,
employer, employment agency, labor organization, real estate broker,
financial institution or educational institution (i.e. the respondent)
against whom the complaint is made; the alleged discriminatory practice and a
statement of particulars thereof; the date or dates of the alleged
discriminatory practice, or, if the alleged discriminatory practice is of a
continuing nature, the dates between which said continuing acts of
discrimination are alleged to have occurred; and a statement as to any other
action, civil or criminal instituted in any other forum based upon the same
grievance as is alleged in the complaint, together with a statement as to the
status or disposition of such other action.



      (2)   The original complaint must be signed and verified
before a notary public or any other person duly authorized by law to
administer oaths and take acknowledgments. Notice of the complaint, including
the date, place and circumstances of the alleged unlawful discrimination,
shall be served upon the respondent within ten days of the filing of the
complaint with the Commission.



      (3)   No complaint shall be valid unless filed within 90 days
from the date of the occurrences of the alleged discriminatory practice.



   (B)   The Commission shall make a prompt and full investigation of
each complaint that is properly filed. The Commission may, by its rules and
regulations, authorize such an investigation by an individual commissioner,
by any committee or subcommittee of the Commission, by the director of the
Commission, or by such staff members of the Commission as may be designated
by the Commission.



   (C)   If a subcommittee composed of three commissioners determines
that probable cause exists for the allegations made in the complaint, it
shall first attempt to resolve the alleged discriminatory practice by means
of conciliation. The subcommittee shall not make public the details of any
conciliation and/or consent agreement except when so authorized by the person
against whom the complaint was made, or when a party to the conciliation
and/or consent agreement has not complied with the agreement. The members of
this subcommittee will not later sit as members at any subsequent public
hearing in the same case.



   (D)   If the subcommittee determines, either on the face of the
complaint or after investigation, that said complaint should be dismissed,
the subcommittee shall dismiss the complaint and notify the parties by mail
of its determination and of the complainant's rights to apply to the
Commission for a reconsideration of such dismissal as provided in these rules.



   (E)   In any case of failure to resolve the alleged discriminatory
practice charged in the complaint by means of conciliation or persuasion, the
Commission, with at least five members being present, shall hold a public
hearing to determine whether or not an unlawful discriminatory practice has
been committed. The Commission shall serve upon the respondent a statement of
charges made in the complaint and a notice of the time and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than 60 days after the service of
the statement of charges issued by the Commission. The respondent shall have
the right to file an answer to the statement of charges within 30 days of
receiving it, to appear at the hearing in person or to be represented by an
attorney or any other person and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.



   (F)   Complaints may be amended at any time prior to the hearing
provided that no hearing may be held on an amended complaint within 15 days
after the filing of such amended complaint and no less than five days after
notice of the amended complaint is served on the adverse party therein.



   (G)   Service may be achieved by any of the means authorized in the
Indiana Trial Rules.



   (H)   If, upon all the evidence presented, the Commission finds that
the respondent has not engaged in any unlawful discriminatory practice, it
shall state in writing its findings of fact, dismiss the complaint and so
notify respondent.



   (I)   If after all the evidence presented the Commission finds that
respondent has engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice, it shall issue
its findings of fact and may cause to be served on the respondent an order
requiring such person to cease and desist from the unlawful discriminatory
practice and requiring such person to take further affirmative action as will
effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to the
power to restore the complainant's losses incurred as a result of
discriminatory treatment, including the awarding of damages as provided at
I.C. 22-9-1-12.1, as the Commission may deem necessary to assure justice. The
Commission may require the posting of notice setting forth the public policy
of Indiana concerning civil rights and the respondent's compliance with said
policy in places of public accommodations; and it may require proof of
compliance to be filed by the respondent at periodic intervals.



   (J)   If the Commission subsequently determines that the respondent
upon whom the order has been served is not complying with such order, or is
making no effort to comply with such order, the Commission may certify the
noncompliance, or lack of effort, to the Commission Attorney, who may seek
and obtain a decree of court for the enforcement of its order in the circuit
or superior court, provided that, a failure to comply with a Consent
Agreement shall be considered as a failure to comply with a cease and desist
order.



   (K)   Any evidence may be introduced at any hearing on a complaint
provided that such evidence is relevant and material to the subject matter of
said complaint. The Commission shall rule on all objections to the
introduction of any evidence provided that the Commission may by motion or
rule designate a member or members to so rule prior to the commencement of
any hearing.



   (L)   A decision of the local Commission may be appealed under the
terms of I.C. 4-21.5 the same as if it was a decision of a state agency.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.21  EXCEPTIONS UNDER HANDICAPPED/DISABLED PROVISIONS.



   State and federal statutes are to be followed regarding exceptions
under disabled provisions relating to employment.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.22  PENALTIES.



   In addition to award of actual damages as provided at I.C.
22-9-1-12.1(c)(8), any person who engages in an unlawful discriminatory
practice as defined in this subchapter shall, upon conviction of an ordinance
violation in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fines
in an amount not exceeding $2,000. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue may constitute a separate offense and may be punishable
as such hereunder.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.23  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   If no proceedings to obtain judicial review are instituted within 30
days from receipt of notice by a respondent that such order has been made by
the Commission as above provided, should the Commission determine that the
respondent upon whom the cease and desist order has been served is not
complying or is not making effort to comply, the Commission may file suit in
any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a decree for the enforcement of
such order upon a showing that such respondent is subject to the Commission's
jurisdiction and resides or transacts business within the county in which the
petition for enforcement is brought.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.24  CITY EMPLOYMENT AND CITY CONTRACTS; CONTRACTORS.



   The city shall not engage in any of the discriminatory practices set
forth in this chapter in any of its departments, divisions, offices or
through any of its officials or employees. Every contract to which the city
or any of its political or civil subdivisions is a party, including
franchises granted to public utilities, shall contain a provision requiring
the contractor and his subcontractors not to discriminate against any
employee or applicant for employment or promotion, who is to be employed in
the performance of such contract with respect to any of the categories of
individuals protected by this subchapter.  Any such contractor shall
obligate himself and his subcontractors to comply with all provisions of this
subchapter. Breach of this covenant or provision may be considered a material
breach of the contract.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.25  PENDING ACTIONS.



   This subchapter does not affect any:



   (A)   Rights or liabilities accrued;



   (B)   Penalties incurred;



   (C)   Offenses committed; or



   (D)   Proceedings begun before the effective date of this
subchapter.  Those rights, liabilities, penalties, and proceedings continue
and shall be imposed and enforced under repealed or amended ordinances as if
this subchapter had not been enacted.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6820, passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.26  REFERRAL.



   Any person who files a complaint with the Human Rights Commission may
not file a complaint with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission concerning any
of the matters alleged in the local complaint. Any person who files a
complaint with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission may not file a complaint
with the Human Rights Commission concerning any of the matters alleged in the
state complaint. Any complaint filed with the Human Rights Commission may be
transferred by the Commission to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission should
that commission have concurrent jurisdiction. The Human Rights Commission may
accept referral of cases from the Indiana Civil Rights Commission. Upon
referral of a case from the Indiana Civil Rights Commission, the Human Rights
Commission shall proceed to process the matter as if it had originally been
filed with the Human Rights Commission. Nothing in this section shall affect
any person's right to pursue any and all other rights and remedies available
in any other state or federal forum.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820,
passed 3-14-16)



§ 33.27  RELATIONS WITH CITY DEPARTMENTS.



   The services of all other city departments and agencies shall be made
available by their respective heads to the Human Rights Commission at its
request and information in the possession of any department or agency,
subject to any applicable state or federal confidentiality requirements,
shall be furnished to the Commission upon its request. The Commission may
make recommendations to such departments and agencies for the effectuation of
the purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 5925, passed 8-29-94; Am. Ord. 6252, passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6820,
passed 3-14-16)



KOKOMO CITY HALL CITIZEN'S REVIEW COMMISSION



§ 33.30  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Kokomo City Hall Citizen's Review Commission is hereby
established.



   (B)   The City Hall Citizen's Review Commission shall consist of
seven members as follows:



      (1)   Mayor or his designee.



      (2)   President of the Kokomo City Hall Building Corporation,
or his designee.



      (3)   One member of the Common Council of the city.



      (4)   Two citizen members appointed by the Mayor.



      (5)   Two citizen members appointed by the Common Council of
the city.



   (C)   The four citizen members shall serve two-year terms.  The
Mayor or his designee shall serve during the period of his term of office. 
The member of the Common Council shall be elected annually by the membership
of the Common Council.  The President of the Kokomo City Hall Building
Corporation, or his designee, shall serve during his term of office.



   (D)   All initial appointments to the City Hall Citizen's Advisory
Commission shall be made within 15 days after the effective date of this
subchapter.



   (E)   Citizen members serve at the pleasure of the appropriate
appointing body.



   (F)   At least one of the Mayor's appointees, and one of the Common
Council's appointees shall have background experience in architecture,
interior design, general contracting, or related fields.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



§ 33.31  MEETINGS; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The City Hall Citizen's Review Commission shall meet within 15
days following the appointment of all its members for the purposes of
organizing and electing a Chairman from among its members. Thereafter, the
Commission shall meet during the month of January of each  year for the 
purpose of electing  a chairman  for the succeeding calendar year.  The
Chairman shall serve until a successor shall have been elected.



   (B)   The Commission shall meet at such other times as are deemed
necessary by the Chairman of the Commission.



   (C)   The members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation.  Such members may, however, be reimbursed for approved
out-of-pocket expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



§ 33.32  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The City Hall Citizen's Review Commission shall do the following:



   (A)   Conduct an annual inspection of building and grounds during
the month of March, l984, and each March thereafter.



   (B)   Provide an annual report to the Mayor and Council as to the
general condition of the building and grounds within 30 days after the annual
inspection.



   (C)   Review any requests for changes inside or outside the
building, covering, but not limited to, such areas as:  landscaping, site
planning, exterior building alterations, interior walls, appointments,
additional or remodeling of furniture, carpet, drapes, accessories, and
related items.



   (D)   Approve or disapprove of such requests and make written
requests for the consent of the lessor to such changes as may be required by
the terms of the lease between the city and the Kokomo City Hall Building
Corporation.



   (E)   Make recommendations for the following year's capital
improvement budget for city hall.



   (F)   Develop long range plans for the replacement or modification
of the physical plant and grounds.



   (G)   Keep the Board of Public Works and Safety apprised of all such
recommendations.



   (H)   Analyze and make recommendations to the Board of Public Works
and Safety concerning changes necessary to comply with any local, state, or
federal statutes or regulations relative to safety and health.



   (I)   Perform such other duties and assume such other
responsibilities as the Mayor and the Common Council of the city may
appropriately assign to it.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



§ 33.33  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   All recommendations of the City Hall Citizen's Review Commission must
be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety before any action is
taken to implement such recommendations, and any such recommendations are
subject to the prerogatives granted to the City Hall Building Corporation
under state law, or under terms of the lease between the city and the Kokomo
City Hall Building Corporation.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



§ 33.34  RELATIONSHIP TO KOKOMO CITY HALL BUILDING CORPORATION.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to abrogate,
limit, or supplant the prerogatives granted to the Kokomo City Hall Building
Corporation, or its successor, under state law, or under the terms of the
lease between the city and the City Hall Building Corporation during the
period of that Corporation's legal existence.



   (B)   Should the City Hall Building Corporation, or its successor,
cease to exist as a legal entity, its representation on the City Hall
Citizen's Review Commission shall terminate, and that Commission's membership
shall be reduced to six members.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



§ 33.35  EMERGENCY REPAIRS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city under the terms of its lease with the City Hall Building Corporation
to effect repairs of a temporary or emergency nature.



(Ord. 5354, passed 2-6-84)



KOKOMO AND HOWARD COUNTY GOVERNMENTAL COORDINATING COUNCIL



§ 33.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Kokomo and Howard County Governmental Coordinating
Council, is to operate a continuing, cooperative, and comprehensive planning
and coordinating effort for the City of Kokomo and Howard County in all areas
of mutual concern relating to transportation, planning, and any other
governmental functions where joint cooperation is necessary and desired.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



Cross-reference:



   For additional provisions concerning this Council, see § 30.52



Statutory reference:



   Interlocal Cooperation Act, see IC 36-l-7-l et seq.



§ 33.41  ORGANIZATION.



   This organization shall consist of a Policy Board and two standing
committees, the Technical Advisory Committee and the Citizens Advisory
Committee.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.42  COMPOSITION AND NATURE.



   (A)   The Policy Board shall consist of the persons holding the
following positions:



      (l)  Mayor of the City of Kokomo.



      (2)   President of the Howard County Commissioners.



      (3)   President of the Kokomo City Council.



      (4)   President of the Howard County Council.



      (5)   Executive Director of the Kokomo and Howard County Plan
Commissions.



   (B)   The Board shall also include one additional member of the
Kokomo City Council who represents the other political party if both
political parties are represented from that party which is represented by the
President of the City Council.  Likewise, the Board shall include one
additional member of the Howard County Council who represents the other
political party from that represented by the President of the County
Council.  These persons shall be selected by vote of their respective
Councils.  In addition, membership shall include two non-voting
representatives, one from the Indiana State Highway Commission and one from
the Federal Highway Administration.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.43  FUNCTIONS OF THE POLICY BOARD.



   The Board shall:



   (A)   Conduct business according to Robert's Rules of Order
(Revised);



   (B)   Elect officers and appoint persons to committees;



   (C)   Approve an annual work program;



   (D)   Approve an annually-updated Transportation System Management
Plan;



   (E)   Approve an annually-updated Transportation Improvement Program;



   (F)   Financially support and supervise a transportation staff;



   (G)   Review and approve all work done by its committees;



   (H)   Assure that plans prepared as part of the planning process
conform with all local plans and planning activities as well as comply with
requirements of the state and federal governments;



   (I)   Monitor on a continuing basis, the transit system and propose
improvements as appropriate.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.44  POWERS OF THE POLICY BOARD.



   The Board may:



   (A)   Receive appropriated funds from any source including federal,
state, and local governments; subject to the review and approval by the City
Council and County Commissioners prior to action by the Coordinating Council
on any requests for funds or plans leading to a request for funds which by
the nature of the activity could create a need for subsequent action by the
City Council and County Commissioners.



   (B)   Expend those funds in accordance with an approved budget
including payroll, contractual services, supplies, subscriptions, dues,
bonds, insurance, audit, loans, property, and other appropriate charges.



   (C)   Establish an office, appoint a Transportation Director, and
employ or obtain such other staff and consultants as it deems necessary.



   (D)   Discuss any questions or any matter within the scope of its
stated purpose and make recommendations for action to the governmental units
involved in order to coordinate to the fullest extent possible, local
programs and to minimize duplications or unnecessarily inconsistent
expenditures of funds by the members.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.45  MANNER OF FINANCING.



   The city and county shall appropriate funds directly to the Council
sharing the cost on a 50 - 50 basis.  In addition, service of persons who
are employees of the city and county agencies and other cost shall also be
provided to the Council as agreed between all parties.  Any reimbursement
paid to the Council by the federal and state governments for cost provided by
these other agencies shall be paid by the Council to the general funds of the
city and county as appropriate.  The Council shall assume legal liability
for all costs incurred for any contractual obligations to the city and county
governments for services rendered.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.46  BUDGET.



   A joint meeting of the City Council and County Council shall be held to
review and approve the budget of the Coordinating Council. The budget shall
be prepared and presented to this joint meeting by the members of the Policy
Board.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



§ 33.47  DURATION; TERMINATION.



   (A)   The Council shall continue until it is desired by either party
to have it terminated.



   (B)   (1)   The Council may be terminated when either the City
Council or the County Commissioners desire such termination.  Such statement
of desired termination shall be in the form of an ordinance by the City
Council or a resolution by the County Commissioners and must be passed at
least 90 days before the end of the following June. If the ordinance or
resolution passes, the Council shall be terminated on the last day of June.



      (2)   In the event of termination, any real estate owned by
the Council at that time shall become the property of the city.  Any other
property shall be sold and the proceeds divided between the federal, state,
and local governments in proportion to their share of financial support
during the previous two years.



(Ord. 5021, passed 12-8-80)



ADDITIONAL BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



§ 33.50  BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES.



   Provisions regarding the Board of Cemetery Trustees are contained in §
30.47.



§ 33.51  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   Provisions regarding the Board of Zoning Appeals are contained in §
30.50.



§ 33.52  BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   Provisions regarding the Board of Parks and Recreation are contained in
§ 30.17.



§ 33.53  BOARD OF AVIATION COMMISSIONERS.



   Provisions regarding the Board of Aviation Commissioners are contained
in § 30.16.



§ 33.54  BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.



   Provisions regarding the Bureau of Fire Prevention are contained in §
30.18(C).



§ 33.55  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   Provisions regarding the Economic Development Commission are contained
in § 30.19.



§ 33.56  HISTORIC REVIEW BOARD.



   Provisions regarding the Historic Review Board are contained in § 30.51



§ 33.57  KOKOMO HOUSING AUTHORITY.



   For provisions concerning the Kokomo Housing Authority, see § 30.54.



§ 33.58  KOKOMO-HOWARD COUNTY CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION.



   For provisions concerning the Kokomo-Howard County Civil Defense
Organization, see § 30.55.



§ 33.59  PLAN COMMISSION.



   Provisions regarding the Plan Commission are contained in §§ 30.49



§ 33.60  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   Provisions regarding the Traffic Commission are contained in § 30.48.



KOKOMO COMMUNITY ARTS COMMISSION



§ 33.75  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established the Kokomo Community Arts Commission.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



§ 33.76  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and duty of the Community Arts Commission shall be as
follows:



   (A)   To stimulate and encourage an appreciation of and partici-
pation in the fine arts by citizens of all ages in the community.



   (B)   To sponsor and develop artistic activities and educational
programs designed to stimulate and encourage the fine arts.



   (C)   To foster an environment conducive to enjoyment of the fine
arts.



   (D)   To cooperate with various private bodies, groups, and
individuals, in efforts to encourage participation in, and the growth of, the
fine arts in the community.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



§ 33.77  COMPOSITION; TERM.



   (A)   The Kokomo Community Arts Commission shall be composed of nine
members of whom four will be appointed by the Mayor and five by the Kokomo
Common Council.  All members shall serve at the pleasure of the appropriate
appointing authority.



   (B)   The initial terms of the Commission members shall be as
follows:  Two of the Mayor's appointees and one of the Common Council's
appointees shall be appointed to four-year terms; one of the Mayor's
appointees and one of the Common Council's appointees shall be appointed to
three-year terms; one of the Mayor's appointees and one of the Common
Council's appointees shall be appointed to two-year terms; two of the Common
Council's appointees shall be appointed to one-year terms.  After the
expiration of the initial terms of the members, all subsequent members shall
be appointed to terms of four years.



   (C)   Of the Council's appointees, one appointee shall be a member
of a minority, and one appointee shall be a woman.  Of the Mayor's
appointees, one shall be a representative of the handicapped members of the
community, and one shall be a woman.



   (D)   In addition to the appointed Commission members, one ex
officio member may be named to the Commission by each of the following
bodies:  Kokomo Center School Board; City Board of Park Commissioners; City
Chamber of Commerce.  Ex officio members will not have voting rights.



   (E)   A majority of all voting members of the Commission shall
reside within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



§ 33.78  ORGANIZATION.



   The Community Arts Commission shall elect from its membership a
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary who shall serve one-year terms and are
eligible for reelection.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of its business.  These rules must include procedures for
calling regular and special meetings and giving legal notice thereof.  All
meetings of the Commission, except duly called executive sessions, must be
open to the public and a public record shall be kept of the Commission's
resolutions, proceedings, and actions.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



§ 33.79  GRANTS TO THE ARTS ADMINISTERED BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND
SAFETY.



   (A)   Funding of grants to the arts shall be administered by the
Board of Public Works and Safety.  These grants shall be taken from monies
as are appropriated for that purpose from time to time by the Common Council
and placed in the annual budget of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to
establish qualification criteria and such other procedures as are necessary
and appropriate to carry out Common Council's intent as set out in § 33.76.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



§ 33.80  DUTIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the criteria and procedures established by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, the Community Arts Commission will solicit
grant applications, evaluate the applications, and make recommendations to
the Board of Public Works and Safety for funding of qualified projects.



   (B)   Funding of qualified projects shall be approved or disapproved
by the Board, taking into account the recommendation of the Community Arts
Commission.



   (C)   Disbursement of funds will be on claim forms and in a manner
prescribed by the Board of Public Works and Safety and the State Board of
Accounts.



   (D)   On or before January 31, l986, and annually thereafter, the
Community Arts Commission shall submit to the Mayor, the Common Council, and
the Board of Public Works and Safety, a written report describing its
activities for the preceding year.



(Ord. 5426, passed 1-28-85)



CHAPTER 34:  EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY



Section



   34.01   Policy



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Affirmative Action Officer



   34.04   Functions of the Affirmative Action Officer



   34.05   Powers and duties



   34.06   Relations with city departments



Cross-reference:



   Human Relations Commission, see §§ 33.10 et seq.



§ 34.01  POLICY.



   (A)   The city is charged with providing a wide variety of services
equally to a broad cross-section of society, therein is committed to
providing equal employment opportunity is necessary for the development and
maintenance of an efficient work force and the optimum utilization of human
resources.



   (B)   For these reasons, the city has adopted an equal employment
opportunity policy ensuring that all employees, applicants, and citizens of
our community are provided nondiscriminatory practices in all personnel
actions.  Additionally, ensuring that all employment opportunities, employee
benefits, and compensations are equally available to all qualified persons,
without regard to race, color, religion, creed, sex, age, handicap, national
origin, or any other factors which cannot be lawfully used as a basis for an
employment decision.



   (C)   The Common Council also establishes the city's official
representative to design and implement the city's Affirmative Action
Program.  The official shall be called the Affirmative Action Director.



(Ord. 4868 passed 8-13-79)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AFFECTED CLASS."  A group of people with a common characteristic
(race, sex, age, or handicapped) who have been denied equal opportunity at
any step in the employment process.



   "AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (AA)."  Any procedures, methods, and programs for
positive identification, recruitment, training, and utilization of
minorities, females, individuals 40 years of age and older, and the
handicapped who are present or potential employees.  It is action which
equalizes employment opportunities in all aspects of city government. 
"AFFIRMATIVE ACTION" requires that the city actively seek out qualified
minority, women, handicapped individuals, and older workers.



   "DISCRIMINATION."  Any denial of equal access to or any differential
treatment of any person in regard to equal employment opportunity based on
race, color, national origin, sex, handicap, or age.



   "DISPARATE EFFECT."  The tendency for a test, job qualification, or
other employment practice to screen out or otherwise limit employment
opportunities of minorities or women at a greater rate than others.



   "DISPARATE TREATMENT."  Any employment practices, such as the use of
test or educational requirements, which are fair and neutral on their face,
but which are applied or administered in an unfair manner.



   "EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY (EEO)."  The condition which ensures
nondiscrimination in all facets of employment by the elimination of patterns
and practices of discrimination and the results of previous discrimination,
intentional and unintentional, to the extent that a climate of equity is
maintained and no disparity in treatment exists in the treatment of special
segment groups.



   "HANDICAPPED PERSONS."  All individuals who by reason of physical or
mental defect or infirmity, whether congenital or acquired by accident,
injury, or disease, are or may hereafter be totally or partially prevented
from achieving the fullest attainable physical, social, economic, mental, and
vocational participation in the normal process of living.



   "MINORITIES."  Blacks, American Indians, Orientals, and Spanish
surnamed persons.



   "SPECIAL SEGMENT GROUPS."  Minorities, females, individuals 40 years
of age and older, and the handicapped.



   "UNDERUTILIZATIONS."  Having fewer special segment employees in a
particular job category and classification than would reasonably be expected
by their presence in the labor market.



(Ord. 4868 passed 8-13-79)



§ 34.03  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION OFFICER.



   For provisions concerning the Affirmative Action Officer, see §
30.14(B).



(Am. Ord. 6060, passed 8-25-97)



§ 34.04  FUNCTIONS OF THE AFFIRMATIVE ACTION OFFICER.



   It shall be the duty of the Affirmative Action Officer to:



   (A)   Make such investigations and studies in the area of equal
employment opportunity as will aid in effectuating its general purpose.



   (B)   Keep the Mayor informed of the latest developments in the area
of equal employment opportunity.



   (C)   Establish and maintain a liaison with various regulatory
agencies such as the Department of Labor and the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, in addition to women's, handicap, minority organizations, and
community groups concerned with equal employment opportunity.



   (D)   Work in conjunction with the Board of Public Works and Safety
in the area of federally funded contract compliance.



(Ord. 4868 passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. 6060, passed 8-25-97)



§ 34.05  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Affirmative Action Officer is empowered to:



   (A)   Develop the written Affirmative Action Plan for approval.



   (B)   Determine the extent to which minorities and women are
underutilized in major categories.



   (C)   Identify and eliminate the specific cause of such under-
utilization.



   (D)   Establish and maintain employment levels for members of
minority groups, women, and other affected class members in proportions of,
or at least equal to their levels in the labor force.



   (E)   Identify all employment practices which have an adverse impact
on minorities, women, and others protected by applicable law and the
relationships of which job performance has not been clearly established.



   (F)   Replace such practices with those which will be based on merit
and valid job qualifications.



   (G)   Establish monitoring systems which will assure effective
operation of the affirmative action program of the city, achievement of its
objectives, and means for modification of plans as needed.



   (H)   Recommend to the Mayor and Common Council legislation to aid
in carrying out the purpose of this chapter.



   (I)   Submit an annual report to the Mayor and the Common Council.



   (J)   To establish and maintain a remedial recruitment file for
projected employment purposes.



(Ord. 4868 passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. 6060, passed 8-25-97)



§ 34.06  RELATIONS WITH CITY DEPARTMENTS.



   The services of all other city departments and agencies shall be made
available by their respective heads to the Affirmative Action Officer at his
request.  Any information in the possession of any department or agency
shall be forwarded to the Affirmative Action Officer on request.  The
Affirmative Action Officer may make recommendations to such departments and
agencies as to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 4868, passed 8-13-79; Am. Ord. 6060, passed 8-25-97)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCE



Section



Funds



   35.01   Cumulative capital improvement fund



   35.02   Rainy Day Fund



   35.03   Levy Access Fund



Recovery of Costs



   35.15   Recovery of costs for emergency medical services



   35.16   Recovery of costs for water for public fire protection
services



FUNDS



§ 35.01  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, "CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT" shall
mean the purchase of real property or any building or buildings for use by
the city in any governmental or proprietary function of the city or the
construction or improvement of any city-owned property, easements, or
rights-of-way, including but not limited to streets, thoroughfares, and
sewers, but shall not include salaries of any public officials or employees,
except that directly chargeable to such improvements.



   (B)   In accordance with the requirements of state law, there is
created a special fund to be known as the cumulative capital improvement fund
into which the cigarette taxes allotted to the city by reason of state law
shall be deposited.



   (C)   The fund shall be a cumulative fund and all of the moneys
deposited into the fund shall be appropriated and used solely for capital
improvements and none of such moneys shall revert to the general fund or be
used for any purposes other than capital improvements.



   (D)   The funds may also be used to retire any general obligation
bonds of the city issued for the purpose of purchase or construction of
improvements which would qualify for use of such funds.



('75 Code, § 2-1)



§ 35.02  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby established a Rainy Day Fund to
receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised by a general or
special tax levy on taxable property within the city whenever the purpose of
such tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and unencumbered balance
remains.



   (B)   Purpose of the Fund.  The funds, on deposit in the Rainy Day
Fund, may be used for the operation of the city and its various departments,
when the city does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs,
including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services,
supplies, equipment, capital improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.



   (C)   Transfers to Fund.  The Common Council of the city may
annually determine the amount, if any, of any unused and unencumbered funds
available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which transfer may not
exceed more than 10% of the city’s total budget for that fiscal year.



   (D)   Appropriations.  The Common Council of the city may authorize
the expenditure of funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in
the same manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax moneys, upon
making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the
intent of the Fund.



(Ord. 6602, passed 2-23-10)



§ 35.03  LEVY ACCESS FUND.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby established a Levy Excess Fund to
receive in the property tax distribution which exceeds 100% of the city’s
ad valorem property tax levy.



   (B)   Purpose.  The funds, on deposit in the Levy Excess Fund, may
be used to reduce the ensuing year’s property tax levy.



(Ord. 6616, passed 8-9-10)



RECOVERY OF COSTS



§ 35.15  RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      “AMBULANCE.” a motor vehicle operated by the Kokomo Fire
Department equipped with facilities to convey infirm or injured persons in a
reclining position.



      “AMBULANCE PATIENT.”  Any ill, infirm or injured person
receiving emergency medical services from Kokomo Fire Department personnel
holding emergency medical technician or paramedic certification from the
State of Indiana and assigned to an ambulance operated by the Kokomo Fire
Department.



      “BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS).”  The emergency medical services
rendered to an ambulance patient by an emergency medical technician or
paramedic employed by the Kokomo Fire Department.



      “EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN.”  An individual employed by
the Kokomo Fire Department and certified by the State of Indiana to provide
emergency medical care at the scene of an accident, illness, or during
transport in an ambulance.



      “MILEAGE CHARGE.”  The fee assessed for each mile or portion
of a mile of transport.



      “NON-RESIDENT.”  An ambulance patient whose domicile is not
within the municipal limits of the city.



      “NON-TRANSPORT.”  Those instances where an ambulance is
dispatched to a location but the patient is not transported in the ambulance
to or from a hospital, physician's office, nursing home, or other health care
facility.



      “PARAMEDIC.”  An individual employed by the Kokomo Fire
Department, and certified by the State of Indiana to perform advanced life
support procedures as defined by applicable state protocols.



      “RESIDENT.”  An ambulance patient whose domicile is within
the municipal limits of the city.



      “TRANSPORT.”  Those instances where an ambulance is
dispatched to a location and the patient is transported in the ambulance to
or from a hospital, physician's office, nursing home, or other health care
facility.



   (B)   Responsible party.  The ambulance patient, or the ambulance
patient's legal representative or guardian in the case of a minor or adult
under guardianship, shall be responsible for the payment of fees assessed
under this section.



   (C)   Establishment of fee schedule.  Charges shall be assessed and
collected pursuant to the medicare ambulance fee schedule, as modified and
amended, from each responsible party receiving basic life support services
from the city ambulance service.



   (D)   Billing procedures.  Responsible parties, including the legal
representative of deceased responsible parties, will be billed within 30 days
of the rendering of services. Charges will be due and payable 60 days after
the date services are rendered. Unpaid charges are subject to collection
action by the city.



   (E)   Annual review.  Charges imposed by this section will be
reviewed no less than annually by the Common Council and adjustments made as
necessary to assure that charges remain reasonable in relation to the cost of
providing the services set out herein. It shall be the obligation of the
Kokomo Fire Department to provide the Common Council with data sufficient to
support the amount of the charges.



   (F)   Disposition of funds.  All funds collected pursuant to this
section shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city.



(Ord. 6347, passed 10-11-04; Am. Ord. 6511, passed 11-19-07)



§ 35.16  RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR WATER FOR PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION SERVICES.



   (A)   Pursuant to IC 8-1-2-103(d), the costs for the protection,
storage, transmission, sale, delivery, and furnishing of water for fire
protection purposes ("public fire costs") shall be included in the basic
rates and charges of all customers of Indiana-American within the city in the
manner and to the extent permitted by such statute.



   (B)   Effective upon the date of this change in the manner of
recovering public fire costs, Indiana-American shall cease directly billing
the city for public fire costs other than charges for the construction cost
for new hydrants installed on and after the date of the change as hereinafter
set forth.



   (C)   On and after the effective date of this section, the
construction cost of any fire hydrant installed at the request of the city to
Indiana-American shall be paid for by the city, but any hydrant requested by
a developer to Indiana-American in response to a city requirement that a
hydrant, or hydrants, be installed, shall be paid by the developer.



   (D)   Public fire costs shall also be reflected in the rates of
customers located in areas adjacent to the city and within 1,000 feet of a
hydrant located within the city.



   (E)   The change in the method of recovering public fire costs
described in IC 8-1-2-103(d) shall be effective upon the first day of the
first month following approval by the IURC of a new schedule of rates
implementing the change. Indiana-American is requested to file such revised
rate schedules with the IURC within a reasonable time after being notified of
the final passage of this section.



   (F)   Notice of the adoption of this section, and a copy of
Ordinance 6348, shall be provided by the City Clerk to Indiana-American.



(Ord. 6348, passed 10-11-04)



CHAPTER 36:  PURCHASING



Section



Purchase of Real Property



   36.01   Purchase of real property



General Purchasing Practices



   36.20   Designation of purchasing agency



   36.21   Designation of additional purchasing agencies



   36.22   Powers of purchasing agencies



   36.23   Designation of Board of Works as purchasing agent



   36.24   Small purchase procedures



   36.25   Preparation of specifications and index of specifications



   36.26   Preference for supplies manufactured in the United States



   36.27   Purchase of services



   36.28   Protection of offers; status of documents as public records



   36.29   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for
proposals



   36.30   Delay of opening of offers



   36.31   Evidence of financial responsibility



   36.32   Modification and termination of contracts



   36.33   Federal transit administration funds



Bidder Requirements



   36.45   Purpose



   36.46   Applicability



   36.47   Criteria



   36.48   Certified payroll



   36.49   Additional criteria



   36.50   Lowest bidder not chosen



   36.51   Access to Public Records Act



PURCHASE OF REAL PROPERTY



§ 36.01  PURCHASE OF REAL PROPERTY.



   The purchasing agent shall follow the requirements of IC 36-1-10.5 et
seq. when purchasing real property and structures.



(Ord. 5053, passed 3-30-81; Am. Ord. 5889, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 6733,
passed 9-9-13)



Statutory reference:



   Power to acquire real property, see IC 36-1-4-5



   Power to legislate regarding control of city property, see IC 36-4-6-18



   Purchase of land or structures, see IC 36-1-10.5-1 et seq.



GENERAL PURCHASING PRACTICES



§ 36.20  DESIGNATION OF PURCHASING AGENCY.



   Except as provided in § 36.21, the Board of Public Works and Safety
shall be designated as the purchasing agency for all boards, offices,
branches, commissions, councils, departments, or other establishments of the
city.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.21  DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL PURCHASING AGENCIES.



   (A)   The provisions of § 36.20 notwithstanding, the following are
designated as the purchasing agencies for their respective departments:



      (1)   The Board of Park Commissioners shall be designated as
the purchasing agency for the Department of Parks and Recreation.



      (2)   The Board of Aviation Commissioners shall be designated
as the purchasing agency for the Department of Aviation.



      (3)   The Community Day Care Center Board shall be designated
as the purchasing agency for the Department of Community Day Care Centers.



   (b)   The provisions of § 36.20 notwithstanding, the Board of
Cemetery Trustees shall be designated as the purchasing agency for all city
owned and operated cemeteries.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.22  POWERS OF PURCHASING AGENCIES.



   The respective purchasing agencies designated in §§ 36.21 and 36.22
shall:



   (A)   Within their jurisdictional areas, assume the duties, powers,
and responsibilities assigned to purchasing agencies under the Act.



   (B)   Establish procedures, not inconsistent with the Act or this
subchapter for obtaining materials, supplies, equipment or contractual
services for the city departments under their jurisdiction as may best be
suited to obtain the greatest economic value for the city.



   (C)   Prepare specifications and notice to bidders and ascertain
that required notices are published where bidding and publication of notices
are required by law.



   (D)   Cooperate and consult with the controller for the purpose of
ensuring that adequate funds are available prior to making necessary
purchases and acquisitions to assure that they are within the limits of the
budget appropriations of the department in need of the material.



   (E)   Designate, in writing, such additional purchasing agents as
are necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.23  DESIGNATION OF BOARD OF WORKS AS PURCHASING AGENT.



   The additional purchasing agencies specified in § 36.21 shall be
authorized to designate the Board of Public Works and Safety as a purchasing
agent in order to allow the Board to conduct procurement activities on behalf
of the designating purchasing agency.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.24  SMALL PURCHASE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Purchasing agents are authorized to purchase materials or
supplies with an estimated cost of less than $5,000 on the open market
without inviting or receiving quotes or bids.



   (B)   Purchasing agencies may, for a specific procurement of
materials or supplies, authorize a purchasing agent to purchase such
materials or supplies having an estimated cost of $25,000 or less on the open
market without inviting or receiving quotes or bids.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.25  PREPARATION OF SPECIFICATIONS AND INDEX OF SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Specifications shall be prepared by the purchasing agency for
all materials and supplies to be purchased.  Such specifications shall
describe the materials and supplies to be purchased with reasonable
specificity and may describe such criteria as shall be used to evaluate
materials and supplies offered for purchase.  Such criteria may include
provisions for inspection and testing of supplies; ascertaining the quality
and workmanship of supplies; determining the delivery time for supplies; and,
in the case of supplies provided by trusts, imposing the statutory
requirements relevant to public purchases from trusts.



   (B)   Specifications shall be written to promote economy for the
purposes intended.



   (C)   Specifications shall be written to encourage competition in
satisfying the needs of the city.



   (D)   Each purchasing agency shall maintain an indexed file of
specifications prepared by or under the authority of the purchasing agency.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.26  PREFERENCE FOR SUPPLIES MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES.



   Supplies manufactured in the United States shall be specified for all
purchases by purchasing agencies and shall be purchased unless the purchasing
agency determines, in writing, that:



   (A)   The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in
reasonably available quantities;



   (B)   The prices of supplies manufactured in the United States
exceeds by an unreasonable amount the price of available and comparable
supplies manufactured elsewhere;



   (C)   The quality of the supplies manufactured in the United States
is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available
supplies manufactured elsewhere; or,



   (D)   The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is
not in the public interest.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.27  PURCHASE OF SERVICES.



   Each purchasing agency may purchase services, except legal services, in
whatever manner the purchasing agency determines to be reasonable. Purchase
of legal services must be authorized by the Office of the Corporation Counsel.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.28  PROTECTION OF OFFERS; STATUS OF DOCUMENTS AS PUBLIC RECORDS.



   (A)   Protection of Offers Prior to Opening.  The purchasing agent
shall retain all offers received in a secure location prior to the date and
time at which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the
contents prior to the opening of the offers.



   (B)   Unobstructed Evaluation of Offers.  After offers have been
opened, the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining the offers
in such a manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the persons
responsible for evaluating the offers.



   (C)   Public Records Status of Bids.  Bids submitted in response to
an invitation for bids must be made available for public inspection and
copying after the time of the bid opening.



   (D)   Register of Proposals.  Where proposals are solicited in lieu
of competitive sealed bidding, the purchasing agent shall prepare a register
of proposals for each request for proposals issued which shall contain
information concerning the proposals. Such registers shall be made available
for public inspection and copying after contract award. The content of the
Register of Proposals shall be consistent with applicable statutory
requirements.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.29  DISCUSSIONS WITH OFFERORS RESPONDING TO A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.



   Where proposals are solicited in lieu of competitive bidding, the
purchasing agent may conduct discussions with, and best and final offers may
be obtained from, responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be
reasonably susceptible of being selected for a contract award.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.30  DELAY OF OPENING OF OFFERS.



   Where the purchasing agency makes a written determination that it is in
the city's best interest to do so, offers may be opened after the time stated
in the solicitation.  The date, time, and place of the rescheduled opening
must be announced at the time and place of the originally scheduled opening.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.31  EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Purchases Less Than $25,000.  Purchasing agents may not
require evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated cost of a
purchase is less than $25,000.



   (B)   Purchases Between $25,000 and $100,000.  The solicitation may
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility.  If evidence of financial responsibility is required, the
solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable.  If
a bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated
cost of the purchase.



   (C)   Purchases Over $100,000.  The solicitation shall include a
requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial responsibility and
must indicate the kind of evidence that will be acceptable.  If a bond or
certified check is required, it may not exceed 10% of the estimated cost of
the purchase.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.32  MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS.



   (A)   Price Adjustments.  Purchasing agencies or agents may include
provisions to permit price adjustments in a purchase contract.  The
following provisions for price adjustments may be included:



      (1)   Price adjustments must be computed by agreement on a
fixed price adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent performance or
as soon after the beginning of performance as possible;



      (2)   Price adjustments may be computed by unit prices
specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



      (3)   Price adjustments must be computed by costs attributable
to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustments of profit or
fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;



      (4)   Price adjustments may be computed in such other manner
as the contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or



      (5)   In the absence of agreement by the parties, price
adjustments must be computed by a unilateral determination by the purchasing
agency of the costs attributable to the events or situations under such
clauses with adjustment of profit or fee, all as computed by the purchasing
agent in accordance with applicable rules adopted by the purchasing agency.



   (B)   Adjustments in Time of Performance.  The purchasing agency or
agent may include provisions in a purchase contract concerning adjustments
for time of performance under the contract.



   (C)   Unilateral Rights of City.  The purchasing agency or agent
may include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the unilateral
right of the city to order changes in the work within the scope of the
contract or to order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.



   (D)   Quantity Variations.  The purchasing agency or agent may
include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with variations between the
estimated quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.



(Ord. 6093, passed 6-29-98)



§ 36.33  FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION FUNDS.



   This section is applicable only to procurements with Federal Transit
Administration Funds:



   (A)   The specification of only a "brand name" product without
listing its salient characteristics and not allowing "an equal" product to be
offered is considered to be restrictive of competition.



   (B)   The city may include options in its contracts.  An option is
a unilateral right in a contract by which, for a specified time, a grantee
may elect to purchase additional equipment, supplies, or services called for
by the contract, or may elect to extend the term of the contract.  If the
city chooses to use options, the following requirements apply:



      (1)   Evaluation of Options.  The option quantities or
periods contained in the contractor's bid or offer must be evaluated in order
to determine the contract award.  When options have not been evaluated as
part of the award, the exercise of such options will be considered a sole
source procurement.



      (2)   Exercise of Options.



         (a)   The city must ensure that the exercise of an
option is in accordance with the terms and conditions of the option stated in
the initial contract awarded.



         (b)   An option may not be exercised unless the city has
determined that the option price is better than prices available in the
market or that the option is the more advantageous offer at the time the
option is exercised.



   (C)   The city does not authorize advance payments and will not
participate in funding payments to a contractor prior to the incurrence of
costs by the contractor unless prior written concurrence is obtained from the
Federal Transit Administration.



   (D)   The city may use progress payments provided the following
requirements are followed:



      (1)   Progress payments are only made to the contractor for
costs incurred in the performance of the contract.



      (2)   When progress payments are used, the city must obtain
title to property (materials, work in progress, and finished goods) for which
progress payments are made.  Alternative security for progress payments by
irrevocable letter of credit or equivalent means to protect the city's
interests in the progress payments may be used in lieu of obtaining title.



(Ord. 6141, passed 9-27-99)



BIDDER REQUIREMENTS



§ 36.45  PURPOSE.



   The Responsible Bidder Ordinance shall serve to define the term
“responsible” as used in IC § 36-1-12-4, regarding competitive bidding.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.46  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply when the city is seeking a contract or service
to perform public work that costs at least $100,000. Public work, in this
context, means the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or renovation of
public building, or other structure that is paid for out of a public fund or
special assessment. The term includes the construction, alteration, or repair
of a highway, street, alley, bridge, sewer, drain, or other improvement that
is paid for out of a public fund or special assessment. The term also
includes any public work leased by the city under a lease containing an
option to purchase.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.47  CRITERIA.



   A “responsible bidder” shall meet all the bid and contract
specifications, and shall:



   (A)   Affirm compliance with all applicable laws pre-requisite to
doing business in Indiana;



   (B)   Produce evidence of a federal employer taxpayer identification
number or social security number (for sole proprietors);



   (C)   Confirm compliance with Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title
42 of the United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11375 (known as
the Equal Opportunity Employer Provisions);



   (D)   Confirm that individuals working on public works projects on
behalf of contractors are either classified as an employee or independent
contractor under all applicable state and federal laws and local ordinances;



   (E)   Provide the city with certificates of insurance indicating
coverage, when such is required in the bid or contract specifications;



   (F)   Affirm, where worker's compensation insurance is required
under the bid specifications, that all employees are:



      (1)   Covered under a current worker's compensation insurance
policy;



      (2)   Properly classified under such policy; and



      (3)   Provide to the awarding agency, upon formal request, a
copy of the “declarations” page of the contractor's worker's compensation
insurance policy which includes the name and addresses of the insured, as
well as the class codes the compensation premium is based upon;



   (G)   Indicate compliance with IC 5-16-7.2, the Indiana Wage Scales
for Public Works Projects Act, and/or the federal Davis-Bacon Act, as
applicable;



   (H)   Submit proof of any professional or trade license required by
law for any trade or specialty area in which a bidder is seeking a contract
award; and disclose any suspension or revocation within the previous five
years of any professional trade license held by the company, or of any
director, officer, or manager employed by bidder;



   (I)   At the time of submitting the bid, bidder shall disclose the
amount of work by self-performance and the following information regarding
subcontractors:



      (1)   The amount of each subcontractors bid;



      (2)   Business name and address;



      (3)   Type of work to be performed, and



      (4)   Statement of acknowledgment that subcontractor(s) shall
comply with all applicable federal and state laws and local ordinances.



   (J)   State that individuals who will perform work on the public
works project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either



      (1)   An employee; or



      (2)   An independent contractor under all applicable state and
federal laws and local ordinances;



   (K)   Provide information as to the substance abuse policy that
pertains to all of the bidder's employees working on the project;



   (L)   Confirm that any apprentices to be used on the project are
registered with an apprenticeship and training program approved and
registered with the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training (or any state or federal successor agency).



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.48  CERTIFIED PAYROLL.



   All contractors and subcontractors are required to submit to the
awarding agency, and General Contractor, if applicable, an approved and
detailed certified payroll on a weekly basis, unless different payroll
reporting requirements are stated under the bid specifications or contract.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.49  ADDITIONAL CRITERIA.



   The city may also request evidence of and/or consider the following
factors when identifying responsible bidders for the purpose of awarding
contractors under this chapter.



   (A)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract;



   (B)   The capacity of the bidder to perform the contract promptly
and efficiently or within the time specified, without delay or interference;



   (C)   The character, integrity, reputation and experience of the
bidder;



   (D)   The quality of the bidder's past performance, including
performance of previous contracts, whether or not such performance was with
the city;



   (E)   The bidder's default under previous contracts, whether or not
such contract was with the city;



   (F)   The bidder's failure to pay or satisfactorily settle bills due
on former contracts, whether or not such contracts were with the city;



   (G)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract;



   (H)   The financial ability of the bidder to perform the contract;



   (I)   A statement regarding and/or disclosure of any determination
of a court or a government agency for violations of federal and state laws or
local ordinances including but not limited to violations of contracting or
antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws, environmental laws, the Occupational
Safety and Health Act (OSHA), the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), Common
Construction Wage Law, or the federal Davis-Bacon Act, and any findings of
“non-responsibility” by federal, state or local departments.



   (J)   Any additional factors the city determines relevant for the
contract.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.50  LOWEST BIDDER NOT CHOSEN.



   When a contract is awarded to a bidder other than the lowest bidder, a
statement of the reasons for such award shall be prepared by the awarding
agency.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



§ 36.51  ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS ACT.



   All requests for inspection or copying made by the public for
submissions tendered under this chapter shall be subject to disclosure in
accordance with IC § 5-14-3-1 et seq. the Indiana Access to Public Records
Law.



(Ord. 6630, passed 1-24-11)



CHAPTER 37:  COMPENSATION DURING ACTIVE DUTY



Section



   37.01   Authority



   37.02   Applicability



   37.03   Definitions



   37.04   Eligibility; exhaustion of paid leave and accrued vacation



   37.05   Amount of benefit



   37.06   Documentation



   37.07   Reliance authorized



   37.08   Source of funding



   37.09   Duration of benefit/extension



   37.10   Training exclusion



§ 37.01  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Indiana Home Rule
statute found at IC 36-1-3-1 et seq. and the statutory provisions concerning
active military duty found at IC 10-2-4-1 et seq.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.02 APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all military
mobilizations of municipal employees occurring subsequent to September 11,
2001.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.03 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "DESIGNATED RECIPIENT."  An individual, designated in writing by the
member, who shall be authorized to receive physical possession of
supplementary benefit checks issued pursuant to this chapter.



   "DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE."  An individual, designated on the
members’ current military Power of Attorney, as being authorized to act on
the members’ behalf during period of the members’ active service.



   "FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE."  An individual scheduled to work 35 hours per
week or more, in a position with no predetermined termination date.



   "GROSS SUPPLEMENTARY BENEFIT."  The monetary difference between the
amount shown as base salary on the members’ Leave and Earnings Statement
and the aggregate amount shown as regular salary for the member in the
records of the City Controller.



   "LEAVE AND EARNINGS STATEMENT."  The military pay stub issued by the
military to the member evidencing the members’ military earnings.



   "LEAVE OF ABSENCE."  An excused absence from the members’ respective
duties with the city, which shall be co-terminus with the members’
mobilization orders not to exceed 365 days, except as herein provided.



   "MEMBER."  Any employee of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, carried on the
muster roll of a reserve component and who is subject to call up to active
duty in the event of mobilization.



   "MOBILIZATION."  A declaration of national or state emergency by
President of the United States or the Governor of Indiana resulting in the
activation of reserve components.



   "MOBILIZATION ORDERS."  Those orders received by the member ordering
the member to active duty as part of a military mobilization.



   "NET SUPPLEMENTARY BENEFIT."  That monetary amount remaining after all
deductions are made from the gross supplementary benefit.



   "PART-TIME EMPLOYEE."  An individual scheduled to work less than 35
hours per week in a position with no predetermined termination date.



   "RESERVE COMPONENT."  The Indiana National Guard, or any of military
reserve elements of the naval, air, or ground forces of the United States.



   "SEASONAL/TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE."  An individual scheduled to work in a
position with a predetermined termination date (e.g. upon completion of
project, end of season, etc.).



   "SUPPLEMENTARY BENEFIT."  The monetary difference between the figure
shown as base salary on the members’ Leave and Earnings Statement and the
figure shown as regular salary on the city’s payroll records for the same
period of time.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.04  ELIGIBILITY: EXHAUSTION OF PAID LEAVE AND ACCRUED VACATION.



   (A)   In order to be eligible for the supplementary benefit provided
in this chapter, the individual must be a fill-time employee of the city. 
Non-full time employees of the city, including but not limited to, part-time,
temporary, or seasonal employees, are not eligible for supplementary benefits
under this chapter.



   (B)   In order to be eligible for supplementary benefits as provided
in this chapter, a member must have received mobilization orders to report
for active duty as a result of a mobilization ordered by the Governor or the
President of the United States.  Entitlement to supplementary benefits under
this chapter shall commence when the member has exhausted a period of 15
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any calendar year for military
training, as provided in IC 10-2-4-3, as a result of the mobilization.  In
the event the members’ period of active duty extends into a succeeding
calendar year, supplementary benefits under this chapter shall cease until
such time as the member has exhausted a similar period of 15 calendar days of
military training as provided in IC 10-2-4-3 for such succeeding calendar
year, at which time benefits under this chapter shall recommence.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as having any
effect on the members’ entitlement to accrued vacation days, it being the
intent of the Common Council that exhaustion of vacation days will not be
required as a precondition to entitlement to the benefit herein provided.  A
members’ vacation days shall continue to accrue until the members’
demobilization.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01; Am. Ord. 6210, passed 11-12-01)



§ 37.05  AMOUNT OF BENEFIT.



   (A)   The provisions in this chapter are applicable only in those
instances where the amount of military salary shown as base salary on the
members’ military Leave and Earnings Statement is less than the amount
earned by the member as regular salary as an employee of the city in the
position last held with the city prior to mobilization.  In those instances
where the members’ military base salary is greater than the members’
regular salary as an employee of the city, this chapter shall have no
application or effect, provided that, the city shall continue to pay the
members’ health and life insurance premiums during the period of the
members’ active duty.



   (B)   Upon meeting the eligibility requirements of this chapter,
including satisfaction of the annual eligibility requirements set out in §
37.04, the member shall be entitled to a supplementary benefit equal to the
monetary difference between the amount shown as base salary on the members’
Leave and Earnings Statement and the aggregate amount shown as regular salary
for the member in the records of the City Controller for the same period of
time.  This difference shall be designated as the "gross supplementary
benefit."  The Office of the Controller shall deduct from the gross
supplementary benefit all customary taxes, public employee’s retirement
fund contributions, and other usual deductions from the members’ municipal
salary as designated by the member or the individual authorized on the
members’ military Power of Attorney to act on the members’ behalf.  The
remaining amount shall be designated as the "net supplementary benefit." The
Office of the City Controller shall disburse to the member, or his or her
designated recipient, on a weekly basis, an amount equal to the members’
net supplementary benefit as calculated herein.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.06  DOCUMENTATION.



   In order to receive the supplementary benefit herein provided, the
member or the individual designated on the members’ military Power of
Attorney shall present to the Office of the City Controller a copy of the
members’ military Power of Attorney and the members’ military Leave and
Earnings Statement for each pay period indicated.  Upon receipt of this
documentation for each pay period, the Office of the City Controller shall
calculate the gross supplementary benefit, make appropriate deductions, apply
those deductions to the appropriate members’ accounts, and issue a
municipal check, or make a direct deposit if so directed in writing by the
member, in an amount equal to the net supplementary benefit, all as provided
in § 37.05.  No disbursement can be calculated or disbursed in the absence
of the documentation required in this section.  The Office of the City
Controller shall retain copies of all documentation upon the basis of which
disbursement of funds was predicated. Disbursement shall be made to the
designated recipient.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.07  RELIANCE AUTHORIZED.



   Upon receipt of the documentation required under § 37.06, the Office
of the City Controller is authorized to rely upon the accuracy of the
information contained in such documentation and act upon the basis of the
same.  Should the member change his or her military Power of Attorney or
should the member choose to change his or her designated recipient, it shall
be the responsibility of the member to advise the Office of the Controller of
the change in writing.  Such notification should be sent to:



      Office of the City Controller



      City Hall, 100 S. Union



      Kokomo, Indiana 46901



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.08  SOURCE OF FUNDING.



   Funding for supplementary benefits shall by drawn from the salary line
item in the budget of the department regularly employing the member. The
Office of the City Controller is authorized to seek additional appropriations
to compensate for any shortfall in the affected department’s salary line
item occasioned by payment of the supplementary benefits herein authorized.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.09  DURATION OF BENEFIT/EXTENSION.



   The duration of the supplementary benefit herein provided shall be for
the period of the employee’s active service as shown on his or her
mobilization orders up to a maximum of 365 calendar days.  Should the
employee’s mobilization extend past this period upon order of the Governor
or the President of the United States, the Common Council, by resolution, may
elect to extend the period of such benefit, on a case by case basis, as it
deems appropriate, subject to finding availability.  The supplementary
benefit herein provided shall cease immediately upon the death of the member
or the members’ release from active service.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



§ 37.10  TRAINING EXCLUSION.



   The supplementary benefit provided under this chapter is intended to
supplement the income of members called to active service as part of a
mobilization ordered by the Governor or the President of the United States. 
It specifically does not apply to periods of military training in excess of
15 days in a calendar year where no mobilization orders have been issued.



(Ord. 6209, passed 10-29-01)



CHAPTER 38:  CITY POLICIES



Section



Labor Relations



   38.01   Labor relations



City Employees



   38.15   Vacation policy



   38.16   Per diem and mileage reimbursement rates



   38.17   Blanket bond or crime insurance policy



   38.18   Internal control standards



Service Fees



   38.25   Dishonored checks and drafts



Sale of Real Estate



   38.35   Transfer of real estate to the Community Development
Corporation; authority; procedure



LABOR RELATIONS



§ 38.01  LABOR RELATIONS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “AFSCME.” A unit consisting of all employees covered by the terms
of the Collective Bargaining Agreement in effect as of the date of adoption
of Ordinance 6309 between the city and the American Federation of state,
county, and municipal employees, Local 2185, a member of Council 962
("AFSCME"), and as composition of the unit may from time to time be amended
in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement
pertaining to expansion of the bargaining group.



   “BARGAINING AGENT.” The labor organization committee selected by
the majority of AFSCME; the Fraternal Order of Police ("Police"); or the
International Association of Firefighters ("Firefighters").



   “CITY.” The Board of Public Works and Safety of the city when such
collective bargaining concerns all Factors of employment, except wages and
monetary fringe benefits; the Common Council of the city when collective
bargaining concerns wages and monetary fringe benefits.



   “CITY BARGAINING AGENT.” The representatives selected by the Board
of Public Works and Safety and the Common Council, which may include legal
representation. The “CITY BARGAINING AGENT” shall include at least one
representative whom the Common Council shall choose by a vote of the
membership and who shall be approved by the presiding officer thereof.



   “FACTORS.” Wages, hours of employment, fringe benefits, and working
conditions.



   “FIRE FIGHTERS.” The permanent uniformed members of the Fire
Department.



   “FIRE MANAGEMENT GROUP.” The management group of the Kokomo Fire
Department is defined as including the following positions and ranks: Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Battalion Chief, District
Chief, Fire Inspector, Assistant Fire Inspector, Fire & Arson Investigator,
Assistant Fire and Arson Investigator.



   “POLICE.” The permanent members of the Police Department.



   “POLICE MANAGEMENT GROUP.” The management group of the Kokomo
Police Department is defined as meaning all supervising officers holding the
rank of Captain or above.



   (B)   Right to collective bargaining and representation. Members of
AFSCME, the Police, and the Firefighters shall have the right to bargain
collectively with the city and to be represented by their respective
Bargaining Agent with respect to all factors. The Bargaining Agent shall also
have the right to retain legal counsel to represent it during collective
bargaining.



   (C)   Recognition of Bargaining Agent. The Bargaining Agent shall be
recognized as the sole and exclusive agent for all of the members of AFSCME,
the police, and the firefighters, excluding those individuals heretofore
defined as being members of the Fire Management Group or Police Management
Group, unless and until recognition of such labor organization is withdrawn
by vote of a majority of their respective group.



   (D)   Right to attend negotiations. The Mayor shall, in all
negotiations conducted pursuant to this section, be an ex officio member of
the City Bargaining Agent, and may attend all meetings in connection with the
negotiations, but without a vote. The parties to the collective bargaining
process may mutually agree to allow outside experts to individual negotiating
sessions for the purpose of making presentations or providing expert advice
on matters relevant to the negotiation process.



   (E)   Notice of negotiations. Either party may serve written notice
or request for collective bargaining with respect to any and all requested
Factors on the other party no sooner than June 1 and no later than June 15 in
the last year of a collective bargaining agreement, so that if wages and
monetary fringe benefits are agreed upon by the parties, those requests can
be reviewed and if deemed acceptable, appropriated by the Council to cover
the contract period which is the subject of the collective bargaining
procedure. Failure of both parties to request bargaining on or before the
deadline shall cause the automatic renewal of all terms of the existing
agreement for a period of one year.



   (F)   Duty of city to bargain. It shall be the obligation of the
City Bargaining Agent to meet and bargain in good faith with the Bargaining
Agent within a reasonable amount of time after receipt of written notice from
said Bargaining Agent of the request for a meeting for collective bargaining
purposes. Said notices for collective bargaining shall be given to the city
by service upon the President of the Board of Public Works and Safety of the
city, and upon the presiding officer of the Council. The obligation to
bargain in good faith shall include the duty to cause any agreement,
resulting from such negotiations, to be reduced to writing. Provided,
however, that the term of any such contract in writing shall not exceed three
years.



   (G)   (1)   Arbitration. In the event the Bargaining Agent and
the city are unable, within 60 days from and after the date of their first
meeting, to reach an agreement on a contract, the following procedure shall
apply:



         (a)   Each party shall select no more than five matters,
including wages and specific monetary fringe benefits, that were the subject
of bargaining proposals or counter proposals, which shall be submitted to
arbitration ("Arbitrable Issues"); and



         (b)   Only existing contract provisions directly
impacted by the Arbitrable Issues and non-substantive contract modifications
(such as new dates, signature page changes, and typographical errors in
current contract language) on which both parties have unconditionally agreed
in writing shall be subject to change through the arbitration procedure; all
other provisions of the existing contract shall remain the same and be
unaffected by the arbitration process regardless of any other tentative or
final agreements otherwise reached between the parties on such matters during
negotiations.



      (2)   Failure to request arbitration in a timely manner shall
be considered a waiver of any right to arbitration. The last position on each
respective, unresolved proposal, made by the city during the bargaining
process and any tentative agreements reached by the parties shall be deemed
the new terms for an agreement for the duration of a new three-year agreement.



   (H)   Selection of arbitrators. Within ten days from the expiration
of the 60-day period referred to in division (G) above, the Bargaining Agent
shall select one arbitrator, and the city shall select one arbitrator, and
shall immediately thereafter notify each other in writing of the name and
address of the person so selected. The two arbitrators so selected and named
shall, within 20 days from and after the expiration of the ten-day period
above mentioned, endeavor to agree on and select and name the third
arbitrator. If, on the expiration of the period allowed therefor, the
arbitrators are unable to agree on the selection of a third arbitrator, the
city and the Bargaining Agent, or either of them, shall in writing request
that the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service furnish, without delay, a
third arbitrator. Said third arbitrator shall act as chairman of the
Arbitration Board and shall call meetings thereof.



   (I)   Arbitration hearing.



      (1)   The Arbitration Board established pursuant to this
section shall, acting through its chairman, call a hearing to be held within
a reasonable amount of time after the date of the appointment of the
chairman, and shall, acting through its chairman, give at least ten days
notice in writing to each of the other two arbitrators of the time and place
of such hearing.



      (2)   The hearing shall be informal, and the rules of evidence
prevailing in judicial proceedings shall not be applicable. Any and all
documentary evidence and other data deemed relevant by the arbitrators may be
received in evidence. The arbitrators shall have the power to administer
oaths, to require by subpoena the attendance and testimony of witnesses, the
production of books, records, and other evidence relative or pertinent to the
issues presented to them for determination.



      (3)   The arbitration hearing conducted shall be concluded
within 30 days of the time of commencement, and the Board shall, as soon as
is reasonably possible, make written findings and conclusions on the issues
presented, a copy of which shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the
Bargaining Agent and the city.



      (4)   A majority decision of the Arbitration Board on all
matters, except wages and specific monetary fringe benefits to be paid to
AFSCME, the Police, or the Firefighters, shall be conclusive and binding on
both the Bargaining Agent and the city. Any decision of the Arbitration Board
with respect to such wages and specific monetary fringe benefits shall be
considered advisory and shall not be binding on the city unless the same is
approved and ratified by the Common Council no later than the last day on
which said Common Council may appropriate money to be paid during the period
covered by the decision of the Arbitration Board.



   (J)   Factors in rendering arbitration decision. The Arbitration
Board established pursuant to this section shall conduct the hearings and
render their decision on the basis of a prompt, peaceful, and just settlement
on the arbitrable issues between the Bargaining Agent and the city in respect
to those factors. The matters, among others, to be given weight by the Board
in arriving at a decision shall include:



      (1)   Comparison of factors with respect to other AFSCME
groups, Police Departments, or Fire Departments with similar and like factors
prevailing in not only the local area, but prevailing in other second class
cities.



      (2)   The interest and welfare of the public.



      (3)   Comparison of peculiarities of employment in regard to
other trades or professions, in particular:



         (a)   Hazards of employment.



         (b)   Physical qualifications.



         (c)   Educational qualifications.



         (d)   Mental qualifications.



         (e)   Job training and skills.



      (4)   Such other matters as the Board may deem pertinent or
relevant.



   (K)   Payment of arbitration expenses. All reasonable fees and
necessary expenses of arbitration shall be borne equally by the Bargaining
Agent and the city.



   (L)   Power of Council when contract constituted. Any agreements
negotiated between the Bargaining Agent and the City Bargaining Agent, either
before, or within 30 days after arbitration, shall constitute the collective
bargaining contract in respect to AFSCME, the police, and the firefighters
and the city for the period stated therein. However, such period shall not
exceed three years.



   (M)   Effect. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
reducing, diminishing, or restricting in any manner the powers given to the
Board of Public Works and Safety by state law.



(Ord. 6885, passed 2-26-18)



CITY EMPLOYEES



§ 38.15  VACATION POLICY.



   (A)   Retroactive effect.  Retroactive to January 1, 1997, city
employees can carry over unused vacation time from year to year with the
approval of their department head and are not required to take unused time
only in the succeeding year.



   (B)   Entitlement to vacation time.  City employees shall be
entitled to paid vacation time, based upon years of service, as set out, in
the case of employees subject to a collective bargaining agreement, in the
relevant contract, or, in the case of non-contract employees, as set out in
the personnel handbook as promulgated by the Mayor.



(Ord. 6317, passed 7-12-04)



§ 38.16  PER DIEM AND MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENT RATES.



   Mileage reimbursement rates and per diem allowances will be fixed at
the rate established by the state.  Parking and toll charges are not
included in the mileage rate and shall be reimbursed in addition to the
established mileage rate.



(Ord. 6524, passed 1-28-08)



§ 38.17  BLANKET BOND OR CRIME INSURANCE POLICY.



   (A)   In accordance with IC 5-4-1-18(b), the city is authorized to
purchase, as needed, a blanket bond or crime insurance policy endorsed to
include faithful performance to cover the faithful performance of all city
employees, commission members or other persons acting on behalf of the city,
including those listed in IC 5-4-1-18(a).



   (B)   The city shall fix the amount of the bond of city controllers
and Barrett Law fund custodians as follows:



      (1)   The amount must equal $30,000 for each $1,000,000 of
receipts of the officer's office during the last complete fiscal year before
the purchase of the bond, subject to division (B)(2) below.



      (2)   The amount may not be less than $30,000 nor more than
$300,000, unless the Common Council approves a greater amount for the officer
or employee.



   (C)   The city shall fix the amount of the bond for any employee or
contractor of the city "whose official duties include receiving, processing,
depositing, disbursing, or otherwise having access to funds that belong to
the federal government, the state, a political subdivision, or another
government entity" in the amount of $5,000.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing sections, the State Board of
Accounts may fix the amount of an official's bond or crime policy as
prescribed by IC 5-4-1-18.



(Ord. 6812, passed 12-14-15)



§ 38.18  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS.



   The City of Kokomo adopts as policy the Internal Control Standards as
set forth by the Indiana State Board of Accounts Uniform Internal Control
Standards for Indiana Political Subdivisions Manual as expressly written and
published by the Indiana State Board of Accounts in September 2015, and as
amended from time to time. In order to implement these standards, the City
Controller shall certify in writing that personnel as defined in statute have
received the required training. All officers, elected officials and employees
are required to comply with the policy. Employees who fail to comply with
this policy are subject to discipline, including but not limited to,
termination of their employment.



(Ord. 6828, passed 5-9-16)



SERVICE FEES



§ 38.25  DISHONORED CHECKS AND DRAFTS.



   (A)   In the event a check or draft is presented to the city for
payment of any outstanding balance due the city; including, but not limited
to utility fees, permits, user fees or ordinance violations and such draft or
check is later dishonored, the City Controller, or his or her designee, is
authorized to contact the issuer of the unpaid or dishonored check or draft,
pursuant to IC 26-2-7-3, and request payment of the amount due.  The City
Controller is also authorized to collect the sum of $27.50 which sum shall
constitute a service fee on returned or dishonored checks or drafts presented
to the city.



   (B)   All service fees collected under this section shall be
deposited in the General Fund of the city.



   (C)   If an individual or entity has failed to remit the amount due
for the dishonored check or draft as well as the service fee within ten days
of notice, as such notice is defined by IC 26-2-7-3, then the City Controller
shall forward any and all relevant information to the prosecutor’s office
for further action consistent with IC 35-43-5 et seq.



(Ord. 6625, passed 10-25-10)



SALE OF REAL ESTATE



§ 38.35  TRANSFER OF REAL ESTATE TO THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION;
AUTHORITY; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Mayor or his or her authorized designee, with the advice
of legal counsel, will negotiate the terms and conditions of the disposal,
transfer, or grant of real estate to the Kokomo Community Development
Corporation (“the Kokomo CDC”).



   (B)   The Mayor or his or her authorized designee is hereby
authorized and directed to execute, and the City Clerk is hereby authorized
and directed to attest if necessary, agreements and any related real estate
documents that will allow real estate to be disposed of or granted to the
Kokomo CDC in accordance with this section and to execute and attest,
respectively, all such documents, instruments, certificates and closing
papers and do all such acts as they, upon advice of counsel, determine
necessary or desirable to carry out the intent or terms of this section or to
take any other action necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes and
intent of this section.



(Ord. 6808, passed 9-14-15)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



         50.   [RESERVED]



         51.   WATER



         52.   [RESERVED]



         53.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



         54.   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM



         55.   SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



CHAPTER 50:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 51:  WATER



Section



   51.01   Reconnecting supply



   51.02   Changing supply



 



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Municipal separate storm sewer system, see Ch. 54



§ 51.01  RECONNECTING SUPPLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect, or reopen, the pipes
supplying the water furnished by the Kokomo Water Company, where such supply
of water has been discontinued, without first procuring from the Company
written permission to make such reconnection or reopening.



('75 Code, § 24-1) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  CHANGING SUPPLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to change, extend, or alter any
service or other pipe of any kind, used in any residence, business block,
public or private place connecting with the water mains of the Kokomo Water
Company, so as to increase or lessen the supply of water furnished by the
Company, without first procuring from the Company written permission to make
such change, extension, or alteration.



('75 Code, § 24-2) Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $l,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 52: [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 53:  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS



Section



   53.01   Application of chapter



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Reimbursement



   53.04   Schedule of charges



   53.05   Administration



   53.06   Enforcement



   53.07   Penalties



   53.08   Disbursement



§ 53.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter does not apply to an occurrence involving the release or
imminent release of less than 25 pounds of active ingredient of substance or
combination of substances that:



   (A)   Was commercially produced and sold as a fertilizer, fungicide,
herbicide, or pesticide; and



   (B)   Is, at the time of the occurrence, in the possession of an
individual who acquired the substance or combination of substances with the
intent to use it for the purposes intended by the commercial producer:



      (1)   In a dwelling owned and occupied by the individual;



      (2)   In the yard owned or occupied by the individual;



      (3)   On a farm owned by the individual.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall be defined
as follows:



   (A)   "EMERGENCY ACTION."  Any action taken to prevent or minimize
the harm to human health, to the environment, or to property from the
uncontrolled release of a hazardous material.



   (B)   "EMERGENCY RESPONSE AGENCY."



      (1)   The state police;



      (2)   The environmental response branch of the state
department of environmental management;



      (3)   A police department established under I.C. 36-8-2-2;



      (4)   A fire department established under I.C. 36-8-2-3;



      (5)   A volunteer fire company established under I.C. 36-8-12;



      (6)   Any agency of a governmental entity, or any combination
of agencies of governmental entities that provide:



         (a)   Fire fighting services;



         (b)   Emergency rescue services;



         (c)   Emergency medical services;



      (7)   Any agency of a governmental unit, or combination of
representatives from governmental units that provide manpower, equipment, or
supplies at the scene of a hazardous materials emergency.



   (C)   "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS."  A material or waste that has been
determined to be hazardous or potentially hazardous to human health, to the
environment, or to property by:



      (1)   The United States Environmental Protection Agency,
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Department of Transportation, or Occupational
Safety and Health Administration;



      (2)   The state waste management board.



   The term shall include all of the hazardous materials identified in 49
CFR 172.101.



   (D)   "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY."  An occurrence that involves
the controlled release or imminent uncontrolled release of a hazardous
material into the environment and that creates the possibility of harm to
human health, to property, or to the environment.



   (E)   "PERSON."  An individual, a corporation, a limited liability
company, a partnership or an unincorporated association.



   (F)   "PESTICIDE."  A substance or a combination of substances
commercially produced for use as:



      (1)   An insecticide;



      (2)   A rodenticide;



      (3)   A nematodicide.



   (G)   "RESPONSIBLE PARTY."  A person who:



      (1)   Owns a hazardous material that is involved in a
hazardous material incident;



      (2)   Owns a container or owns or operates a vehicle that
contains hazardous materials that is involved in a hazardous materials
emergency;



      (3)   Causes or substantially contributes to the cause of the
hazardous materials emergency; or



      (4)   Owns real estate where a hazardous material emergency
occurs and knew or should have known that hazardous material was being used,
stored, or transported on the real estate.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.03  REIMBURSEMENT.



   (A)   Persons who are responsible parties in connection with a
hazardous materials emergency shall reimburse an emergency response agency of
the city for all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the emergency
response agency in taking emergency action.  Reimbursement shall be
available under this section for expenses that are incurred by the emergency
response agency in taking the emergency action, except for expenses of a type
that the agency normally incurs in responding to emergencies that do not
involve hazardous materials.  Reimbursement for expenses is not available
under this section if those expenses may be reimbursed by the federal
government under Section 123 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization
Act of 1986, 42 U.S.C. 9623.



   (B)   An emergency response agency of the city may obtain
reimbursement under division (A) of this section by filing an action for
reimbursement in a court of general jurisdiction of the county in which a
hazardous materials emergency arose.



   (C)   As a precondition to the filing of any such action, the city
shall first serve a written notice on the responsible party making demand for
the reimbursement and setting out the amount thereof.  A reimbursement
action shall not be filed until the expiration of 60 days from the date
notice is mailed to the responsible party.  Service by certified or
registered mail to the last known address of the responsible party shall be
sufficient to meet the requirements of this section.



   (D)   Any reimbursement costs which remain unreimbursed at the end
of the 60 day period set out in division (C) of this section shall become
subject to an enforcement action as provided herein.



   (E)   In addition to liability for non-payment of reimbursement
costs, failure to pay the same within the 60 day period above referenced
shall also render the responsible party liable to fines as hereinafter
provided.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.04  SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.



   The Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety shall, from time to time,
adopt a schedule of charges setting out an hourly rate for manpower (both
regular and overtime) and equipment used in responding to hazardous materials
emergencies by municipal emergency response agencies.  All supplies and
materials used shall be billed at a rate equal to their current replacement
cost.  The rates and charges so established shall be used in calculating the
reimbursement charges authorized under § 53.03.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   Claims for reimbursement shall be prepared by the department head of
the city department rendering the hazardous materials emergency response. 
The claim shall be forwarded to the office of the City Controller who shall
prepare an itemized summary of charges and serve the same upon the
responsible party as set out in § 53.03.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any claim on behalf of an emergency response agency of the city to
collect reimbursement from a responsible party shall be prosecuted by the
corporation counsel of the city or his designee.  In any action brought
pursuant to this chapter, the city shall be entitled to reasonable attorney
fees incurred to collect reimbursement for any responsible party, as well as
interest at the statutory rate and court costs.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.07  PENALTIES.



   A responsible party who fails to pay the amounts due under § 53.03, or
fails to make arrangements for doing so acceptable to the city within the 60
day period referenced in § 53.03, shall be subject to an additional fine of
up to $2,000.00 a day for failure to make reimbursement as provided herein. 
Each day beyond the 60 day grace period referenced in § 53.03 shall be
considered a separate violation.  Such fines shall be in addition to the
continuing duty of the responsible party, or parties, to reimburse the amount
calculated under § 53.05.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



§ 53.08  DISBURSEMENT.



   Reimbursement sums receipted by the city under this chapter shall be
used first to reimburse the budget of any municipal emergency response agency
for costs incurred by them in taking emergency action for the hazardous
material action giving rise to the charge for reimbursements.  Where funds
are reimbursed to the Kokomo Fire Department, such funds shall be placed in a
special non-reverting fund within the budget of said department.  Funds so
deposited may be used for hazardous materials emergency action training and
equipment.  Such funds may also be used to pay overtime incurred by the
department as the result of hazardous materials emergency action response and
cleanup.



(Ord. 6140, passed 10-25-99)



CHAPTER 54:  MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM



Section



Illicit Discharge Control



   54.01   Introduction; purpose



   54.02   Definitions



   54.03   Applicability



   54.04   Authority



   54.05   Discharge prohibitions



   54.06   Suspension of MS4 access



   54.07   Inspection and monitoring of discharges



   54.08   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices



   54.09   Watercourse protection



   54.10   Notification of spills



   54.11   Notice of violation



   54.12   Enforcement



   54.13   Appeals



   54.14   Remedies not exclusive



Post Construction Stormwater Management



   54.25   Introduction; purpose



   54.26   Definitions



   54.27   Authority



   54.28   Requirements



   54.29   Notice of violation



   54.30   Enforcement



   54.31   Appeals



ILLICIT DISCHARGE CONTROL



§ 54.01  INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city, in its capacity as an MS4 operator, is required by
327 IAC 15-13-14(c) to adopt an ordinance to prohibit illicit discharges into
MS4 conveyances, and to establish appropriate enforcement procedures and
actions.



   (B)   Therefore, the purpose of this subchapter is to provide for
the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and environment of
the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm
drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and
state law.  This subchapter establishes methods for controlling the
introduction of any illicit discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) within the city in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.



   (C)   The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any
user.



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.



      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   This regulation shall be known and cited as the City of Kokomo
Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Illicit Discharge Ordinance.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following shall mean:



   "AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY."  Employees or designees of the MS4
Operator designated to enforce this subchapter.



   "AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL."  The City of Kokomo MS4 operator, or any
employees, or designees of the said MS4 operator - designated to inspect,
monitor, and/or enforce this subchapter.



   "BOARD."  The City of Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.



   "BMP – BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES."  Any structural or nonstructural
control measure utilized to improve the quality and, as appropriate, reduce
the quantity of storm water run-off. The term includes schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, operation and maintenance
procedures, use of containment facilities, land use planning, policy
techniques, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge
of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or
stormwater conveyance systems. "BMPs" also include treatment practices,
operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   "CLEAN WATER ACT."  The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   "CLEARING."  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   "CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY."  Land disturbing activities associated with
the construction of infrastructure or structures.



   "CONSTRUCTION PLAN."  An ordered collection of drawings, narratives,
data and documents assembled for review, approval, authorization, and
establishment of guidelines for the imitation, management, and completion of
construction activities at a project site regulated by this subchapter. A
stormwater pollution prevention plan is a part of the construction plan.



   "CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SITE."  The physical location(s) or legal
boundaries within which a construction activity or a series of construction
activities is planned to be or is being accomplished.



   "CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS."  A stabilized stone surface at all points
of construction-related egress from a project site planned and installed in
accordance with specification from an approved reference manual, and
maintained throughout the period of land disturbing activities for the
purpose of capturing and detaining sediment carried by tires, tracks, or
other surface contact components of vehicles, earthmoving equipment, or
material and personnel transport conveyances.



   "DRAINAGE WAY."  Any channel that conveys surface stormwater runoff.



   "DEVELOPER."  A project site owner or person financially responsible
for construction activity; or an owner of property who sells, leases, or
offers for sale or lease, any lot(s) in a subdivision or larger common plan
of development or sale.



   "EROSION CONTROL."  A measure that prevents erosion.



   "POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN."  A set of plans prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer or Certified Professional in
Storm Water Quality (CPSWQ) indicating the specific measures and sequencing
to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and
after construction.



   "EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SYSTEM."  Appropriate control measures
combined to prevent or minimize the wearing away of soil, sediment, and rock
fragments by water, wind, or ice, and to intercept detached or suspended
particles to prevent their discharge from or within a project site.



   "FINAL STABILIZATION."  The establishment of permanent vegetative
cover or the application of a permanent, non-erosive material to areas where
all land disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land
disturbing activities are planned under the current plan.



   "GRADING."  Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.



   "HAZARDOUS MATERIALS."  Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   "ILLICIT DISCHARGE."  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 54.04.



   "ILLICIT CONNECTION."  An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including
but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain
system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or any
drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.



   "INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT."  A single parcel of land in a multi-parcel
development.



   "LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY."  Any manmade change of the land surface,
including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil,
excavating, filling, transporting, and grading.



   "MEASURABLE STORM EVENT."  A precipitation event that results in a
total measured accumulation of precipitation equal to or greater than
one-half inch of rainfall.



   "MS4 - MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM."  A system of stormwater
conveyances including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures - either owned,
operated, or regulated by a governmental agency that IDEM has designated as
responsible to eliminate or minimize pollutant loadings of the stormwater
entering waters of the state.



   "MS4 AREA."  Within this subchapter, the corporate limits of the City
of Kokomo under an NPDES Permit regulated by 327 IAC 15-13.



   "MS4 OPERATOR."  The person locally responsible for development,
implementation, or enforcement of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan
(SWQMP) for the City of Kokomo as regulated under 327 IAC 15-13.



   "NOTICE OF PLAN APPROVAL (NPA)."  A notification from the MS4 operator
to the project site owner that the construction plan for a project site has
been reviewed and approved by the MS4 operator.  The project site owner must
insert the NPA with the notice of intent sent to the Director of IDEM at
least 48 hours prior to initiating land disturbing activities at the
construction project site.



   "NPDES."  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, a
program administered by IDEM to reduce or eliminate the pollutant loadings
into public waters.



   "NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT."  A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   "NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE."  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   "PEAK DISCHARGE."  The maximum rate of flow from a point of stormwater
discharge during or immediately following a storm event, usually in reference
to a specific return period or 'design storm'.



   "PERIMETER CONTROL."  A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.



   "PERMANENT STABILIZATION."  The establishment, at a uniform minimum of
70% across the disturbed areas, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive
material that ensures the resistance of the underlying soil to erosion,
sliding, or other movement.



   "PHASING OF CONSTRUCTION."  Sequential development of smaller portions
of a large project site, stabilizing each portion before initiating land
disturbing activities on the next portion, to minimize exposure of land to
erosion.



   "POLLUTANT."  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   "RUNOFF."  An accumulation of stormwater flow that is moving across
the surface of the earth as sheet flow or concentrated flow in natural
surface watercourses, drains, or waterways.



   "RESPONSIBLE PARTY."  Any individual, association, organization,
partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law as the
owner, or acting as the owner's agent.



   "SEDIMENT."  Solid material, both organic and mineral, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.



   "SEDIMENTATION."  The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated
sediment carried by stormwater runoff.



   "SEDIMENT CONTROL."  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.



   "SITE."  A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   "SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT."  A permit issued by the municipality for
the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff, and grading.



   "START OF CONSTRUCTION."  The first land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings such as garages.



   "STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN."  A plan developed to minimize
the impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction and
post-construction activities, identify sources of pollution or contamination
at a site, and describe the Best Management Practices to be implemented by a
person or business to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters.



   "STORMWATER."  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   "STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE."  A practice or combination of practices
to control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.



   "TEMPORARY STABILIZATION."  The covering of soil to ensure its
resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement. The term includes
vegetative cover, anchored mulch, or other non-erosive materials applied at a
uniform minimum density of 70% across the disturbed areas of a project site.



   "TRACKING."  The movement and re-depositing of dirt, mud, aggregate,
sediment, or other stormwater pollutants from a project site by the actions
of wheels, tires, skids, tracks, or other surface contact components of cars,
trucks, heavy equipment, or material and personnel transport conveyances.



   "WASTEWATER."  Any water, or other liquid mixed with water, other than
uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a site or facility.



   "WATERCOURSE."  Any body of water, including, but not limited to
lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated within the city.



   "WATERS OF THE STATE."  As defined in I.C. 13-11-2-265.



   "WATERWAY."  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the public storm drainage system.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 - Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System generated on any developed and undeveloped lands
unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.04  AUTHORITY.



   The city and the MS4 operator shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this subchapter under authority granted by I.C. 36-1-4,
36-1-6, 36-7-4, 36-8-2, and 32-30-6 and all acts supplemental and amendatory
thereto.  Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency, may be delegated in writing by the MS4 operator to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the city MS4. The requirements and/or provisions of this subchapter do not
pre-empt or limit more stringent stormwater management requirements, and/or
regulatory powers, of any other lawful regulatory governing body.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.05  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but
not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than
stormwater.



      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as
follows:



         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this subchapter: water line flushing or other
potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, rising ground
water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or
wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one
PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not
containing pollutants.



         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



         (c)   Dye testing is considered an allowable discharge.



         (d)   The prohibition shall not apply to any
non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority
of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger
is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order
and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval
has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city
MS4 operator prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
subchapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.06  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Detection of illicit discharge suspension.  Any business,
facility, or person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge.  The authorized enforcement agency will notify
a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.  The violator may
petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and
hearing.  A person shall be considered in violation of this subchapter, if
they reinstate MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of the city MS4.



   (B)   Emergency suspension.  The city MS4 may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a business, facility, or person when
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened illicit
discharge which may present imminent and substantial danger to the health and
welfare of citizens, the environment, the MS4, or Waters of the State of
Indiana. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued
during an emergency, the city MS4 may take such steps as deemed necessary to
stop the violator's discharge into the MS4 conveyance system.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.07  INSPECTION AND MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to all facilities that
have stormwater discharges, including those with construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city MS4 shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter.  If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement
agency.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city MS4 ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city MS4 shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city
MS4 operator to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.



      (4)   The city MS4 has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city MS4 and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by
the operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city MS4 access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of
this subchapter.  A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the city MS4 operator, or designated
representative, reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose
of conducting any activity authorized or required by this subchapter.



      (7)   If the city MS4 operator, or designated representative,
has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he or she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of
the community, then the city MS4 may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.08  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   Any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
the pollution or contamination of the city MS4 conveyance system shall
incorporate technical standards and design methods specified in the city
Stormwater Management Plan Checklist and/or the Operation and Maintenance
Plan for Structural Best Management Practices.  The owner, operator, and/or
responsible party of any facility shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the MS4 conveyance system through the use of these
structural and non-structural BMPs.  Further, any person responsible for a
property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural
and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and
conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be
deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be
part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan as necessary for compliance
with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.09  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property, or such person's lessee, through which
any MS4 regulated stormwater conveyance, including but not limited to any
natural and human-made watercourse or altered drainage channels passes shall
keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of
trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute,
contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.10  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system,
or water of the state said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such
a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or
facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city
MS4 operator, or designated representative, within three business days of the
phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.11  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Contents of notice.  Should the city MS4 find that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
subchapter, the MS4 operator may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible party. Such notice may require without
limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That all violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall be corrected and brought into compliance within 48 hours;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (5)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   Transfer of property within MS4's.  The transfer of a
property found in violation of this subchapter from one MS4 entity, into
another MS4 entity shall not indemnify the permit holder from any pending
enforcement actions.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.12  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Abatement.



      (1)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an
appeal, within ten days of the decision of the Board of Public Works and
Safety upholding the decision of the city MS4, then representatives or
designees of the said MS4 shall enter upon the subject private property and
are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city MS4
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set
forth above.



      (2)   Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs.



   (B)   Lien.  If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the city by reason
of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal
payments. Interest at the rate of percent per annum shall be assessed on the
balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.



   (C)   Injunctive relief.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
subchapter.  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions
of this subchapter, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of
the violation.



   (D)   Compensatory action.  In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this subchapter, the city may impose
upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



   (E)   Fines.  Any person that has violated, or continues to remain
uncooperative to, the terms of this subchapter shall be considered in
violation thereof. Each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter are committed, continued, or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,500 for each offense. In addition to any penalty authorized by this
section, any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of
the provision of this subchapter shall be required to bear the expense of
restoration. The city may also recover all attorney's fees court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this subchapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.13  APPEALS.



   (A)   Notice of violation appeal.  Any business, facility, and/or
person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
city MS4. The notice of appeal must be received within five days from the
date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of
Public Works and Safety, or their designee, shall take place within 30 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the Board
of Public Works and Safety, or their designee, shall be final.



   (B)   Enforcement appeal.  Should the Board of Public Works and
Safety uphold the notice of violation, and enforcement penalties be enacted
upon a business, facility, person, the responsible party may, within ten days
of receipt of such violation, file a written appeal to the Board of Public
Works and Safety for review of the penalties.



      (1)   The Board shall complete its review within 30 days of
receipt of said request for appeal. The Board's determination on the appeal
shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reason for its decision.



      (2)   In evaluating the appeal, the Board shall be bound by
the standards and review criteria contained or referenced herein.



      (3)   Should the decision of the Board uphold the amount of
enforcement costs, then the property owner shall be responsible to pay said
costs within 30 days of the final ruling.



      (4)   All determinations of the Board arising out of this
section shall be final.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.14  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.



(Ord. 6472, passed 4-9-07)



POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



§ 54.25  INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum post
construction stormwater management requirements, and also to protect the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public within this jurisdiction
through the regulation of stormwater discharges to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) as required by federal and state law.  This
subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the MS4 in compliance with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this
subchapter are:



   (A)   To regulate, and reduce, the contribution of pollutants to MS4
conveyances from post construction stormwater discharges;



   (B)   To reduce and/or minimize the total annual surface water
runoff rate and volume entering into the MS4 conveyance system through post
construction stormwater management controls;



   (C)   To require permanent post construction stormwater runoff
controls be included as part of new development, and retrofit existing
development where practicable to improve overall water quality within the MS4
conveyance system;



   (D)   To establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for
and maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater Best Management
Practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are
maintained, and do not threaten public safety;



   (E)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures as necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter; and



   (F)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and
permits by owners of construction sites, developments and permanent Best
Management Practices (BMPs) within the MS4 jurisdictional limits of the city.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning set forth in this section:



   "AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY."  Employees or designees of the MS4
operator designated to enforce this subchapter.



   "AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL."  The city MS4 operator, or any employees, or
designees of the said MS4 operator, designated to inspect, monitor, and/or
enforce this subchapter.



   "AVERAGE ANNUAL RAINFALL."  A typical calendar year of precipitation,
excluding snowfalls.



   "BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS)."  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping measures, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. "BMPs" also include structural and non-structural
treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, and drainage from raw
materials storage.



   "BOARD."  The city Board of Public Works and Safety.



   "COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM."  A sewer system which carries both stormwater
runoff and sanitary sewage within the same conveyance.



   "CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY."  Construction activity may include any
clearing, construction, demolition, dewatering, digging, drainage
installation, dredging, excavation, filling, grading, grubbing, paving,
stripping, removal of vegetation, and transporting of soil.



   "CONSTRUCTION SITE."  Any location where construction activity occurs.



   "CONTRACTOR."  Any person performing or managing construction work at
a construction site, including, but not limited to, any construction manager,
general contractor or subcontractor, and any person engaged in any one or
more of the following: earthwork, pipework, paving, building, plumbing,
mechanical, electrical, landscaping or material supply.



   "CLEARING."  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   "CITY."  City of Kokomo, Indiana.



   "DESIGN STORM."  A hypothetical rainfall event characterized by
specific duration, temporal distribution, rainfall intensity, return
frequency, and total depth or quantity of rainfall.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  The conversion of existing agricultural, fallow, or
wooded lands to a commercial, industrial, municipal, residential,
institutional, or roadway land usage.



   "DISTURBED AREA."  That area of the land's surface disturbed by any
work or activity upon the property by grading; excavating; stockpiling;
filling; clearing; vegetation removal; removal or deposition of any rock,
soil, or other materials; or other activities which expose soil. Disturbed
area does not include the tillage of land that is zoned for agricultural use.



   "EARTHWORK."  The disturbance of soil on a site associated with
clearing, grading, or excavation activities.



   "EROSION."  The detachment and movement of soil particles by water,
wind, ice or gravity.



   "EROSION CONTROL."  Measures that prevent soil erosion to the maximum
extent practicable.



   "FINAL STABILIZATION."  When all land disturbing activities at the
construction site are completed; and a uniform perennial vegetative cover, or
employment of equivalent permanent stabilization measures, have been
established with a density of at least 70% for all areas unpaved or not
covered by structures.



   "FINANCIAL GUARANTEE."  A maintenance bond, performance bond, surety
bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or similar guarantees submitted to the
Board of Public Works and Safety by the responsible party, to assure that
requirements of the subchapter are carried out in compliance with the
stormwater management plan.



   "GRADING."  Leveling of excavated or fill material, including the
resulting conditions thereof.



   "IMPERVIOUS SURFACE."  Any material or area that releases all or a
large portion of the precipitation that falls upon it as runoff.



   "INFILTRATION."  The entry of precipitation or runoff into or through
the soil.



   "INFILTRATION SYSTEM."  A device or practice designed to specifically
encourage infiltration, such as basins, rainwater gardens, stormwater swales,
etc.



   "MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT."  A legal document that provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater management practices.



   "MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)."  Publicly-owned
facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including any
roads or municipal streets with drainage systems, catch basins, inlets,
gutters, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, detention and retention
basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage ditches/channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures within the MS4 area.



   "NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT."  A permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   "NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE."  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   "OPERATOR."  The individual who has day-to-day supervision and control
of activities occurring at the construction site. This can be the owner, the
developer, the general contractor or the agent of one of these parties. It is
anticipated that at different phases of a construction project, different
types of parties will satisfy the definition of "OPERATOR" and the pertinent
portions of any applicable permit will be transferred as the roles change.



   "OWNER."  The person who owns a facility, development, part of a
facility, or land.



   "PERVIOUS SURFACE."  Any surface area that absorbs part of the
precipitation that falls upon it, and releases a smaller portion as runoff
which may include: grassed lawns, grassed channels, gardens, wooded areas,
pervious pavement, etc.



   "PHASING."  Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the
stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next.



   "POLLUTANT."  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes; yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; wastes and residues that result from
mobile washing operations; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



   "POST-CONSTRUCTION STATUS."  Following the completion of land
disturbing activity and final site stabilization site, after the construction
phase has been completed.



   "PRE-DEVELOPMENT CONDITION."  The extent and distribution of land
cover types present before the initiation of land disturbing construction
activity, assuming that all land use prior to development activity was
managed in an environmentally sound manner.



   "REDEVELOPMENT."  Any construction, alteration or improvement
performed on a previously developed site.



   "RESPONSIBLE PARTY."  Any association, cooperative, corporation, firm,
individual, limited liability company, organization, partnership, or other
entity recognized by law holding fee title to a property.



   "SEDIMENT."  Soil (or mud) that has been disturbed or eroded and
transported naturally by water, wind or gravity, or mechanically by any
person.



   "SEDIMENT CONTROL."  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.



   "SITE."  The land or water area where any facility or activity is
physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection
with the facility or activity.



   "SPILL."  A release of solid or liquid material, which may cause
pollution of any MS4 conveyance, or any waters of the State of Indiana.



   "STABILIZATION."  The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.



   "STORMWATER."  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   "STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWMP)."  A document which describes the
Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person during
the construction activities, which identifies sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant
discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving
waters.



   "STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN."  A plan that indicates the
specific measures and sequencing to be used for controlling stormwater runoff
and sediment/erosion control on a development site during and after
construction activity.



   "SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT."  Includes activities associated with the
platting of any parcel of land into lots and all construction activity taking
place thereon.



   "TECHNICAL STANDARD."  An approved document that specifies the design,
predicted performance, operation and maintenance, and specifications for a
material, device, or method.



   "UTILITY AGENCY/CONTRACTOR."  Private utility companies, public
utility departments, or other utility providers contractors working for such
private utility companies, or public entity utility departments, or other
utility providers engaged in the construction or maintenance of utility lines
and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas,
telephone, television and communication services.



   "WASTEWATER."  Any water, or other liquid mixed with water, other
than, uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a site or facility.



   "WATERCOURSE."  Any body of water, including, but not limited to
lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated within the city.



   "WATERS OF THE STATE."  As defined in I.C. 13-11-2-265.



   "WATERWAY."  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the public storm drainage system.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.27  AUTHORITY.



   The city and the city MS4 operator shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter under authority granted by I.C.
36-1-4, 36-1-6, 36-7-4, 36-8-2, 32-30-6; and all acts supplemental and
amendatory thereto. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency, may be delegated in writing by the city MS4 operator, to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the city MS4.  The requirements and, or provisions of this subchapter do not
pre-empt or limit more stringent stormwater management requirements, and/or
regulatory powers, of any other lawful regulatory governing body.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.28  REQUIREMENTS.



   Any person who undertakes or causes to be undertaken any land
development subject to this subchapter shall ensure that soil erosion,
sedimentation, increased pollutant loads and changed water flow
characteristics resulting from construction and post construction activities
are controlled so as to minimize pollution of MS4 receiving waters.



   (A)   Plan requirements and approval.  Any land-disturbing
activity, which is subject to the terms of this subchapter, shall include all
documents and information required within 327 IAC 15-5, and 327 IAC 15-5-6.5
as a part of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city MS4
operator, or their designated representative, prior to any construction as
detailed in the Construction Site Ordinance. The post construction Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan component shall contain the following:



      (1)   A description of potential pollutants and their sources
associated with the proposed land use;



      (2)   A sequence describing stormwater quality measure
implementation;



      (3)   A description of proposed post construction stormwater
quality measures;



      (4)   Location, dimensions, specifications, and construction
details of each stormwater quality measure;



      (5)   A description of maintenance guidelines for post
construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper long term
function.



   (B)   Exemptions.  The following activities are exempt from this
subchapter.



      (1)   Single-family residential strip developments consisting
of four lots or less;



      (2)   Additions or modifications to existing single-family or
duplex residential structures which disturb less than one acre;



      (3)   Agricultural farm activities associated with cultivating
and harvesting, and installation of conservation practices;



      (4)   Forest harvesting activities.



      (5)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property, or natural resources.



   (C)   Design criteria, standards, and specifications.  All
development that meets the requirements of this subchapter must address post
construction stormwater runoff quality, and shall incorporate technical
standards and design methods specified in the city Stormwater Management Plan
Checklist and/or the Operation and Maintenance Plan for Structural BMP'S. 
These will be maintained and periodically updated as needed by the city MS4,
and may include and/or incorporate standards from the IDNR Department of Soil
Conservation Indiana Handbook for Erosion Control in Developing Areas, and
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Field Office Technical
Guide.



      (1)   All site designs shall utilize accepted stormwater best
management practices to control peak flow rates of stormwater discharges
associated with specified design storms, and allow treatment for water
quality purposes.



      (2)   Where practicable, sites shall preserve buffer strips
and riparian zones, minimize land disturbance, reduce surface imperviousness,
minimize directly connected impervious areas, maximize open space, direct
growth away from sensitive areas and toward areas that can support it without
compromising water quality, promote storage and infiltration, in any
combination as appropriate to reduce the impact of pollutants in stormwater
runoff on receiving waters.



      (3)   Stormwater discharges into sensitive areas (i.e. well
head protection zones, recreational waters, water supply reservoirs) may be
subject to additional performance criteria.



      (4)   Concentrated stormwater discharges leaving a permitted
site shall not result in an increased flood hazard, erosion, or other adverse
impacts to downstream property or public safety.



   (D)   Maintenance agreement.  An agreement shall be made to provide
for the maintenance of post construction stormwater practices beyond the
duration of the permit.



      (1)   The maintenance agreement provision shall be included in
the subdivision covenants which then will be approved by the city in
conjunction with final plat approval, and recorded with the Recorders Office.
As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed by the owner with the
city's approval for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure
proper function of the stormwater management facility.



      (2)   As a part of the maintenance agreement, an access
easement shall be provided for the post construction stormwater facility. The
said easement will allow for periodic inspections, at reasonable times, by
the city MS4 operator, or any designees thereof, to ensure that the facility
is maintained in proper working condition as to meet design standards any
other provisions established by this subchapter.



   (E)   Inspection.



      (1)   It shall be a condition of the site development permit
that the MS4 operator, or designated inspection representative, has the right
to enter a project site to periodically inspect for compliance with this
subchapter in accordance with 327 IAC 15-5-10.



      (2)   All post construction stormwater management facilities
shall have, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and
repair needs and to ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement,
the plan, and this subchapter.



      (3)   Results of all site inspections shall be made available
to inform the owner, and/or designated responsible party (i.e. homeowners
association, etc.), and will specifically indicate any corrective actions
required to bring the practice into proper working order. Any maintenance
needs shall be addressed in a timely manner as determined by the city MS4
operator, and the inspection and maintenance requirements may be increased as
deemed necessary to ensure proper function of the stormwater measure.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.29  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Contents of notice.  Should the city MS4 find that a
responsible party has failed to comply with the post construction
requirements, the terms of the maintenance agreement, or creates a situation
which becomes detrimental and/or injurious to the public health, welfare, and
safety which is deemed in violation of this subchapter the city MS4 operator
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible party.
Such notice may require without limitation the following:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations
shall be corrected and brought into compliance within 48 hours;



      (3)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;



      (4)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and



      (5)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   Transfer of property within MS4's.  The transfer of a
property found in violation of this subchapter from one MS4 entity, into
another MS4 entity, shall not indemnify the permit holder from any pending
enforcement actions.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.30  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Abatement.



      (1)   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an
appeal, within ten days of the decision of the Board of Public Works and
Safety upholding the decision of the city MS4, then representatives or
designees of the said MS4 shall enter upon the subject private property and
are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city MS4
or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set
forth above.



      (2)   Within ten days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs.



   (B)   Lien.  If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien
on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of
the provisions of this subchapter shall become liable to the city by reason
of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal
payments.  Interest at the rate of percent per annum shall be assessed on
the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation.



   (C)   Injunctive relief.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
subchapter.  If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions
of this subchapter, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent
injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of
the violation.



   (D)   Compensatory action.  In lieu of enforcement proceedings,
penalties, and remedies authorized by this subchapter, the city may impose
upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain
stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.



   (E)   Fines.  Any person that has violated, or continues to remain
uncooperative to, the terms of this subchapter shall be considered in
violation thereof.  Each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter are committed, continued, or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,500 for each offense.  In addition to any penalty authorized by this
section, any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of
the provision of this subchapter shall be required to bear the expense of
restoration.  The city may also recover all attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this subchapter, including
sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



§ 54.31  APPEALS.



   (A)   Notice of violation appeal.  Any business, facility, and/or
person receiving a written notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the city MS4. The notice of appeal must be received within five days from
the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board
of Public Works and Safety, or their designee, shall take place within 30
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the
Board of Public Works and Safety, or their designee, shall be final.



   (B)   Enforcement appeals.  Should the Board of Public Works and
Safety uphold the notice of violation, and enforcement penalties be enacted
upon a business, facility, person, the responsible party may, within ten days
of receipt of such violation, file a written appeal to the Board of Public
Works and Safety for review of the penalties.



      (1)   The Board shall complete its review within 30 days of
receipt of said request for appeal.  The Board's determination on the appeal
shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reason for its decision.



      (2)   In evaluating the appeal, the Board shall be bound by
the standards and review criteria contained or referenced herein.



      (3)   Should the decision of the Board uphold the amount of
enforcement costs, then the property owner shall be responsible to pay said
costs within 30 days of the final ruling.



      (4)   All determinations of the Board arising out of this
section shall be final.



(Ord. 6473, passed 4-9-07)



CHAPTER 55:  SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



Section:



General Provisions



   55.001   Purpose and policy



   55.002   Administration



   55.003   Abbreviations



   55.004   Definitions



   55.005   Establishment of pretreatment program



   55.006   Pretreatment charges and fees



   55.007   Sewer use and wastewater processing charges and fees



General Sewer Use Requirements



   55.015   General requirements



   55.016   Prohibited discharge standards



   55.017   National categorical pretreatment standards



   55.018   State pretreatment standards and environmental statutes



   55.019   Local limits



   55.020   City’s right of revision



   55.021   Dilution



   55.022   Toxic organic pollutants



   55.023   Slug discharges



   55.024   High strength wastewater



Sewer Connections



   55.035   Purpose



   55.036   Prerequisites; permits and charges



   55.037   Tap fees



   55.038   Effect of error in permits



   55.039   Appeal of sewer tap permit denial



   55.040   Connections by out-of-city properties



   55.041   Blasting



   55.042   Sewer pipes; composition



   55.043   “Y” branch connections



   55.044   Location and grade of pipe



   55.045   Joints



   55.046   Backfilling



   55.047   Barricades and lights



   55.048   Notice after installation and inspection



   55.049   Disconnection of nonconforming sewers



   55.050   Disconnection of pipes carrying rainwater



   55.051   Appeal of order to disconnect



   55.052   Bonding requirements



   55.053   Violations and enforcement remedies



Sewer Extension Policy



   55.065   General provisions



   55.066   Purpose of extension fee



   55.067   Restriction of extension fee use



   55.068   Establishment of assessment area and rate



   55.069   Extension fees: sewers greater than eight inches in diameter



   55.070   Establishing difference in cost of sewers



   55.071   Extension of sewers into undeveloped areas



   55.072   Extension of sewers to address public health needs



   55.073   Assessments for real estate not connected to POTW



   55.074   Credit for service line connections across streets



   55.075   Assessment rates



   55.076   Applicable assessment rate



   55.077   Actual assessment rate applied



   55.078   Connection to existing sewers



   55.079   Requirements of petitioner



   55.080   Properties not assessable



   55.081   Evidence of assessability



   55.082   Assessment on properties outside city



   55.083   Donated sewers



   55.084   Border sewers



   55.085   Sewers at excess depth; cost sharing



   55.086   Certified plans and specifications



   55.087   Required maps and records



   55.088   Separate accounting on extension fees and assessments



   55.089   Modification or waiver of requirements



   55.090   Record of modification or waiver



   55.091   Violations and enforcement remedies



Sewer Usage Rates and Charges



   55.100   General provisions



   55.101   Usage fees and assessments for utility services



   55.102   Wastewater processing fees: general policy



   55.103   Wastewater processing fees: schedule of rates and charges



   55.104   Wastewater processing fees: special situations



   55.105   Stormwater user fees



   55.106   Rates to be charged to city



   55.107   Preparation and billing



   55.108   Effect of error in billing



   55.109   Due date



   55.110   Penalty for late payment



Pretreatment Program Fees



   55.120   Purpose



   55.121   Wastewater discharge permit fees



   55.122   Other pretreatment program fees



   55.123   Annual review



Pretreatment of Wastewater



   55.135   Pretreatment facilities



   55.136   Additional pretreatment measures



   55.137   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans



   55.138   Hauled wastewater



Individual and General Wastewater Discharge Permits



   55.150   Wastewater analysis



   55.151   Individual and general permits: requirement



   55.152   Individual and general permits: existing connections



   55.153   Individual and general permits: new connections



   55.154   Individual and general permits: permit application contents



   55.155   General wastewater discharge permits



   55.156   Individual and general permits: signatories and
certifications



   55.157   Individual and general permits: permit decisions



Individual and General Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance



   55.170   Individual and general permits: duration



   55.171   Individual and general permits: contents



   55.172   Individual and general permits: permit issuance



   55.173   Individual and general permits: permit modification



   55.174   Individual and general permits: permit transfer



   55.175   Individual and general permits: revocation



   55.176   Individual and general permits: permit reissuance



   55.177   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions



Reporting Requirements



   55.190   Baseline monitoring reports



   55.191   Compliance schedule progress reports



   55.192   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   55.193   Periodic compliance reports



   55.194   Reports of changed conditions



   55.195   Reports of potential problems



   55.196   Reports from unpermitted users



   55.197   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting



   55.198   Discharge of hazardous waste



   55.199   Analytical requirements



   55.200   Sample collection



   55.201   Date of receipt of reports



   55.202   Recordkeeping



   55.203   Certification statements



Compliance Monitoring



   55.215   Right of entry: inspection and sampling



   55.216   Search warrants



Confidential Information



   55.225   Confidential information



Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance



   55.230   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



Administrative Enforcement Remedies



   55.240   Notification of violation



   55.241   Consent orders



   55.242   Show cause orders



   55.243   Compliance orders



   55.244   Cease and desist orders



   55.245   Administrative fines



   55.246   Emergency suspensions



   55.247   Termination of discharge



Judicial Enforcement Remedies



   55.255   Injunctive relief



   55.256   Civil penalties



   55.257   Criminal prosecution



   55.258   Remedies nonexclusive



Supplemental Enforcement Action



   55.270   Penalties for late reports



   55.271   Performance bonds



   55.272   Liability insurance



   55.273   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties



   55.274   Public nuisances



   55.275   Contractor listing



   55.276   Violation of notification requirements



Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations



   55.290   Upset



   55.291   Prohibited discharge standards



   55.292   Bypass



Appeals of Administrative Enforcement Actions



   55.305   Appeal to Board of Public Works and Safety



   55.306   Appeal procedure



Employee Protections



   55.315   General



   55.316   Notification requirement



   55.317   Permitted dischargers



   55.318   All other dischargers



   55.319   Enforcement



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 55.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment works for the City of Kokomo and enables the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR]
Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the discharge to, and use of, public and
private sewers within the service area of the publicly owned treatment works
of the city; and establish requirements for the installation and construction
of service connections to building sewers within the city’s sewer service
area;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;



      (3)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;



      (4)   To protect the publicly owned treatment works, all POTW
personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public from the unregulated discharge of
wastewater having constituents that could endanger the POTW, the health and
welfare of POTW personnel and/or the general public;



      (5)   To promote reuse and recycling of non-residential
wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;



      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and



      (7)   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.



      (8)   To ensure that users and affected employees of such
users are aware of the employee protections provided by the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned
treatment works. This chapter authorizes the issuance of individual or
general wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance,
and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein; the Superintendent shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Superintendent may be delegated by the
Superintendent to a duly authorized city employee.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



 



BOD
 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand


cBOD5
 
Five-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand


BMP
 
Best Management Practice


BMR
 
Baseline Monitoring Report


CFR
 
Code of Federal Regulations


CIU
 
Categorical Industrial User


DML
 
Daily Maximum Limit


EPA
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency


FSE
 
Food Service Establishment


gpd
 
gallons per day


IML
 
Instantaneous Maximum Limit


IU
 
Industrial User


mg/L
 
milligrams per liter


NPDES
 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System


NSCIU
 
Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User


POTW
 
Publicly Owned Treatment Works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIU
 
Significant Industrial User


SNC
 
Significant Noncompliance


TSS
 
Total Suspended Solids


U.S.C.
 
United States Code




 



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.004  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.



   “ACT” or “THE ACT.” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.



   “ALLOCATION” or “POLLUTANT ALLOCATION” or “POLLUTANT
DISCHARGE ALLOCATION.” A percentage of the total pollutant mass available
for distribution among contributing dischargers which is assigned to a 
non-residential user determined to be a contributing discharger for a given
pollutant. The total pollutant mass available for distribution among
contributing dischargers shall be determined by subtracting the background
loading reserved for non-contributing dischargers from the maximum allowable
industrial loading for the pollutant. When granted by the Superintendent,
such distributions of the allowable pollutant loading for a given pollutant
shall be used to calculate user-specific pollutant discharge limitations for
contributing dischargers.



   “AMMONIA.” Ammonia measured as nitrogen. Sometimes described by the
term “AMMONIA-N” or “NH3-N.” Laboratory determinations for this
pollutant shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
latest edition of 40CFR Part 136.



   “APPROVAL AUTHORITY.” The Regional Administrator for USEPA Region
V. Alternatively, the State of Indiana Department of Environmental Management
(IDEM).



   “ASSESSMENT AREA.” The area of unplotted land extending to, but not
more than, 200 from the right-of-way line of the street in which a sewer is
located or from the sewer itself where the sewer is constructed in any
location other than the street or an easement immediately adjacent to the
street. In platted subdivisions the assessment area shall go to but not
beyond the far lot line of the nearest tier of lots.



   “AUTHORIZED (OR DULY AUTHORIZED) REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.”



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or
any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for
the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and  accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit or  general permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
above may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



   “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES” or “BMPs.” Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other  management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 55.016(A) and (B) and 40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). “BMPs” include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   “BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND” or “BOD.” The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Centigrade, usually
expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).



   “BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.” The Board of Public Works and
Safety of the City of Kokomo, Indiana; or any duly authorized officials or
boards acting in its behalf.



   “BUILDING DRAIN” or “HOUSE DRAIN.” The part of the lowest
horizontal piping of the building drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to a point approximately three feet outside the
foundation wall of the building.



   “BUILDING SEWER” or “HOUSE SEWER.” The pipe which is connected
to the building or house drain at a point approximately three feet outside
the foundation wall of the building and which conveys the building’s
discharge from that point to the public sewer or other place of disposal.



   “CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD” or “CATEGORICAL STANDARD.”
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317)
that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 369 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



   “CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER.” A non-residential user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.



   “CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND” or “COD.” A measure of the oxygen 
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.



   “CITY.” The City of Kokomo located in Howard County, Indiana or a
duly authorized representative.



   “CITY COUNCIL.” The Common Council of the City of Kokomo located in
Howard County, Indiana or a duly authorized representative.



   “CLASS 1.”



      (1)   Residential - a source of indirect discharge that meets
the definition of “user” as defined herein and discharges only domestic
water from a single family residence of a conventionally built structure;
manufactured housing; or condominium units; designed, built, and intended for
occupancy by an individual or a single-family unit, and being utilized for
residential purposes.



      (2)   Commercial - a source of indirect discharge that meets
the definition of “user” as defined herein and does not meet the
definition of residential.



      (3)   Wells - a source of indirect discharge that meets the
definition of “user” as defined herein, but is unmetered.



   “CLASS 2.” Categorical industrial user as defined herein.



   “CLASS 3.” Government - a source of indirect discharge that meets
the definition of “user” as defined herein and is a division that governs
and directs actions of the citizens of a community, society, or state and is
funded by a collection of funds from the citizens.



   “CLASS 4.” Public Schools (K-12) - a source of indirect discharge
that meets the definition of “user” as defined herein and is a
tuition-free school that is funded and operated by a government.



   “COMBINED SEWER.” A sewer which transports sewage or
pollutant-bearing wastewaters; as well as storm, surface, and ground waters
and unpolluted non-residential wastes.



   “COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.” Pollutants for which the treatment works
was designed to treat; which are BOD, TSS, Ammonia-N and E. Coliform
Bacteria; plus additional pollutants for which the treatment works was
designed to treat and for which the treatment works achieves removal to a
substantial degree. Such additional pollutants may include:



      (1)   Chemical oxygen demand;



      (2)   Total organic carbon;



      (3)   Phosphorus and phosphorus compounds;



      (4)   Nitrogen and nitrogen compounds;



      (5)   Fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.



   “COMPOSITE SAMPLE.” A sample which results from the combination of
multiple aliquots collected from a wastestream at selected intervals using
time-proportional or flow-proportional methods. Aliquots combined to comprise
a composite sample may be collected as discrete samples and combined manually
after collection; or they may be combined in a single collection vessel as
each aliquot is collected throughout the sampling period. “COMPOSITE
SAMPLES” shall be representative of the entire process flow. “COMPOSITE
SAMPLES” shall be comprised of at least four  discrete aliquots collected
at uniform time-paced (or flow-paced) intervals occurring at least once every
hour during the sampling period.



   “CONTRIBUTING DISCHARGER.” A non-residential user that discharges a
pollutant in excess of the domestic background concentration value
established for that pollutant in § 55.019(C)



   “CONTROL AUTHORITY.” The City of Kokomo located in Howard County,
Indiana; represented by the city’s Board of Public Works and Safety.



   “COOLING WATER.” Water used for cooling; without regard to whether
it has been in direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product. Such waters may include, but are not
limited to, untreated water originating from uses such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration. Such waters may include added pollutants from
industrial processes or waters where the only pollutant added is heat.



   “DAILY DISCHARGE.” The total mass or average concentration or other
measurement of a specified pollutant (e.g., pH, temperature) that is
discharged over the calendar day or any other 24-hour period that reasonably
represents the calendar day for purposes of sampling.



   “DAILY MAXIMUM.” The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.



   “DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT.” The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.



   “DIRECT DISCHARGE.” The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the state.



   “DISCRETE SAMPLE.” A sample which consists of a single aliquot
collected from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream
and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. Such aliquots shall be
entirely independent and separate from other aliquots collected from the
wastestream.



   “EFFLUENT.” The water, together with any wastes that may be
present, flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle, vessel or other outlet.



   “ENVIRONMENTAL  PROTECTION  AGENCY” or “EPA.” The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly
authorized official of said agency.



   “EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE.” An additional charge which is
billed to users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess
of normal strength wastewater.



   “EXISTING SOURCE.” Any source of discharge that is not a “NEW
SOURCE.”



   “EXISTING DISCHARGE.” A discharge from a non-residential user in 
existence at the time that an MAIL for a particular pollutant is first
adopted in this chapter and from which a pollutant discharge allocation is
included in the “Local Limits Revision Summary Report” prepared on behalf
of the Superintendent in support of this chapter.



   “FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT” or “FSE.” Any hotel,
institution,  restaurant, hospital, catering establishment, facility or
similar location where garbage or wastewater originates from the preparation
of meals for consumption (whether consumed at the site of preparation or
elsewhere); or from industrial or commercial activities involving the
preparation or processing of food products.



   “GRAB SAMPLE.” A sample that is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed
15 minutes.



   “HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER.” Wastewater discharged by a user, as
herein defined, having an average daily concentration of five-day
carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (cBOD5) which exceeds 200 milligrams
per liter; or an average daily concentration of chemical oxygen demand (COD)
which exceeds 500 milligrams per liter; or an average daily concentration of
total suspended solids (TSS) which exceeds 250 milligrams per liter; or an
average daily concentration of ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) which exceeds 20
milligrams per liter.



   “INDIRECT DISCHARGE” or “DISCHARGE.” The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any source.



   “INFLUENT.” The water, together with any wastes that may be
present, flowing into a drain, sewer, receptacle, vessel, or other inlet.



   “INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM LIMIT” or “IML.” The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent
of the discharge flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   “INTERFERENCE.” A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and/or is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or of
the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in  compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder,
or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the Solid  Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances
Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.



   “LATERAL SEWER.” A sewer sized less than ten inches in diameter.



   “LOCAL LIMIT.” Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the city upon non-residential users to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).



   “MEDICAL WASTE.” Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   “MONTHLY AVERAGE.” The sum of all “daily discharges” measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges”
measured during that month.



   “MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT” or “MAL.” The highest allowable average
of “daily discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all
“daily discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of “daily discharges” measured during that month.



   “NEW ALLOCATED DISCHARGE.” A discharge from a non-residential user
that is not an existing allocated discharge and for which the user requests a
pollutant discharge allocation.



   “NEW SOURCE.”



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (1)(b) or (c) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
onsite construction program:



            1.   Any placement,  assembly,  or
installation  of facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this division (2)(b).



   “NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.” Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   “NON-CONTRIBUTING DISCHARGER.” A non-residential user that 
discharges a pollutant at or below the domestic background concentration
value established for that pollutant in § 55.019(C).



   “NON-RESIDENTIAL WASTES.” Wastes from industrial processes
(including wastes from any sources identified as non-residential users as
defined in this section), trade or business activities (including food
preparation concerns, high-density residential facilities and businesses
operated from a residence); as distinct from residential or sanitary wastes
discharged from a single-family dwelling.  Any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance or form of energy that is discharged, permitted to flow or escape
from an industrial, manufacturing or  commercial facility or business
activity or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource.



   “NORMAL STRENGTH WASTEWATER.” Wastewater discharged by a user, as
herein defined, having an average daily concentration of five-day
carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (cBOD5) of not more than 200
milligrams per liter; or an average daily concentration of chemical oxygen
demand (COD) of not more than 500 milligrams per liter; or an average daily
concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) of not more than 250 milligrams
per liter; or an average daily concentration of ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) of
not more than 20 milligrams per liter.



   “OUTLET.” Any outlet, whether natural or constructed, which is the
point of final discharge of storm water, ground water, surface water,
wastewater, sewage or treatment plant effluent into any watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater; which may or may not
require an NPDES permit.



   “PASS THROUGH.” A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   “PERSON.” Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.



   “pH.” A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.



   “POLLUTANT.” Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
non-residential wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   “PRETREATMENT.” The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



   “PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.” Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a 
pretreatment standard.



   “PRETREATMENT STANDARDS” or “STANDARDS.” Pretreatment standards
shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, and local limits. This term shall also apply to best management
practices included in a categorical pretreatment standard promulgated by the
USEPA; or to BMPs developed by the Superintendent in accordance with §
55.019(H).



   “PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS” or “PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.”
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 55.016.



   “PUBLIC SEWER.” A sewer in which all owners of abutting property
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.



   “PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS” or “POTW.” A treatment works,
as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned
by the city.  This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
non-residential wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey
wastewater to a treatment plant.



   “RECEIVING STREAM.” The watercourse, stream, or body of water
receiving the waters finally discharged from the POTW’s wastewater
treatment facility.



   “RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY UNIT.” A building under one roof that is 
designed, arranged, and used primarily for dwelling purposes by a single
family.



   “SANITARY SEWER.” A sewer dedicated for the purpose of transporting
sewage or pollutant-bearing wastewaters; and to which storm, surface, and
ground waters and unpolluted non-residential wastes are not intentionally
admitted.



   “SERVICE CHARGE.” The assessment based on water usage levied or 
metered discharge applied to all users of the POTW for discharges of normal
strength wastewater.



   “SEPTIC TANK WASTE” or “SEPTAGE.” Any sewage from holding tanks
such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   “SEWAGE.” Human excrement and gray water (i.e., household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).



   “SEWER.” A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, wastewater or other
waste liquids.



   “SEWERAGE SYSTEM.” The network of sewers and appurtenances used for
collecting, transporting, and pumping sewage to the wastewater treatment
plant.



   “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” or “SIU.” Except as provided in
divisions (3) and (4) of this definition, a “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER”
is:



      (1)   A non-residential user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A non-residential user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the city on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   The city may determine that a non-residential user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a “NON-SIGNIFICANT
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER” rather than a “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
USER” on a finding that the non-residential user never discharges more than
100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding
sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown  wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   The non-residential user, prior to city’s
finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (b)   The non-residential user annually submits the
certification statement required in § 55.203(B) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)],
together with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and



         (c)   The non-residential user never discharges any
untreated concentrated wastewater.



      (4)   Upon a finding that a non-residential user meeting the
criteria in division (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from a non-residential user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.”



   “SLUG LOAD” or “SLUG DISCHARGE.” Any discharge at a flow rate
or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 55.016. A “SLUG DISCHARGE” is any discharge of a
non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or NPDES permit conditions.



   “STORM SEWER.” A sewer dedicated for the purpose of transporting
storm, surface and groundwater drainage but not sewage or other polluted
wastewaters.



   “STORM WATER.” Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



   “SUPERINTENDENT.” The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter. The term also means a duly authorized
representative of the Superintendent.



   “TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS” or “SUSPENDED SOLIDS.” The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.



   “USER.” A source of indirect discharge to the POTW. Any person who
contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
Notwithstanding any lease agreements or other such contracts, the property
owner of record shall be considered to be a “USER” when wastewater is
discharged or otherwise contributed to the POTW from the property or a
facility, building or tenant thereon located. Property ownership shall not;
however, constitute a prerequisite for consideration as a “USER” under
this chapter. “USERS” may be classified as residential or non-residential
as may be appropriate to identify the type of wastewater that the “USER”
contributes to the POTW.



      (1)   “RESIDENTIAL USER.” A source of indirect discharge
which meets the definition of a “USER” as defined above; and which
discharges only domestic wastewater from a single-family dwelling.



      (2)   “NON-RESIDENTIAL USER.” A source of indirect
discharge which meets the definition of a “USER” as defined above; and
which meets any of the following criteria:



         (a)   Any person which does not meet the definition of a
“RESIDENTIAL USER” as that term is herein defined; or



         (b)   Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the
contribution of non-residential wastes into the POTW; or



         (c)   Any source of indirect discharge which is
regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act; or



         (d)   Any source of indirect discharge which is listed
in division A, B, D, E, or I of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
(1987), as may be amended or revised; or



         (e)    Any solid waste disposal operation such as, but
not limited to, landfills, recycling facilities, solid or hazardous waste
handling or disposal facilities; or



         (f)   Facilities which store or treat aqueous wastes
generated by facilities not located on site and which dispose of these wastes
by discharging them into the POTW.



      (3)   “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” or “SIU.” A
non-residential user which meets the criteria established in division (1) or
(2) of the separate definition of “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” above in
this section.



      (4)   “NON-SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” or “NSIU.” A
non-residential user that does not meet the criteria in division (1) or (2)
of the separate definition of “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” above in this
section; or which meets the criteria established in division (4) of the
separate definition of “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” above in this
section.



      (5)   “CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER” or “CIU.” A
non-residential user which meets the criteria established in the separate
definition of “CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER” above in this section.



      (6)   “NON-SIGNIFICANT CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER” or
“NSCIU.”



   A non-residential user which meets the criteria established in the
division (3) of the separate definition of “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER”
above in this section.



   “WASTEWATER.” Liquid, aqueous or water-carried wastes, or otherwise
pollutant-bearing waters, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged
or otherwise contributed to the POTW. This includes pollutant-bearing waters
such as but not limited to:



      (1)   Spent or otherwise used water which contains pollutants
generated from single-family residential dwellings; or



      (2)   Spent or otherwise used water which contains pollutants
generated from industrial facilities, commercial establishments,
institutions, or other non-residential properties and/or facilities therein
contained; or



      (3)   Water that comes in contact with any raw material,
product, by-product, or waste during any production activity or industrial
process; or



      (4)   Sewage (i.e., human excrement and gray water) from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions.



      (5)   Spent or otherwise used water which meets the criteria
for high-strength wastewater established in the separate definition of
“HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER” above in this section.



      (6)   Spent or otherwise used water which meets the criteria
for normal-strength wastewater established in the separate definition of
“NORMAL STRENGTH WASTEWATER” above in this section.



   “WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT” or “TREATMENT PLANT.” That portion
of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
non-residential waste.



   “WATERCOURSE.” A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13; Am. Ord. 6852, passed 12-19-16)



§ 55.005  ESTABLISHMENT OF PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   The Superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to
establish a pretreatment program for the purpose of properly monitoring and
controlling the discharge of non-domestic wastewaters into the city’s
publicly owned treatment works (POTW).



   (B)   The Superintendent shall develop written policies and
procedures as necessary to ensure the effective implementation of the
pretreatment program. Pretreatment policies and procedures shall address
issues such as but not limited to the following items:



      (1)   The schedule and frequency of surveillance of
significant industrial users (SIUs);



      (2)   The schedule and frequency of surveillance of
non-significant industrial users (NSIUs);



      (3)   The enforcement response plan required by the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403); and



      (4)   Other enforcement procedures necessary to implement the
pretreatment program and the requirements of this chapter;



      (5)   Other pretreatment program requirements necessary for
the operation and management of the POTW’s delegated pretreatment program.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.006  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The city may impose reasonable fees for reimbursement of expenses
incurred from setting up and operating the city’s pretreatment program
which may include:



   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including
the cost of processing such applications;



   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
including the costs incurred in the collection and analysis of samples of a
user’s discharge; and expenses related to the review of reports submitted
by users.



   (C)   Fees for reviewing construction plans, accidental discharge
procedures, emergency contingency plans, standard operating procedures or
written environmental programs developed by users;



   (D)   Fees for responding to and investigating environmental
incidents;



   (E)   Fees the filing of appeals under §§ 55.305 and 55.306;



   (F)   Fees to recover administrative and legal expenses not included
in § 55.256(B); where such expenses are associated with enforcement activity
taken by the Superintendent to address IU noncompliance; and



   (G)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties that may be imposed by the city.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.007  SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PROCESSING CHARGES AND FEES.



   The city may impose reasonable fees for reimbursement of expenses
incurred from setting up and operating the city’s Sanitation Utility which
may include:



   (A)   Fees for activities conducted and services rendered with
regard to the establishment of connections to the city’s wastewater
collection system;



   (B)   Fees for activities conducted and services rendered with
regard to the termination of connections to the city’s wastewater
collection system;



   (C)   Fees for the processing of wastewater discharged to the POTW;



   (D)   Fees and surcharges for the processing of high-strength
wastewater discharged to the POTW;



   (E)   Fees for the processing of septage wastes processed by the
POTW;



   (F)   Fees authorized by §§ 55.035 through 55.053, §§ 55.065
through 55.091, and §§ 55.100 through 55.110;



   (G)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
including the expenses related to the review of reports submitted by users;



   (H)   Fees for reviewing construction plans, proposals, project
bids, or other information submitted by users or other persons related to a
proposed or ongoing sewer construction project or other Sanitation Utility
project;



   (I)   Fees the filing of appeals under §§ 55.305 and 55.306;



   (J)   Fees to recover administrative and legal expenses not included
in § 55.256(B); where such expenses are associated with enforcement activity
taken by the Board of Public Works and Safety, an authorized designee of the
Board, or the Superintendent to address noncompliance; and



   (K)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties that may be imposed by the city.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 55.015  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, the property owner of record
shall be responsible for any discharge to the POTW originating from their
property and shall ensure that such discharges comply with the requirements
of this chapter.



      (1)   Where a discharge to the POTW constitutes a violation of
any section of this chapter, the property owner shall bear primary
responsibility for ensuring that non-compliant conditions are corrected and
appropriate action is taken to prevent the recurrence of non-compliance.



      (2)   Private agreements between property owners and tenants
shall not relieve the property owner of their responsibility to ensure that
discharges originating from facilities, business activities or other actions
on their property are in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the requirements of division (A) above, the
Superintendent may elect to initiate appropriate enforcement action against
persons other than the property owner of record in cases where non-compliance
with this chapter is the result of a business activity or other action by
persons other than the property owner of record.



      (1)   The Superintendent, at his or her discretion, may elect
to initiate appropriate enforcement action against such persons in order to
ensure compliance and obtain the appropriate deterrent effect.



      (2)   Issuance of an enforcement action against the property
owner shall not be a prerequisite for, or bar against, the initiation of an
enforcement action against such persons other than the property owner of
record.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
discharge, or otherwise permit to be deposited or discharged to any natural
outlet within the city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any
of the following wastewaters; except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter:



      (1)   Sanitary wastewaters;



      (2)   Commercial wastewaters;



      (3)   Industrial wastewaters; or



      (4)   Other polluted wastewaters.



   (D)   Except as herein provided, no person shad construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other wastewater
treatment facility intended or used for the treatment and/or disposal of
sewage.



   (E)   No person shall construct, repair, modify or alter a lateral
sewer, publicly owned sewer, manhole or other publicly owned sewer system
appurtenance without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer.



   (F)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
pipe, means of conveyance, or equipment which is part of the sewage
collection system or POTW.



   (G)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following to any sanitary sewer unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent;



      (1)   Stormwater;



      (2)   Surface water;



      (3)   Groundwater;



      (4)   Wastewater from footer drains, yard drains, roof
run-off, parking lot run-off; or



      (5)   Non-contact cooling water or other unpolluted industrial
process waters.



   (H)   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
preventing the city from entering into an agreement between the city and any
non-residential user whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the city for treatment, provided that:



      (1)   The non-residential user shall provide sufficient
information, as determined by the Superintendent, to adequately characterize
the nature of the non-residential waste;



      (2)   The non-residential user shall provide the
Superintendent, or his or her designated representative, access to the
non-residential user’s facility in order to conduct inspections and obtain
samples of the non-residential waste if the Superintendent chooses to obtain
independent samples of the non-residential waste for analysis;



      (3)   Such agreements shall not include or constitute waivers
of pretreatment standards or requirements that are designed to protect the
POTW, its biosolids re-use and disposal, and its receiving stream from pass
through or interference.



      (4)   Upon evaluation of all information submitted or obtained
regarding the non-residential waste, the Superintendent at his or her sole
discretion shall determine whether the city may accept the non-residential
waste for treatment without causing pass through, interference, or otherwise
negatively impacting the POTW or the receiving stream to which the POTW
discharges;



      (5)   Where the Superintendent determines that the city may
safely accept the non-residential waste for treatment, the non-residential
user shall agree to discharge the non-residential waste to the POTW at a
location and in a manner prescribed by the Superintendent. The
non-residential user shall likewise agree to pay the city for treatment
services as determined by the Superintendent through the terms of the
agreement.



   (I)   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose located in the city
and abutting any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is
now located, or may in the future be located, a sanitary or combined sewer
owned by the city, are hereby required at their own expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein and connect such facilities and
non-residential waste outlets directly to the POTW in  accordance with this
chapter within 90 days after the date of receipt from the city of written
notice to do so, provided that a sewer owned by the city is within 300 feet
of the property line.



   (J)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pay
for the cost of constructing a lateral sewer to transport wastewater from a
building on said property to the publicly owned sewer main. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to pay for the cost of maintaining the
lateral sewer, including the tap saddle, from the building to the publicly
owned sewer main. The city is responsible for the maintenance and repair of
the publicly owned sewer main.



   (K)   A separate and independent sanitary lateral sewer shall be
provided for each and every residential building, except present sewer
structures in use; and except that where one building stands at the rear of
another on the same lot and no sanitary sewer can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. In such cases,
the lateral sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole lateral sewer considered as one lateral sewer for the
single property. The lateral sewer shall be owned and maintained by the
property owner.



   (L)   Existing sanitary lateral sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found to meet all the requirements for
new sanitary lateral sewers upon examination and testing by the appropriate
department charged with providing engineering services to the city.



   (M)   The appropriate department charged with providing engineering
services to the city shall develop written standards for the construction of
lateral sewers, sewer mains, manholes and other appurtenances which are
connected to the city’s sewer system. Such standards shall be submitted to
the Board of Public Works and Safety for approval. The department providing
engineering services to the city shall regularly review the construction
standards and revise them as  appropriate. Such revisions shall be submitted
to the Board of Public Works and Safety for approval.



   (N)   The construction of all sewers, components, systems or private
sewers which connect to the city’s sewer system shall comply with the
construction standards approved by the city’s Board of Public Works and
Safety. The acceptance of the applicability of these standards to all sewers
shall be considered part of the terms for the approval of connection to the
city’s sewer system.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.016  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or
any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW; including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade) using
the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0
standard units, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW
or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than 3/4-inch in any dimension;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause
interference with the POTW;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140 degrees
Fahrenheit (60 degrees Centigrade), or which will inhibit biological activity
in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to
exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Centigrade);



      (6)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through; but in no case greater than the discharge limitations for
non-polar oil and grease provided in § 55.019(B);



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 55.138;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby causing a violation of the city’s
NPDES permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of non-residential wastes;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Superintendent in an individual or general wastewater discharge permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
in amounts that cause, or have the potential to cause, excessive foaming in
the POTW;



      (17)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 10% or any single reading over 15% of the lower explosive limit
of the meter;



      (18)   Materials causing, alone or in conjunction with other
materials normally in the sewer system, an obstruction to the flow in the
sewer line or system; injury or damage to the sewer system; the creation of a
nuisance or prevention of effective maintenance or operation of the sewer
system;



      (19)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than the discharge limitations for polar oil and
Grease provided in § 55.019(B);



   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.017  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. The categorical pretreatment
standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-71 are hereby
incorporated by reference.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent, through the designated Pretreatment Program Coordinator,
may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
divisions (E) and (F) below and 40 CFR 403.6(c).



   (B)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
Superintendent may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed
either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual
non-residential users in accordance with 40 1228 CFR 403.6(c)(2).



   (C)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent, through the designated Pretreatment Program Coordinator,
shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) using the
combined waste stream formula.



   (D)   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical
pretreatment standard in accordance with this division (D) and 40 CFR 403.15.



      (1)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to
reflect the presence of pollutants in the non-residential user’s intake
water in accordance with this section. Any non-residential user wishing to
obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon
request of the non-residential user, the applicable standard will be
calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of division (D)(2) below
are met.



      (2)   Criteria:



         (a)   Either of the following conditions must be true:



            1.   The applicable categorical pretreatment
standards contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they
shall be applied on a net basis; or



            2.   The non-residential user demonstrates that
the control system it proposes for use or already uses to meet applicable
categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated,
meet the standards in the absence of pollutants present in the intake waters.



         (b)   Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and grease should
not be granted unless the non-residential user demonstrates that the
constituents of the generic measure in the user’s effluent are
substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the
intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process
water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.



         (c)   Credit shall be granted only to the extent
necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to
a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be
necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with
standard(s) adjusted under this section.



         (d)   Credit shall be granted only if the user
demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as
that into which the POTW discharges. The city may waive this requirement if
it finds that no environmental degradation will result.



   (E)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of pollutant concentrations, a non-residential user may request that
the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to
convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the
Superintendent. The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if the
non-residential user meets all the conditions set forth in divisions
(E)(1)(a) through (E)(1)(e) below.



      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the
non-residential user must:



         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water
conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use
during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;



         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies
adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;



         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the
facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on
data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the
facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily
flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of
current operating conditions;



         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or
pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are
not appropriate to control the discharge; and



         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable
categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the
non-residential user’s request for equivalent mass limits.



      (2)   A non-residential user subject to equivalent mass limits
must:



         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and
treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent
mass limits;



         (b)   Continue to record the facility’s flow rates
through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;



         (c)   Continue to record the facility’s production
rates and notify the Superintendent whenever production rates are expected to
vary by more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in



division (F)(1)(c) below. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the
Superintendent will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit
as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and



         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to
division (E)(1)(a) above so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass
limit.



      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the
Superintendent:



         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by
multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es)
of the non-residential user by the concentration-based  daily maximum and
monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard
and the appropriate unit conversion factor;



         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate,
will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as
necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and



         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in
subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the
non-residential user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as
a result of the implementation of water conservation methods and
technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original
calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of
dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to § 55.021. The
non-residential user must also be in compliance with § 55.272 regarding the
prohibition of bypass.



   (F)   The Superintendent may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual non-residential users. The conversion is at the discretion of the
Superintendent.



   (G)   Once included in its permit, the non-residential user must
comply with the equivalent limitations developed according to the provisions
of this section in lieu of the promulgated categorical pretreatment standards
from which the equivalent limitations were derived.



   (H)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. 
Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure
shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent
limitation.



   (I)   Any non-residential user operating under a permit
incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a
production-based standard shall notify the Superintendent within two business
days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level
will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not
notifying the Superintendent of such anticipated  change will be required to
meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the
original estimate of the long term average production rate.



   (J)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 1380 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.018  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS AND ENVIRONMENTAL STATUTES.



   Users must comply with the most current version of the pretreatment
standards for the State of Indiana codified in 327 IAC Rule 5; this
administrative rule is hereby incorporated by reference. Users must also
comply with the most current version of the Environmental Statutes for the
State of Indiana codified at IC Title 13; which is hereby  incorporated by
reference.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.019  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The Superintendent is authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).



      (1)   This chapter establishes uniform concentration limits in
division (B) below for the pollutants of concern listed in that division.
These limits shall apply to all non-residential users discharging to the
POTW. The pollutants regulated in division (B) below are those for which
composite sampling is inappropriate; or those for which a user-specific
pollutant allocation is impractical or otherwise inappropriate.



      (2)   This chapter establishes domestic background
concentrations in division (C) below for the pollutants listed in that
division. These domestic background concentration values shall constitute the
enforceable local limit for pollutants not listed in division (B) below and
shall apply to all non-residential users; except as provided in divisions
(C)(1) through (C)(3) below.



      (3)   This chapter also establishes maximum allowable
industrial loadings (MAILs) in division (D) below for pollutants of concern
listed in that division. These MAILs shall be used by the Superintendent to
establish user-specific discharge limits for contributing dischargers in
accordance with the provisions of divisions (D) through (G) below. Such
user-specific discharge limits shall be included in individual wastewater
discharge permits for the users to whom they apply.



   (B)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect the
POTW against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing pollutant concentrations in excess of the following
instantaneous maximum limits (IMLs) or daily maximum limits (DMLs). The
following limits shall apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. The Superintendent may impose  either mass limitations or
concentration-based limitations contained in the following table.



 

POLLUTANT
 
IML
 
DML


Oil & grease, non-polar
 
57 mg/l
 
28 mg/l


Oil & grease, polar
 
265 mg/l
 
32 mg/l


Phenols, total recoverable
 
13.2 mg/l
 
6.6 mg/l



 



   (C)   The following domestic background concentration values are
included for use in the establishment of local limits. The domestic
background concentration values listed below shall constitute the enforceable
local limit for pollutants not listed in division (B) above and shall apply
to all non-residential users with the following exceptions:



      (1)   Where the Superintendent has established a user-specific
discharge limit for a pollutant in an individual wastewater discharge permit
in accordance with divisions (D) through (G) below.



      (2)   Where the Superintendent has not established a
user-specific discharge limit for a pollutant; and an alternate compliance
criterion value is given below in the table.



      (3)   Where a non-residential user is regulated through an
existing individual or general wastewater discharge permit on the effective
date of this chapter and the Superintendent has not modified the existing
wastewater discharge permit, or issued a new wastewater discharge permit, to
include:



         (a)   Local limits provided by this division (C); and/or



         (b)   User-specific local limits in accordance with
divisions (D) through (G) below.



      (4)   Should the average monthly loading to POTW exceed 80% of
the design loading for cBOD5, ammonia nitrogen or total suspended solids, for
three consecutive months, the Superintendent will evaluate whether a local
limit is necessary for these pollutants and impose these limits on
non-residential users.



      (5)   Local limits established under this division (C) shall
apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated
otherwise. The Superintendent may impose either mass-based limitations or
concentration-based limitations contained in the following table.



 

POLLUTANT
 
DOMESTIC BACKGROUND




Arsenic, Total
 
0.0029 mg/l


Cadmium, Total
 
0.0001 mg/l


Chromium, Total
 
0.0011 mg/l


Copper, Total
 
0.1026 mg/l


Cyanide, Total
 
0.0040 mg/l


Fluoride, Total
 
0.5700 mg/l


Lead, Total
 
0.0008 mg/l


Mercury, Total
 
0.0001 mg/l


Molybdenum, Total
 
0.0045 mg/l


Nickel, Total
 
0.0010 mg/l


Selenium, Total
 
0.0001 mg/l


Silver, Total
 
0.0001 mg/l


Zinc, Total
 
0.0786 mg/l




 



   (D)   The following maximum allowable industrial loadings (i.e.,
MAILs) are established to protect the POTW against pass through and
interference. These MAILs shall be used by the Superintendent when
user-specific local limits are developed for pollutants not regulated under
division (B) above. The following MAILs represent the total combined loading
for each pollutant that may be accepted from all non-residential users
discharging to the POTW. Any user-specific discharge limits derived from the
following MAILs shall apply at the point where the user’s wastewater is
discharged to the POTW.



 



Arsenic, Total
 
5.7326 lbs/day


Cadmium, Total
 
0.2993 lbs/day


Chromium, Total
 
63.9337 lbs/day


Copper, Total
 
13.5432 lbs/day


Cyanide, Total
 
0.3591 lbs/day


Fluoride, Total
 
Report Value


Lead, Total
 
1.2408 lbs/day


Mercury, Total
 
0.0161 lbs/day


Molybdenum, Total
 
Report Value


Nickel, Total
 
50.7305 lbs/day


Selenium, Total
 
5.5826 lbs/day


Silver, Total
 
3.1566 lbs/day


Zinc, Total
 
64.0779 lbs/day




 



   (E)   Non-residential users may file a written request with the
Superintendent asking the Superintendent to establish user-specific discharge
limitations for any of the pollutants included in divisions (C) or (D) above.
The following provisions shall govern any user requests for the establishment
of user-specific discharge limitations:



      (1)   Deviation from the local limits established in division
(C) above (i.e.,  implementation of user-specific pollutant discharge
limitations) shall remain under the sole discretion of the Superintendent.
The Superintendent shall establish pollutant discharge allocations for
existing allocated discharges in accordance with the criteria established in
divisions (F) through (G) below. The initial pollutant discharge allocation
for an existing allocated discharge shall not be more stringent than the
corresponding proposed allocation in the “Local Limits Revision Summary
Report” prepared on behalf of the Superintendent in support of this chapter
unless the Superintendent demonstrates that a more stringent allocation is
technically feasible given the user’s current treatment system and is
necessary to prevent pass-through or interference.



      (2)    Non-residential users filing such a request must
justify to the city’s satisfaction that the local limits as included in
division (C) above cannot be reasonably achieved through the implementation
of BMPs, modification of existing pretreatment equipment, or installation of
new pretreatment equipment or facilities.



   (F)   The Superintendent, at his or her sole discretion, shall grant
a pollutant discharge allocation for any pollutant listed in division (D)
above on a case-by-case basis to only those non-residential users that
discharge a pollutant to the POTW in excess of the domestic background
concentration for a pollutant listed in division (C) above.



      (1)    The Superintendent will use professional judgment to
determine the total amount of each pollutant discharge allocation by
assigning a portion of the appropriate MAIL to each non-residential user
receiving an allocation for each pollutant for which an allocation is granted.



      (2)    The Superintendent shall consider, but not be limited
to, the following factors when performing case-by-case allocation of the MAIL
to contributing non-residential users:



         (a)   The contributing users current loading to the POTW;



         (b)   The contributing users need for continued loading
allocation;



         (c)   The user’s need for a new or increased
allocation;



         (d)   The user’s ability to apply pretreatment to
achieve discharge pollutant levels (i.e., treatability);



         (e)   Changes to the POTW treatment system that affect
the MAIL;



         (f)    Any other factor that the Superintendent
determines is relevant.



      (3)   Where the Superintendent grants an allocation of the
MAIL to a contributing user for one or more pollutants, he or she shall
establish corresponding user-specific discharge limitations for such
pollutants in accordance with the provisions of divisions (D) through (G) of
this section. Such  user-specific discharge limits shall be included in
individual wastewater discharge permits for the contributing user to whom
they apply.



   (G)   When user-specific pollutant discharge limitations are
developed from case-by-case pollutant discharge allocations; the
Superintendent shall ensure that:



      (1)   The total allocation to non-residential users for a
specific pollutant does not exceed the maximum allowable industrial loading
(i.e., MAIL) for that pollutant listed in division (D) above; or the most
current calculated MAIL available to the Superintendent.  Moreover; in order
to prevent over-allocation of the MAIL for a specific pollutant, the
Superintendent will reserve a portion of the current MAIL that will not be
allocated to non-residential users in order to ensure that a sufficient
portion of the MAIL is reserved for non-contributing users that discharge the
pollutant of concern at or below the domestic background levels listed in
division (C) above.



      (2)   Non-residential users receiving an allocation of the
MAIL for one or more pollutants of concern will have user-specific pollutant
discharge limitations included in an individual wastewater discharge permit.



      (3)   Non-residential users not receiving an allocation of the
MAIL will be required to discharge the pollutant of concern at or below the
domestic background concentration listed in division (C) above, or as
determined by the Superintendent.



      (4)   Non-residential users already discharging below domestic
background levels listed in division (C) must maintain appropriate treatment
to ensure that the level of pollutant in their discharge does not increase.
In such cases, the Superintendent shall establish an appropriate
user-specific pollutant discharge limitation below the domestic background
level with which such dischargers must comply.



   (H)   Best management  practices. The Superintendent may develop
best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual or general
wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits established in
accordance with divisions (A) through (G) above and the requirements of §
55.016. Such BMPs shall be considered pretreatment standards and be
enforceable as pretreatment standards in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c)(4).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.020  CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish pretreatment standards or
requirements which are more stringent than those established by state or
federal statutes and rules for the purpose of regulating discharges to the
POTW. Where such standards or requirements are established, they shall be
consistent with the purpose of this chapter. More stringent standards or
requirements shall be implemented by ordinance or in individual or genera)
wastewater discharge permits.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.021  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.022  TOXIC ORGANIC POLLUTANTS.



   (A)   General. For purposes of this chapter, the terms “TOXIC
ORGANICS”, “TOXIC ORGANIC POLLUTANTS” or “TOXIC ORGANIC COMPOUNDS”
shall include:



      (1)   Any of the organic pollutant parameters listed in 40 CFR
401.15 (as amended); and/or



      (2)   Any of the organic pollutant parameters listed in 40 CFR
423, Appendix A (as amended); specifically, pollutants #001 through #113 and
#129 listed in 40 CFR 423, Appendix A; and/or



      (3)   Any pollutant defined as a “TOXIC ORGANIC”, “TOXIC
ORGANIC POLLUTANT”, or “TOXIC ORGANIC COMPOUND” in the following
regulations (as amended): 40 CFR 413, 40 CFR 433, 40 CFR 464, 40 CFR 465, 40
CFR 467, 40 CFR 468 and 40 CFR 469.



   (B)   Sampling and analysis.



      (1)   All samples for toxic organic pollutants must be
collected, preserved and stored in accordance with 40 CFR 136, Appendix A.
Samples for volatile organics must be analyzed within 14 days of collection.
Samples for semi-volatile organics, PCBs and pesticides must be extracted
within seven days of collection and analyzed within 40 days of extraction.



      (2)   Toxic organics shall be analyzed using an approved
method listed in 40 CFR 136.3. Alternate testing procedures may be used
provided that such procedures have been approved for use by the EPA in
accordance with 40 CFR 136.4 and 40 CFR 136.5. Modifications to approved
methods may be used in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 136.6.



   (C)   Total toxic organics (TTO). For purposes of this chapter, the
terms “TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS” and “TTO” shall be defined as the value
resulting from the summation of all quantifiable values reported that are
greater than 0.01 mg/l; following analysis for the toxic organic  compounds
listed in 40 CFR 423, Appendix A (as amended). The sum of all values shall
not exceed the most restrictive of the following limitations applicable to a
specific user:



      (1)   The applicable categorical discharge limitation for TTO
for users whose discharge is regulated by a specific categorical pretreatment
standard (see 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471);



      (2)   A value of 2.13 mg/l for users whose discharge is not
regulated by a specific categorical pretreatment standard;



      (3)   A more restrictive limitation established by the
Superintendent in an individual or general wastewater discharge permit; 
where the Superintendent determines that a more restrictive limitation is
necessary to prevent pass through and interference; to preserve the intended
use of the POTW’s biosolid product; or otherwise to protect the POTW.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.023  SLUG DISCHARGES.



   (A)   General. For purposes of this chapter, the terms “SLUG”,
“SLUG LOAD”, “SLUG LOADING” and “SLUG DISCHARGE” shall refer to
any discharge meeting at least one of the following criteria:



      (1)   Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s NPDES permit conditions;



      (2)   Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 55.016.



      (3)   Any discharge which exceeds, in either concentration or
loading of any constituent, or in quantity of flow, any of the following
criteria:



         (a)   A value equal to or greater than the average
24-hour concentration (in milligrams per liter) for a given constituent
multiplied by a factor of five. The average 24-hour concentration value shall
be calculated using all available data (representative of normal operation)
from the most recent six-month period prior to the suspected slug discharge.



         (b)   A value equal to or greater than the average
24-hour loading (in pounds per day) for a given constituent multiplied by a
factor of five. The average 24-hour loading value shall be calculated using
all available data (representative of normal operation) from the most recent
six-month period prior to the suspected slug discharge.



         (c)   A value equal to or greater than the average
24-hour discharge flow (in million-gallons per day) multiplied by a factor of
five. The average 24-hour discharge flow value shall be calculated using all
available data (representative of normal operation) from the most recent
six-month period prior to the suspected slug discharge.



   (B)   Prohibition. Slug discharges as defined in division (A) above
are prohibited, and shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Reporting. Known or suspected slug discharges shall be
reported in accordance with the requirements of §§ 55.195 through 55.197.



   (D)   Slug discharge control plan. The Superintendent may require
the development of a slug discharge control plan per the requirements of §
55.137.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.024  HIGH STRENGTH WASTEWATER.



   (A)   The city reserves the authority to prohibit the discharge of
high strength wastewaters to the POTW when such wastewaters will cause or are
reasonably expected to cause overloading, damage, upset or interference in
the POTW.



   (B)   Any user discharging high strength wastewater to the POTW
shall be assessed surcharges in accordance with the requirements of §
55.103(A)(2).



   (C)   In cases where a user discharges high strength wastewater
(cBOD5, COD, TSS or Ammonia-N), which exceeds a discharge limitation
established in accordance with § 55.019; the user will be subject to an
assessment of applicable surcharges for high strength wastewater as provided
in § 55.103, as well as an appropriate enforcement action as provided by
§§ 55.250 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258 and §§ 55.290
through 55.292 and the city’s enforcement response plan, provided however
that the amount of any administrative fine or civil penalty assessed for
violation of a local limit shall be reduced by the amount of applicable
surcharges paid by the user for the excess discharges.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



SEWER CONNECTIONS



§ 55.035  PURPOSE.



   This section shall set forth the requirements concerning connection to
and disconnection from the city’s wastewater collection system.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.036  PREREQUISITES; PERMITS AND CHARGES.



   (A)   No owner or occupant of any real property shall tap or drain
either directly or indirectly into any public sewer until a sewer tap permit
has been obtained and until he or she has satisfied his or her obligation to
pay all tap fees, assessments, reimbursements, or pro rata shares of sewer
extension costs, established by ordinance or private agreement, that are laid
against that property for public sewers installed to serve it.



   (B)   No particular qualifications shall be required of any person
to obtain a sewer tap permit; but all such connections shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter as they relate to sewer pipe composition and
installation of sewer pipe. Should it appear at the time application is made
for a sewer tap permit that there is noncompliance with the provisions of
this chapter; no sewer tap permit will be  issued until the nonconformity
has been corrected.



   (C)   The POTW reserves the right to refuse the request of any
person or prospective user for connection to the POTW in the event that the
sewerage service requirements for the potential user, in the judgment of the
Superintendent or City Engineer, would result in any of the following
conditions:



      (1)   “PASS THROUGH” as that term is defined in § 55.004;
or



      (2)   “INTERFERENCE” as that term is defined in § 55.004;
or



      (3)   Hydraulic overloading of the wastewater treatment
facility; or



      (4)   Hydraulic overloading of combined sewer systems which
would result in dry-weather combined sewer overflows; or



      (5)   Hydraulic overloading of sanitary sewer systems which
would result in sanitary sewer overflows; or



      (6)   Discharges to the receiving stream which violate state
or federal water quality criteria; or



      (7)   Discharges to the POTW which would damage the POTW or
otherwise create an emergency situation.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.037  TAP FEES.



   (A)   In the event that a sewer connection or any connection is made
after January 28, 2013, from any lot, parcel of real estate, or building or
improvement of any kind located within the corporate limits of the city, or
outside such corporate limits, that connects with the POTW or otherwise uses
the POTW through any part of the city’s wastewater collection system, or
that in any way directly or indirectly uses or is served by such system, an
initial connection charge, unless otherwise provided by written contract as
provided by law, in the amount of $1,250 shall be levied against said lot or
parcel of real estate, all as more particularly described in division (C)
below. Such charges or surcharges shall hereinafter be referred to as “tap
fees.”



   (B)   All words and phrases in this section shall be construed in



concert with City of Kokomo Ordinance 6279, as amended.



   (C)   Schedule of tap fees. The following tap fees shall be levied
against lots or parcels of real estate upon which are located improvements
and connections which are attached to or use the POTW, either directly or
indirectly.



      (1)   Dwelling, single-family: $1,250 for each dwelling unit.



      (2)   Dwelling, multi-family:



         (a)   Up to four families: $1,250 for each dwelling unit.



         (b)   Five or more families: $1,250 for each stand-alone
building, plus $350 for each dwelling unit, plus $100 for each fixture
contributing flow to the POTW that is not located in a dwelling unit.



      (3)   Manufactured home park: $350 for each dwelling site,
plus $1,250 for each non-residential building with sewer service, plus $100
per fixture located in a non-residential building and contributing flow to
the POTW.



      (4)   Motels and hotels: $1,250 for each stand-alone building,
plus $350 for each rentable room located therein, plus $100 for each fixture
not located in a rentable room but which contributes flow to the POTW.



      (5)   Business and commercial: $1,250 for the first fixture
contributing flow to the POTW, plus $100 for each additional fixture
contributing flow to the POTW.



      (6)   Industrial establishments (light and heavy): $1,250 for
the first fixture contributing flow to the POTW, plus $100 for each
additional fixture contributing flow to the POTW.



   (D)   Tap fees are to be paid at the office of the Controller of the
city. The City Engineer shall not issue a permit to make such connection to
the POTW, until presented with a receipt from the Controller showing that tap
fees have been paid.



   (E)   In the event that buildings or site alterations occur after
the payment of tap fees pursuant to this section, the city shall adjust such
payments to compensate for the addition of fixtures, dwelling units or
rentable rooms.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.038  EFFECT OF ERROR IN PERMITS.



   A sewer tap permit given in error shall not operate to nullify any
obligation to pay all tap fees, assessments, reimbursements, or pro rata
shares of sewer extension costs that are established by ordinance or private
agreement that has been duly recorded.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.039  APPEAL OF SEWER TAP PERMIT DENIAL.



   Any person denied a sewer tap permit under § 55.036(B) or (C) of may
appeal the denial to the City Board of Public Works and Safety in accordance
with the procedures established in §§ 55.305 and 55.306 with the following
additional requirements:



   (A)   Any person denied a sewer tap permit under § 55.036(B) shall
include all the information required by § 55.306(A)(2) in the written
request for appeal required by § 55.306(A)(2). Additionally, the written
request for appeal shall also meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The appeal shall include the reasons given for the
denial; and



      (2)   The appeal shall include the reasons why such denial
should be reversed. Such reasons may include a showing that the sewer pipe
composition or installation method proposed, while not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, is, nevertheless, equivalent to the standards set
out in this chapter; and



      (3)   The appeal shall contain such additional information as
is sufficient to allow the City Engineer to review the petition prior to the
appeal hearing and make a recommendation to the Board of Public Works and
Safety as to whether sufficient cause is shown to issue a sewer tap permit.
The City Engineer may request the appellant to supply such additional test
data or other information as is necessary in order to enable the City
Engineer to make a recommendation to the Board. Costs associated with
supplying test data or other information requested by the City Engineer shall
be the responsibility of the appellant.



   (B)   Any person denied a sewer tap permit under § 55.036(C) shall
include all the information required by § 55.306(A)(2) in the written
request for appeal required by § 55.306(A)(1). Additionally, the written
request for appeal shall also meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The appeal shall include the reasons given for the
denial; and



      (2)   The appeal shall include the reasons why such denial
should be reversed. Such reasons must include documentation that the
conditions described in § 55.036(C)(1) through § 55.036(C)(7) cannot occur;
and



      (3)   Where the tap permit was denied based on §§
55.036(C)(1) through (C)(3) or 55.036(C)(6) through (C)(7); the appeal shall
contain such additional information as is sufficient to allow the
Superintendent to review the petition prior to the appeal hearing and make a
recommendation to the Board of Public Works and Safety as to whether
sufficient cause is shown to issue a sewer tap permit. The Superintendent may
request the appellant to supply such additional test data or other
information as is necessary in order to enable the Superintendent to make a
recommendation to the Board. Costs associated with supplying test data or
other information requested by the  Superintendent shall be the
responsibility of the appellant.



      (4)   Where the tap permit was denied based on §§
55.036(C)(4) through (C)(5) or § 55.036(C)(7); the appeal shall contain such
additional information as is sufficient to allow the City Engineer to review
the petition prior to the appeal hearing and make a recommendation to the
Board of Public Works and Safety as to whether sufficient cause is shown to
issue a sewer tap permit. The City Engineer may request the appellant to
supply such additional test data or other information as is necessary in
order to enable the City  Engineer to make a recommendation to the Board.
Costs associated with supplying test data or other information requested by
the City Engineer shall be the responsibility of the appellant.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.040  CONNECTIONS BY OUT-OF-CITY PROPERTIES.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority, per IC
36-9-2-18, to permit a property located outside the corporate limits to
connect to an existing sewer which is part of the sewerage system on such
terms as are deemed beneficial to the city.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.041  BLASTING.



   If blasting of rock is required to make any sewer excavation, the
utmost precaution shall be used, and it shall be with mats, timber, brush, or
other similar materials so that no life or property shall be jeopardized.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.042  SEWER PIPES; COMPOSITION.



   (A)   All sewer pipe utilized to connect to municipaily-owned storm
or sanitary sewers shall conform to standards for sewer pipe composition
approved by the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM), or such other
standards as have been approved for use by agencies of the State of Indiana
charged with promulgating and administering regulations governing sewer pipe
composition.



   (B)   All house and/or building lateral sewer pipes shall be a
minimum of six inches in diameter unless use of a smaller diameter pipe is
approved in writing by the City Engineer.



   (C)   A set of ASTM standards, or such other standards as have been
approved for use by agencies of the State of Indiana charged with
promulgating and administering regulations concerning sewer pipe composition,
will be kept on file by the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection
Services of this city, and will be open for public inspection during normal
business hours.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.043  “Y” BRANCH CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The connection between the building sewer and the municipal
sewer shall be made at the “Y” branch, provided there is one.



   (B)   If no “Y” branch was left in the municipal sewer for the
building sewer and the municipal sewer is not over 12 inches in diameter, a
“Y” branch shall be installed in the municipal sewer at the desired
location by the owner of the building sewer.



   (C)   Where the municipal sewer is over 12 inches in diameter and
where no “Y” branch was left for the building sewer, a hole may be cut in
the municipal sewer large enough to receive the end of the building sewer and
the connection made so that the building sewer enters the municipal sewer at
an angle of about 45 degrees.  A 45-degree “L” may be used to make this
connection. In no case shall the spigot end extend past the inside surface of
the municipal sewer.



   (D)   A smooth joint shall be made and the connection made secure
and watertight by encasing with concrete.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.044  LOCATION AND GRADE OF PIPE.



   (A)   The grade of a minimum six-inch building sewer shall not be
less than one-quarter inch per foot. Minimum slopes for larger diameter pipes
shall conform to the Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities as
promulgated by the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State and
Provincial Public Health and Environmental Managers, 1997 Edition, and as
thereafter amended, a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the
Department of Engineering, Traffic, and  Inspection Services.



   (B)   All pipe shall be laid on a uniform grade and, where possible,
on a straight line. Where any sewer cannot be laid on a straight line, a
manufactured fitting shall be used to make deflections that exceed
three-quarter inches per foot.



   (C)   Public sewers to be dedicated to the city shall be located in
a dedicated easement or the public right-of-way in front of the proposed
development. The installation of sewers in easements along rear property
lines is discouraged and prohibited without written request and authorization
from the City Engineer. The installation of public sewers along rear lot
lines may be considered when it is deemed by the city to be physically
prohibited to standard sewer installation methods, or necessary to service an
adjacent unsewered area.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.045  JOINTS.



   All joints between sewer pipes shall be made tight by the use of
suitable jointing material as determined by the City Engineering Department.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.046  BACKFILLING.



   (A)   The minimum cover over the top of a sewer shall be four feet,
unless the City Engineer, in writing, approves a lesser minimum. Such
approval may be made contingent upon the satisfaction of such terms and
conditions as are set out by the City Engineer in his or her written
approval. It is the intent of this section that the discretion granted the
City Engineer is to be exercised in those cases where strict adherence to a
four-foot minimum would be physically impossible, or would be contrary to
accepted engineering practices.



   (B)   Backfill material shall be grade “B” borrow or approved
bank run sand or gravel and shall be placed as backfill in six-inch layers
equally on both sides of the pipe mechanically compacted to a point 12 inches
above the top of the sewer pipe. The placement of this backfill material must
be equally placed so as not to disalign the sewer pipe. The top of the
granular backfill material shall be uniform so as to assure that the
compacted backfill material will provide the necessary proper support to the
sewer pipe. Backfill material to be placed between the area which is one foot
above the top of the pipe and the surface of the ground shall be installed in
a good workmanlike manner, and shall either be compacted with mechanical
compaction equipment or by the use of water jetting. If water jetting is
selected, the spacing of each jetting hole shall not exceed ten feet. The
area immediately below the ground surface shall be replaced with a minimum of
four  inches of top soil. The top soil layer shall be seeded.



   (C)   Backfilling for areas which are under hard surfaces, such as
sidewalks, drives, alleys, streets, and parking lots, shall be performed with
granular backfill which shall be either mechanically compacted or water
jetted between the area of one foot above the top of the pipe to the bottom
of the sub base required for the various types of hard surface. The type of
material and thickness of the sub base and the actual street material shall
be determined from the thoroughfare  cross section as listed in the City
Plan Commission Master Plan Ordinance, unless the City Engineer requires a
design of additional thickness due to either existing street or alley
conditions or anticipated conditions for the area. The repair of the actual
street surface shall be in compliance with the most current Indiana State
Highway Department specifications.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.047  BARRICADES AND LIGHTS.



   Proper barricades and lights shall be maintained on the banks of the
trenches made in connection with any sewer work in order to guard the public
against accidents occurring during the progress of the work.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.048  NOTICE AFTER INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Installation of all sewer pipe to be connected to municipally
owned storm or sanitary sewers shall conform to standards set forth by
agencies of the State of Indiana charged with promulgating and administering
regulations governing sewer pipe installation, and shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   After making each sewer tap and sewer installation, the person
responsible for the installation shall notify the City Engineer so that the
sewer may be inspected and approved before the excavation is backfilled.
Prior to approval of the sewer tap and sewer, testing of the sewer may be
required to assure acceptable performance. All testing shall be in accordance
with standards approved for use by agencies of the State of Indiana charged
with promulgating and administering regulations governing sewer pipe testing.



   (C)   As part of the inspection process, any sewer line in excess of
300 feet shall be televised, unless for good cause shown, upon application to
the City Board of Public Works and Safety, such requirement is waived.



   (D)   Costs associated with sewer testing and televising shall be
the responsibility of the person requesting approval of the sewer tap and
sewer.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.049  DISCONNECTION OF NONCONFORMING SEWERS.



   Any sewer connection found to have been made without a sewer tap permit
first having been obtained, or any connection or sewer which, upon inspection
as required in § 55.048, is found to be in noncompliance with the provisions
of this chapter, shall be deemed an illegal connection and shall be promptly
disconnected at the expense of the property owner and shall remain
disconnected until compliance with the provisions of this chapter is
demonstrated.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.050  DISCONNECTION OF PIPES CARRYING RAINWATER.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall have the authority to
require an owner of real property to disconnect from a building sewer which
drains into a sanitary sewer any downspouts, yard drains, or other drains
which carry the runoff of natural precipitation. Property owners shall have
30 days after notice to comply with any such requirements. All new
construction is prohibited from directing discharge of natural precipitation
into a sanitary sewer.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.051  APPEAL OF ORDER TO DISCONNECT.



   An order to disconnect a nonconforming sewer pursuant to § 55.046 or
55.049 may be appealed to the Board of Public Works and Safety in accordance
with the procedures established in §§ 55.305 and 55.306 with the following
additional requirements:



   (A)   The appeal shall include all the information required by §
55.306(A)(2) in the written request for appeal required by § 55.306(A)(1);
and



   (B)   The appeal shall include the reasons given for the order to
disconnect; and



   (C)   The appeal shall include the reasons why the order should be
reversed. Such reasons may include a showing that the sewer in question,
while not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is,
nevertheless, equivalent to the standards set out in this chapter; and



   (D)   The appeal shall contain such additional information as is
sufficient to allow the City Engineer to review the petition prior to the
appeal hearing and make a recommendation to the Board of Public Works and
Safety as to whether sufficient cause is shown to reverse the order to
disconnect the sewer. The City Engineer may request the appellant to supply
such additional test data or other information as is necessary in order to
enable the City Engineer to make a recommendation to the Board. Costs
associated with supplying test data or other information requested by the
City Engineer shall be the responsibility of the appellant.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.052  BONDING REQUIREMENTS.



   Should a proposal be made to the City Board of Public Works and Safety
that a privately constructed storm or sanitary sewer be dedicated to the
public for public use, the Board may condition its acceptance of any such
dedication upon the provision of such performance or maintenance bonds, or
both, as are required to assure the city that the sewer will be constructed
in compliance with city specifications and will continue to perform
acceptably throughout the term of the maintenance bond.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.053  VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   Any person found to be violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 55.035 through 55.052 shall be subject to the enforcement
remedies included in §§ 55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258,
and §§ 55.290 through 55.292.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



SEWER EXTENSION POLICY



§ 55.065  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   This Section shall set forth the policies and requirements concerning
the extension of areas to be serviced by the POTW through the extension of
the city’s wastewater collection system.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.066  PURPOSE OF EXTENSION FEE.



   The “extension fee” required by this chapter is a fee collected for
the purpose of having each sewer service connection applicant pay a
proportional part of the cost of providing the main and interceptor sewers
required to collect sewage from lateral sewers and service connections and
convey the sewage to the treatment plant, and is not intended to pay for
lateral sewers constructed for the primary purpose of accepting sewage from
service connections, accumulating the sewage and conveying it to the main and
interceptor sewers.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.067  RESTRICTION OF EXTENSION FEE USE.



   Extension fees shall not be credited, rebated, waived, or otherwise
used to permanently fund any part of the cost of constructing eight-inch
laterals, except where authorized in this section.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.068  ESTABLISHMENT OF ASSESSMENT AREA AND RATE.



   Extension fees and assessment fees on hand prior to construction of a
sewer may be used by the city to construct eight-inch laterals as well as
larger mains and interceptors provided an assessment area is established and
an assessment rate per 100 square feet is adopted, both of which when
multiplied together can reasonably be expected to yield sufficient return to
pay 125% of the cost of an eight-inch sewer system.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.069  EXTENSION FEES: SEWERS GREATER THAN EIGHT INCHES IN DIAMETER.



   (A)   The difference in cost between an eight-inch sewer system and
a large sized system may be paid for using extension fees; provided that the
need for such a larger system is clearly justified by one of the following
criteria:



      (1)   The size of the area served; or



      (2)   The type and quantity of flow; or



      (3)   The number and type of service connections anticipated;
or



      (4)   Any combination of the above-mentioned factors or others
not herein contemplated.



   (B)   At the city’s discretion, payments may be made either
directly to the contractor, or by paying, rebating, crediting, or refunding
the builder this difference in cost of the sewers as the extension fees are
collected.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.070  ESTABLISHING DIFFERENCE IN COST OF SEWERS.



   Unless competitive bids are available to establish the difference in
cost between eight-inch sewer systems and larger systems, the cost difference
shall be taken as 125% of the difference in cost of the materials required as
per annual bids to the city on such materials.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.071  EXTENSION OF SEWERS INTO UNDEVELOPED AREAS.



   Sanitary sewer extensions shall be constructed by the builder or
petitioner with his or her funds covering the cost of an eight-inch system
and city funds covering the additional cost of an approved system over eight
inches. The City may enter into a refund contract not to exceed 15 years to
assess and collect area assessments and pay those collections to the builder
or petitioner until the cost of the eight-inch sewer is refunded. The cost of
sewers on which there is a refund contract shall be established by public
bidding.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.072  EXTENSION OF SEWERS TO ADDRESS PUBLIC HEALTH NEEDS.



   The city may build with any combination of available funds, sanitary
sewers which are required to serve a pressing public health need of any area
within the city when it can be clearly established that ground and water
conditions are unsatisfactory for the absorption of septic tank effluent
provided an assessment area is established and an assessment rate per 100
square feet is adopted which, when multiplied together, can be expected to
yield sufficient return to pay 125% of the cost of an eight-inch system.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.073  ASSESSMENTS FOR REAL ESTATE NOT CONNECTED TO POTW.



   All real estate lying adjacent to or near a sanitary sewer which is or
becomes a part of the sewer system is subject to an area assessment in
addition to the tap fee required by §§ 55.035 through 55.053 unless it can
be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that:



   (A)   The real estate was not connected to a sanitary sewer on or
before December 31, 1973; or



   (B)   The cost of installing the adjacent sewer was borne by the
owner of the real estate at the time the sewer was constructed or by some
later owner; or



   (C)   The property is located in a development where the sewer was
installed by the developer and included in the sale price of the property. In
such cases, where a contract exists that requires payment of an additional
tap fee as a condition of connection, the larger of either the additional tap
fee or the area assessment shall be collected.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.074  CREDIT FOR SERVICE LINE CONNECTIONS ACROSS STREETS.



   Where an existing improved street must be crossed by a service line to
make a connection to a sewer, the property serviced will be credited with $5
per foot of service line required and approved by the City Engineer to cross
the street against the assessment charge.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.075  ASSESSMENT RATES.



   The rate of assessment of real estate lying within the assessment area
of any sanitary sewer now existing or under construction shall be as follows:



 

Lot Area
(Square Feet)
 
Rate
(per 100 Square Feet)


0 through 5,000
 
$3.00


5,001 through 10,000
 
$2.00


10,001 through 15,000
 
$2.00


Greater than 15,000
 
$1.75



 



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.076  APPLICABLE ASSESSMENT RATE.



   The rate of assessment provided for in § 55.077 will apply throughout
the city.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.077  ACTUAL ASSESSMENT RATE APPLIED.



   The rate of assessment in effect at the time the sewer tap permit is
issued will govern.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.078  CONNECTION TO EXISTING SEWERS.



   Any real estate lying within the assessment area of a new sewer which
is already served by an adequate existing sewer must connect to the existing
sewer and pay any tap fees or assessment required to connect to the existing
sewer.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.079  REQUIREMENTS OF PETITIONER.



   The city will require the person who petitions for sewer extension and
requests a refund contract to pay the assessment on all property within the
assessment area that for any reason cannot be fully assessed on this sewer.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.080  PROPERTIES NOT ASSESSABLE.



   (A)   The following types of property are not assessable:



      (1)   Those properties lying on the opposite sides of
railroads, expressway thoroughfares, streams, ditches and the like; which
either make the connection physically or legally impossible or which cause
connection cost to exceed the assessment costs.



      (2)   Properties already legally connected to acceptable
sanitary or combination sewers.



      (3)   Properties lying in the assessment area of previously
constructed sewers.



      (4)   Cemeteries.



      (5)   Areas where elevation is such that the area cannot be
drained by the sewer.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to assess any such land when and
if the use of the land becomes such that sewer service is required.



   (C)   Real estate in public and parochial school sites as well as
public and quasi-public park and recreation facilities is partially
assessable. A church site will be assessed on the basis of 20,000 square feet
for a parsonage and 20,000 square feet for each 100 seats in the sanctuary.
Schools will be assessed on the basis of 20,000 square feet for each
classroom.



   (D)   Other facilities in such areas needing sewer service will be
judged as they compare to residential facilities and assessed in proportion
to 20,000 square feet for each comparable unit.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.081  EVIDENCE OF ASSESSABILITY.



   The connection of any property to the sewer shall be prima facie
evidence of its assessability where interpretation is in doubt. Any real
estate lying within the assessment area shall be subject to the assessment at
the time it is connected to the POTW.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.082  ASSESSMENT ON PROPERTIES OUTSIDE CITY.



   Owners of real estate outside the corporate limits lying within the
assessment area of any sewer shall pay twice the normal assessment.  When
such real estate is in a subdivision or otherwise where the cost of the
sewers has been included in the sale price of the property the property owner
shall pay the normal assessment amount. This additional assessment shall not
be as a penalty but shall be an adjustment to compensate for tax funds
expended in the past as well as those now being collected and used to provide
facilities and service.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.083  DONATED SEWERS.



   The builder or petitioner may choose to construct the sewer and donate
it to the city without a refund contract with the provision that land owned
by him or her within the city limits and located in the assessment area will
not be assessed, or that such land outside the  city limits will be assessed
and paid at the time that the tap permit is issued.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.084  BORDER SEWERS.



   For a sewer to qualify as a border sewer the area along the route of
the border sewer must be assessable to a depth of one tier of platted lots or
200 feet on both sides of the sewer. On border sewers the city will collect
for its own use all assessments on the opposite side of the sewer from the
land owned by the builder or petitioner.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.085  SEWERS AT EXCESS DEPTH; COST SHARING.



   Where the city requires sewers of any size at depths substantially in
excess of what the builder or petitioner needs for his or her use, the extra
cost of such depth shall be considered in the same light as extra size over
eight inches and may be paid for from extension fees.  This extra cost
payment will require public bidding to establish the cost differential.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.086  CERTIFIED PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   All sewers shall be built in accordance with plans and specifications
prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor and approved by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. No sewer shall be accepted by the city until it
shall have been certified by a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer as completed in accordance with the plans and specifications, or in
accordance with acceptable “as built” drawings.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.087  REQUIRED MAPS AND RECORDS.



   The City Engineer shall prepare or have prepared maps and records
showing all assessable areas as of December 31, 1973, and shall from that
date forward keep those maps and records current as to areas assessed, areas
exempt from assessment and a record of a change of status from assessable to
exempt as well as exempt to assessable. The record shall show those areas on
which assessment has been paid and provide a record reference system tying
receipt of payment to the assessment area paid for. In this record system a
contract for extended payment shall be recorded as paid by contract.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.088  SEPARATE ACCOUNTING ON EXTENSION FEES AND ASSESSMENTS.



   All extension fees and area assessments shall be placed in a separate
non-reverting fund and shall be used exclusively for the design and
construction of sanitary sewers and lift stations.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.089  MODIFICATION OR WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety may modify or waive any specific
requirement of this section when a petitioner files a written request for
modification or waiver and includes in his or her request good and sufficient
reasons other than personal misfortunes or  hardship for granting a
modification or waiver.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.090  RECORD OF MODIFICATION OR WAIVER.



   When a modification or waiver request is granted pursuant to this
section, the request as well as action taken shall be incorporated into the
minutes of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.091  VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.



   Any person found to be violating or failing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 55.065 through 55.090 shall be subject to the enforcement
remedies included in §§ 55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258,
and §§ 55.290 through 55.292.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



SEWER USAGE RATES AND CHARGES



§ 55.100  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   This subchapter shall set forth the policies and requirements
applicable to fees and assessments which the city shall impose upon users of
the POTW for the processing and treatment of wastewater discharged to the
POTW. This subchapter shall also set forth fees for users of the municipal
separate stormwater system operated by the city.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.101  USAGE FEES AND ASSESSMENTS FOR UTILITY SERVICES.



   Fees and assessments shall be issued and collected from every user
having a parcel of real estate, lot, facility or building that is connected
to the city’s wastewater collection system; or which otherwise discharges
to the POTW any water, wastewater, sewage, septage, non-residential wastes or
other liquids. Such fees and  assessments as herein established shall be for
the use of the POTW (including the city’s wastewater collection system and
treatment works) and any services rendered by the city’s Sanitation Utility.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.102  WASTEWATER PROCESSING FEES: GENERAL POLICY.



   (A)   Residential  users. Wastewater processing fees for
residential users discharging normal strength wastewater to the POTW shall be
based on water consumption data for the property as measured by the water
meter that is owned and maintained by the water supply company which provides
water to the property or premises. Determinations of quantity of water used
or quantity of flow discharged to the POTW may be accomplished by other means
where such alternate means are allowed elsewhere in this chapter, or
authorized by the Superintendent.



   (B)   Non-residential users not having effluent meters. Wastewater
processing fees for non-residential users that have not been required to
install suitable flow measurement devices to determine the quantity of flow
discharged to the POTW shall be based on water consumption data for the
property as measured by the water meter that is owned and maintained by the
water supply company which provides water to the property or premises.
Determinations of quantity of water used or quantity of flow discharged to
the POTW may be accomplished by other  means where such alternate means are
allowed elsewhere in this chapter, or authorized by the Superintendent.



   (C)   Non-residential users having effluent meters. Wastewater
processing fees for non-residential users that have been required to install
suitable flow measurement devices to determine the quantity of flow
discharged to the POTW shall be based on the data obtained from the flow
measurement device. Such devices shall be non-resettable, totalizing devices,
which have been inspected and approved by the Superintendent, or an
authorized designee.



   (D)   Authority to determine the most appropriate data for
calculations. The city shall reserve the right to calculate wastewater
processing fees using water consumption data when the city believes that the
data from devices measuring the quantity of flow discharged to the POTW has
been falsified, tampered with, corrupted, or is otherwise unreliable. The
city shall also reserve the right to calculate wastewater processing fees
using data from a facility’s effluent flow measurement device; when the
city believes that the data from that measuring device is more credible than
the water consumption data.



   (E)   Authority to require flow measurement devices. The city shall
reserve the authority to require the installation of meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices, or other flow measurement devices acceptable to
the city in order to facilitate accurate determinations of the quantity of
wastewater discharged to the POTW. Such devices shall be installed and
maintained at the user’s expense in situations such as but not limited to
the following:



      (1)   In the event that the total water consumption for a
user’s property or facilities therein contained is not measured by a water
meter or other acceptable flow measurement device; or



      (2)   In the event that the existing influent water meter (or
meters) do not accurately and reliably measure the total water consumption
for the user’s property or facilities therein contained; or



      (3)   Where existing facility influent water meters are not of
a non-resettable, totalizing type; or



      (4)   Where existing meters are otherwise unacceptable to the
city.



   (F)   Petitions for billing on actual quantity discharged. A user
whose wastewater processing fees assessed per § 55.103 are based upon
metered water consumption data may petition the city to be billed on the
actual amount of wastewater discharged to the POTW provided that the
following criteria are met:



      (1)   The user must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
city that the metered water consumption for their property or facility
contained thereon exceeds 10,000 gallons per month; and



      (2)   The user must further demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the city that a portion of the total water consumption measured by the water
meter or meters does not and cannot enter the POTW; and



      (3)   The user must agree to install and maintain a meter or
meters acceptable to the city in such a manner as to determine the quantity
of water actually entering the POTW; and



      (4)   The user must agree to install and maintain such meters
as are acceptable to the city at the user’s own expense; and



      (5)   The user must submit the request along with the required
supporting information and documentation to the Board of Public Works and
Safety for consideration and final approval. Upon approval, the user shall be
billed only for that measured quantity of water entering the POTW.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.103  WASTEWATER PROCESSING FEES: SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of § 55.103, the following 
schedule of rates and charges is hereby imposed upon users:



      (1)   Flow processing fees. The city shall impose monthly fees
for the processing of wastewater discharged to the POTW. These fees shall be
calculated by determining the total quantity of flow discharged to the POTW
during the monthly billing cycle and assessing a fee at the indicated rate
per 1,000 gallons discharged. In cases where no meters are available to
determine the quantity of flow discharged, the fee indicated in division
(A)(1)(d) shall be assessed until an appropriate metered value can be
obtained.



         (a)   Class 1.



            1.   Residential flow processing rate (per 100
gallons): $00.6400.



            2.   Commercial flow processing rate (per 100
gallons): $00.6400.



         (b)   Class 2. Industrial flow processing rate (per 100
gallons): $00.4000.



         (c)   Class 3. Governmental flow processing rate (per
100 gallons): $00.7120.



         (d)   Class 4. K-12 Public schools flow processing rate
(per 100 gallons): $00.5990.



         (e)   Minimum fee for metered facilities:



 


METER SIZE

 

FEE





5/8" meter
 
$12.80


3/4" meter
 
$12.80


1" meter
 
$29.02


1-1/2" meter
 
$58.06


2" meter
 
$102.84


4" meter
 
$102.84


6" meter
 
$102.84




 



         (f)   Minimum fees for unmetered facilities:



            Wells:   Residential and commercial:   $38.58



               Other:            $54.40



      (2)   Surcharge for high strength wastewater. Any user that
discharges high strength wastewater to the POTW shall be assessed surcharges
in accordance with the requirements of this section.



         (a)   The city reserves the authority to prohibit the
discharge of high strength wastewaters to the POTW when such wastewaters will
cause or are reasonably expected to cause overloading, damage, upset or
interference in the POTW.



         (b)   The assessment of surcharges to cover the
additional expense of treating high strength wastewaters discharged to the
POTW shall not be construed as acceptance of high strength wastewaters for
treatment by the city.



         (c)   The city, at its sole discretion, may assess
surcharges for high strength wastewater containing excessive oxygen demanding
pollutants by using the applicable rates for cBOD5 or COD; but may not assess
surcharges using both pollutant measures.



         (d)   In cases where a user discharges wastewater having
a concentration of cBOD5, COD, TSS or Ammonia-N which exceeds a discharge
limitation established in accordance with § 55.019; the user will be subject
to an assessment of applicable surcharges for high strength wastewater as
provided in this section, as well as an appropriate enforcement action as
provided by §§ 55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258, and §§
55.290 through 55.292 and the city’s enforcement response plan.



         (e)   The city may require the user to conduct
self-monitoring to measure and determine the strength and character of all
wastewater, sewage and other wastes discharged to the POTW; in such manner
and by such method as the city may deem practicable in the light of the
conditions and attending circumstances; in order to determine an appropriate
surcharge for a given monthly billing cycle.



         (f)   The city reserves the right to obtain samples of
wastewater, sewage and other wastes discharged to the POTW for the purpose of
determining the character and strength of a user’s discharge and to
determine an appropriate surcharge for a given monthly billing cycle.



         (g)   The strength and character of the sewage and
wastes shall be based on the quantity of five-day biochemical oxygen demand,
chemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids and ammonia-nitrogen as



determined using the analytical methods approved in 40 CFR Part 136 for the
analysis of wastewater.



         (h)   In a given monthly billing cycle, surcharges shall
be assessed for each pound of surchargeable pollutant (i.e., cBOD5, COD, TSS
or Ammonia-N) discharged to the POTW in excess of the allowable number of
pounds of pollutant.



         (i)   Allowable pounds of each pollutant for each user
in a given monthly billing  cycle  shall  be calculated  by multiplying 
the threshold concentration for the pollutant (in milligrams per liter) by
the total quantity of flow discharged to the POTW (in million gallons) by a
conversion factor of 8.3453 pounds per gallon.



         (j)   Each pound of the following pollutants in excess
of the allowable number of pounds for each pollutant shall be surcharged as
follows:



 

POLLUTANT
 
THRESHOLD CONCENTRATION
 
RATE


CBOD5
 
200 milligrams per liter
 
$0.423 per pound


COD
 
500 milligrams per liter
 
$0.933 per pound


TSS
 
250 milligrams per liter
 
$0.369 per pound


NH3-N
 
20 milligrams per liter
 
$0.562 per pound



 



      (3)   Tax equalization assessment. The city shall impose a 25%
tax equalization assessment upon all users that are not located within the
corporate limits of the City of Kokomo. This assessment shall be calculated
by multiplying a factor of 0.25 by the total assessments  applicable under
divisions (A)(2),(A)(2) and (A)(4) of this section.



      (4)   Non-residential surveillance fee. Users meeting the
definition of a non-residential user as that term is herein defined shall be
assessed a monthly fee equal to $105.52 (per user, per month) where the
Superintendent determines that the implementation of the fee is necessary to
defray the expense of additional oversight,  monitoring and analysis, or
other surveillance activities conducted by the city’s pretreatment team or
other POTW personnel. Situations requiring additional oversight, monitoring
and analysis, or surveillance activities may include, but are not limited to,
the following categories:



         (a)   The user is regulated through an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit issued by the City of Kokomo; or



         (b)   The user is a waste hauler that has been issued a
written discharge authorization granting such user permission to discharge
septage or other hauled wastes to the POTW’s designated septage receiving
station; or



         (c)   The user is a party to a special discharge
agreement with the City of Kokomo which regulates the user’s discharge to
the POTW; or



         (d)   The Superintendent elects to impose such a fee for
a short-term to defray the expense of additional surveillance activities
implemented due to temporary changes in the nature of the user’s discharge;
which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, require additional surveillance
and oversight from the city’s pretreatment team or other POTW personnel.



   (B)   Wastewater processing fees and rates contained in this section
shall be set periodically, as required, by separate ordinance titled,
“Sanitary Sewerage Service Rate Ordinance.”



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13; Am. Ord. 6852, passed 12-19-16)



§ 55.104  WASTEWATER PROCESSING FEES: SPECIAL SITUATIONS.



   (A)   Single water consumption meter servicing multiple users. In
the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real estate, or buildings
discharge wastewater to the POTW; and the quantity of water discharged to the
POTW is determined from the total water consumption measured by a single
water meter; then in each such case the user with whom the water company that
owns the meter associates the total water consumption measured by the meter
shall be the user which the city  holds liable for applicable assessments
provided in § 55.103.



   (B)   Billing of tenants; liability of property owner. Except for
billings to multiple users such as apartment houses, trailer or mobile home
parks, and housekeeping rooms, the wastewater processing fees may be billed
to the tenant occupying the properties served unless otherwise requested in
writing by the owners thereof; but such billings shall in no way relieve the
property owner from liability in the event payment is not made as required.
Delinquent wastewater processing fees become a de facto lien on and against
the property for which the service was provided. At the time of sale of such
property, the buyer or his or her agent will assume the responsibility for
such delinquency in the event the buyer or agent fails to secure an
attestment from the City of Kokomo Sanitation Utility that such property is
free of delinquent charges.



   (C)   Property owner’s right to examine collection records. The
owners of the properties served which are occupied by tenants shall have the
right to examine the city’s collection records for the purpose of
determining whether the wastewater processing fees have been paid by such
tenants, provided that such examinations shall be made at the office at which
the records are kept and during the hours that such office is open for
business.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.105  STORMWATER USER FEES.



   (A)   This section establishes monthly fees for the use of, and
services provided by, the city’s Stormwater Utility. Such fees shall be
based upon the meter size serving each user according to the following
schedule:



 


METER SIZE

 

MONTHLY FEE





5/8" meter
 

$3.18



3/4" meter
 

$3.18



1" meter
 

$9.38



1-1/2" meter
 

$23.84



2" meter
 

$46.20



4" meter
 

$227.54



6" meter
 

$578.21





 



   (B)   On or after January 1 and July 1 of every year, beginning July
1, 2017, stormwater fees shall be prepared and billed for those parcels
outside the city’s sewer service area for the prior period. The process
shall be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety via resolution and
provide an equitable, per parcel, fee structure commensurate with current
rates.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13; Am. Ord. 6852, passed 12-19-16)



§ 55.106  RATES TO BE CHARGED TO CITY.



   The city shall be subject to the wastewater processing fees established
in § 55.103 and the Stormwater Utility fees established in § 55.105, or to
other rates and charges established by the Sanitation Utility in harmony with
this chapter.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.107  PREPARATION AND BILLING.



   All fees established in §§ 55.103 and 55.105 shall be prepared and
billed monthly by the city and shall be collected in the manner provided by
applicable law, except non-metered stormwater fees, which shall be prepared
and billed bi-annually in January and July.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13; Am. Ord. 6852, passed 12-19-16)



§ 55.108  EFFECT OF ERROR IN BILLING.



   In the event that fees established in §§ 55.103 and 55.105 are
incorrectly calculated, assessed, or otherwise errant; such error shall not
operate to nullify any obligation to pay all assessments that are established
by this chapter.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.109  DUE DATE.



   All wastewater processing fees established in § 55.103 and all 
stormwater utility fees established in § 55.105 shall be due and payable on
the twentieth calendar day next succeeding the day of billing. In such cases
where the twentieth calendar day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or Holiday on
which city offices are closed; then payment shall be due on the next business
day following the twentieth calendar day.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.110  PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   All wastewater processing fees established in § 55.103 and all 
stormwater utility fees established in § 55.105 shall be due and  payable
as set forth in § 55.109. The failure to remit payment for  such fees by
the due date stated on the bill, or as provided in § 55.109, shall result in
the assessment of a late charge of 10%, in addition to any costs associated
with collection, including reasonable attorney’s fees.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES



§ 55.120  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the payment of fees
to the Sanitation Utility by the non-residential class of users  for the
cost of the administration of the pretreatment program established in
accordance with the POTW’s NPDES permit and state and federal regulations.
The Common Council shall adopt fees and charges as provided in § 55.006;
which may include, but are not limited to, the  following:



   (A)   Fees for monitoring inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (B)   Fees for permits;



   (C)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (D)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.121 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT FEES.



   This section shall establish fees for non-residential users to whom the
Superintendent issues individual or general wastewater discharge permits
according to the requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   The permit fee shall be due annually, with payment by January
31 of each year, and shall be determined by the non-residential class
assigned to the user.



   (B)   Non-residential users shall be categorized for the purpose of
determining an appropriate permit fee. The non-residential class shall be
determined by whether the facility meets the criteria for the specific
non-residential class as set forth below. The term “DISCHARGE” as used in
this section shall refer to the total combined flow of all sanitary, storm
and process water entering the POTW from the user’s facility.



      (1)   Class A.



         (a)   Significant categorical industrial users; or



         (b)   Average daily discharge is greater than 250,000
gpd.



      (2)   Class B.



         (a)   Significant categorical industrial users; or



         (b)   Average daily discharge is not less than 100,000
gpd or greater than 250,000 gpd.



      (3)   Class C.



         (a)   All other significant industrial users, as defined
in § 55.004, that do not qualify as Class A or Class B dischargers; and



         (b)   Average daily discharge is at least 50,000 gpd but
less than 100,000 gpd.



      (4)   Class D.



         (a)   All other significant industrial users, as defined
in § 55.004, that do not qualify as Class A or Class B dischargers; and



         (b)   Average daily discharge is at least 25,000 gpd but
less than 50,000 gpd.



      (5)   Class E.



         (a)   All other significant industrial users, as defined
in § 55.004, that do not qualify as Class A or B dischargers; and



         (b)   Average daily discharge is less than 25,000 gpd.



      (6)   Class F (general discharge).



         (a)   Not a significant industrial user as defined in §
55.004 and has pretreatment equipment or monitors for compatible pollutants;
or



         (b)   Any user not meeting the criteria listed in
division (B)(1) through (B)(5) of this section.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge permit fees shall be as follows:



 

NON-RESIDENTIAL CLASS
 
PERMIT FEE


Class A
 
$6,000


Class B
 
$4,000


Class C
 
$2,000


Class D
 
$1,000


Class E
 
$500


Class F
 
$100



 



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.122  OTHER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES.



   The Superintendent may assess fees and charges for all other
activities, which may include, but are not limited to noncompliance
monitoring and inspection, review of construction plans, annual publication
of violators, filing appeals and private laboratory  analysis. Such fees
shall be billed directly to the user as set out in the following table of
charges:



 

Charge Area
 
Rate




Superintendent
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Utility Director
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Corporate Counsel
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Engineering staff
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Pretreatment team
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Technician
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Clerical
 
Prevailing hourly wage plus benefits


Other legal expenses
 
At cost


Private laboratory analysis
 
At cost plus 10%




 



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.123  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   The fees and charges established in this subchapter shall be reviewed
on an annual basis by the Superintendent and recommendations for amendment
provided to the Common Council for approval or amendment, before January 1 of
each year.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 55.135  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 55.016 within the
time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Superintendent,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the Superintendent
before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable
to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.136  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Superintendent may require that
users:



      (1)   Restrict their discharge during peak flow periods; and/or



      (2)   Designate that certain wastewater be discharged only
into specific sewers; and/or



      (3)   Relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge; and/or



      (4)   Separate sewage wastestreams from non-residential
wastestreams; and/or



      (5)   Install and maintain, at the user’s expense, one or
more control manholes at specified locations to facilitate observation,
wastewater monitoring and analysis; and/or



      (6)   Implement such other requirements as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An
individual or general wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



   (C)   The Superintendent shall require the installation of grease,
oil, or solids interceptors when they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or solids (i.e.,
sand, food scraps, particulates, etc.); except that such interceptors shall
not be required for discharges of domestic wastewater from residential users.



      (1)   Wastewater shall be considered to contain excessive
amounts of grease, oil, or solids if the laboratory analysis of the
wastewater demonstrates a violation of the provisions of § 55.016 or a
discharge limitation established in accordance with § 55.019.



      (2)   Wastewater containing grease, oil or solids, which does
not otherwise violate this chapter; but which alone or in conjunction with
other discharges necessitates increased maintenance activity to ensure the
effective operation of the POTW, shall be considered to contain excessive
amounts of grease, oil, or solids for purposes of this requirement.



      (3)   Wastewater generated by activities involving the
preparation, handling, packaging or manufacture of food products for human
consumption shall be considered to contain excessive amounts of grease and
oil for purposes of this requirement; except where it can be demonstrated, to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that:



         (a)   Such activities are substantially similar in
nature to food preparation and handling activities which would be conducted
in a single-family residential dwelling; and



         (b)   Such activities are not conducted in a manner or
frequency exceeding that which would be expected to occur during a 24-hour
period in a single-family residential dwelling.



      (4)   All interceptor units shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Superintendent, and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.



      (5)   All interceptor units shall be inspected, cleaned, and
repaired regularly by the user at their expense and as necessary to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.137  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG DISCHARGE CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an
accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control
slug discharges. The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be
necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the Superintendent may
develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   A description of discharge practices, including 
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   A description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent
of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 55.195; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (B)   The Superintendent may also require the accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan to include any of the following:



      (1)   A description of the location of stored chemicals,
including a site plan or schematic;



      (2)   A description of the nature and characteristics of
stored chemicals, including material safety data sheets (MSDS), and other
descriptive documents;



      (3)   Spill containment through provision of secondary
containment devices or diversionary structures;



      (4)   Measures for containing spills of raw materials or
products and intermediate products and wastes; and



      (5)   Any other measures deemed necessary by the
Superintendent to adequately control slug discharges.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.138  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Residential.



      (1)   Septic tank waste (i.e., septage) may be introduced into
the POTW only at locations designated by the Superintendent, and at such
times as are established by the Superintendent.



      (2)   The Superintendent, at his or her discretion, may
prohibit the discharge of septage to the POTW.



      (3)   Septage waste shall not violate §§ 55.015 through
55.024 or any other ordinances or requirements established by the city.



      (4)   The Superintendent may require septage haulers to obtain
individual or general wastewater discharge permits.



      (5)   The Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled
load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Superintendent may
require the septage hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to
discharge.



      (6)   Septage haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for
every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the septage hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses
of sources of the septage, and volume and characteristics of the septage.



      (7)   The waste-tracking form shall also include the
certification statement provided in § 55.203(A) and shall be signed by a
representative of the septage hauler. The provision of false, misleading or
otherwise inaccurate information on the waste tracking form shall constitute
a violation of this chapter and shall subject the waste hauler to the
sanctions provided in § 55.257(E).



   (B)   Non-residential.



      (1)    Non-residential waste shall not be discharged to the
POTW without prior consent of the Superintendent. Non-residential waste
haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
Superintendent.



      (2)   The Superintendent, at his or her discretion, may
prohibit the disposal of hauled non-residential waste to the POTW.



      (3)   The discharge of hauled non-residential waste shall
comply with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances
and requirements established by the city.



      (4)   The Superintendent shall require haulers of
non-residential waste to obtain individual or general wastewater discharge
permits. The Superintendent may also require generators of hauled
non-residential waste to obtain individual or general wastewater discharge
permits.



      (5)   The Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled
load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Superintendent may
require the non-residential waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.



      (6)   Non-residential waste haulers must provide a
waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum,
the name and address of the non-residential waste hauler, permit number,
truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known
or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.



      (7)   The waste-tracking form shall also include the
certification statement provided in § 55.203(A) and shall be signed by  a
representative of the non-residential waste hauler. The provision of false,
misleading or otherwise inaccurate information on the waste tracking form
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the
non-residential waste hauler to the sanctions provided in § 55.257(E).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS



§ 55.150  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   When requested by the Superintendent, a user must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 15 business days of
the request. The Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
Failure to complete and submit this form shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and subject the user to the enforcement remedies set forth in §§
55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258, and §§ 55.290 through
55.292.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.151  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into
the POTW without first obtaining an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit from the Superintendent, except that a significant
industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to § 55.152 may
continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require other users to obtain
individual or general wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out
the purposes of this chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set
out in §§ 55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258, and §§
55.290 through 55.292. Obtaining an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply
with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any
other requirements of federal, state, and local law.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.152  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within 45 calendar days after said date, apply to the
Superintendent for an individual or general  wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with § 55.154, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the
POTW to continue after 90 calendar days of the effective date of this chapter
except in accordance with an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit issued by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.153  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the
POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit, in accordance with § 55.154, must be filed at least 30
calendar days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.154  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   (A)   All users required to obtain an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. Users that are
eligible may request a general permit under § 55.155. The Superintendent may
require users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a
permit application:



      (1)   Identifying information:



         (a)   The name and address of the facility, including
the name of the operator and owner;



         (b)   Contact information;



         (c)   A description of activities, facilities, and plant
production processes on the premises.



      (2)   Environmental permits: A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations:



         (a)   A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and
rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



         (b)   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



         (c)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation;



         (d)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (e)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



         (f)   Time and duration of discharges;



         (g)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by
the permit;



      (4)   Flow measurement: Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in § 55.017(C) and 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants:



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for
existing sources.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process.



         (c)   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.



         (d)   The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
55.199. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or  pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by
the Superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with
the standard.



         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 55.200.



      (6)   Miscellaneous:



         (a)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal
of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge based on § 55.194(B) [40 CFR 3251
403.12(e)(2)].



         (b)   Any request to be covered by a general permit
based on § 55.155.



         (c)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the Superintendent to evaluate the permit application.



   (B)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.155  GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   At the discretion of the Superintendent, the Superintendent
may use general permits to control SIU discharges to the POTW if the
following conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general
permit must:



      (1)   Involve the same or substantially similar types of
operations;



      (2)   Discharge the same types of wastes;



      (3)   Require the same effluent limitations;



      (4)   Require the same or similar monitoring; and



      (5)   In the opinion of the Superintendent, are more
appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   To be covered by the general permit, the SIU must file a
written request for coverage that identifies its contact information,
production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for
monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in
accordance with § 55.193(B) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other
information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective
in the general permit until after the Superintendent has provided written
notice to the SIU that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance
with § 55.193(B).



   (C)   The Superintendent will retain a copy of the general permit,
documentation to support the POTW’s determination that a specific SIU meets
the criteria in § 55.193(A)(1) through (A)(5) and applicable state
regulations, and a copy of the user’s written request for coverage for
three years after the expiration of the general permit.



   (D)   The Superintendent may not control an SlU through a general
permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical
pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as
mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the
combined wastestream formula [§ 55.017(C)] or net/gross calculations [§
55.017(D)].



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.156  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of
the user as defined in § 55.004 and contain the certification statement in
§ 55.203(A).



   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new  written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this subchapter must be submitted to the
Superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.



   (C)   A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user by the Superintendent pursuant to § 55.004 must annually
submit the signed certification statement in § 55.203(B).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.157  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT DECISIONS.



   The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete
permit application, the Superintendent will determine whether to issue an
individual wastewater discharge permit or a general wastewater discharge
permit. The Superintendent may deny any application for an individual
wastewater discharge permit or a general wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE



§ 55.170  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS; DURATION.



   An individual or general wastewater discharge permit shall be issued
for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date
of the permit. An individual or general wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the
Superintendent. Each individual or general wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.171  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: CONTENTS.



   An individual or general wastewater discharge permit shall include such
conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Superintendent to
prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body
receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the
POTW.



   (A)   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits must
contain:



      (1)   A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge
permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date;



      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with §
55.174, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy
of the existing wastewater discharge permit;



      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices,
based on applicable pretreatment standards;



      (4)   Self-monitoring,  sampling,  reporting, 
notification,  and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law.



      (5)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a
pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with § 55.193(B).



      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties
for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.



      (7)    Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined
by the Superintendent to be necessary.



      (8)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Superintendent
per § 55.193(B) must be included as a condition in the user’s permit or
other control mechanism.



   (B)   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits may
contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:



      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge,
time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



      (3)   Requirements for the development and implementation of
spill control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or
non-routine discharges;



      (4)   Development and implementation of waste minimization
plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



      (5)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;



      (7)   A statement that compliance with the individual or
general wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the individual or general wastewater discharge permit; and



      (8)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.172  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Public notification. The Superintendent shall provide public
notice of the issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit. The Superintendent will publish the notice on a Web page or
in an official government publication and/or newspaper of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice for the jurisdiction served by the
POTW. The notice will indicate a location where the draft permit may be
reviewed and an address where written  comments may be submitted.



   (B)   Permit appeal process. Any person, including the user, may
appeal the terms of an  individual  or general wastewater discharge 
permit issued by the Superintendent in accordance with the following
procedure:



      (1)   Administrative appeal to the Superintendent.  Any
person, including the user, may petition the Superintendent to reconsider the
terms of an individual or general wastewater discharge permit within 30
working days of notice of its issuance.



         (a)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review
shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



         (b)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate
the individual or general wastewater discharge permit provision(s) to which
the appealing party objects; the reasons for the objection(s), and the
alternative condition(s), if any, that the appealing party seeks to place in
the individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit.



         (c)   The effectiveness of the individual or general
wastewater discharge permit may be stayed pending the appeal.



         (d)   The Superintendent shall make every effort to
either approve or deny the petition, or schedule a conference with the
petitioner, within 30 working days from the receipt of a petition for review.
If the Superintendent fails to act within 30 working days, a petition for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied and the date upon which the
thirtieth day falls shall be considered the date of the final administrative
decision.



         (e)   Decisions not to reconsider an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall be considered the date of the
Superintendent’s final administrative decision.



      (2)   Administrative appeal to the Board of Public Works and
Safety. Aggrieved parties seeking administrative review of the
Superintendent’s final decision shall file an appeal with the Board of
Public Works and Safety in accordance with the provisions of §§ 55.305 and
55.306.



      (3)   Judicial review. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial
review of a final administrative decision of the Board of Public Works and
Safety must do so by filing a petition with the appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the date of the final
administrative decision issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety in
accordance with § 55.306(D)(4).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.173  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To include additional provisions or modify existing
provisions to facilitate the compliance assurance responsibilities of the
POTW;



      (3)   To address significant alterations or additions to the
user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;



      (4)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (5)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge
poses a threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;



      (6)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual
wastewater discharge permit;



      (7)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



      (8)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



      (9)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or



      (10)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
55.174.



   (B)   The Superintendent may modify a general permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements;



      (2)   To include additional provisions or modify existing
provisions to facilitate the compliance assurance responsibilities of the
POTW;



      (3)   To accommodate a change in the POTW that requires either
a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



      (4)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or



      (5)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
55.174.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.174  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT TRANSFER.



   (A)   Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage under
general wastewater permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only
if the permittee gives at least 60 working days advance notice to the
Superintendent and the Superintendent approves the transfer of the individual
or general wastewater discharge permit coverage.  The notice to the
Superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or
operator which:



      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to
occur; and



      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing individual or general wastewater discharge permit.



   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
individual or general wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.175  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Superintendent may revoke an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit for good cause; which may include, but not be
limited to, the following reasons:



      (1)   Failure to notify the Superintendent of significant
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;



      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to § 55.194;



      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification
statements;



      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



      (6)   Refusing to allow the Superintendent timely access to
the facility premises and records;



      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



      (8)   Failure to pay fines;



      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of
business ownership of a permitted facility; or



      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement,
or any terms of an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or this
chapter.



   (B)   Coverage under individual or general wastewater discharge
permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of
business ownership. All individual or general wastewater discharge permits
issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new individual or general
wastewater discharge permit to that user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.176  INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL PERMITS: PERMIT REISSUANCE.



   A user with an expiring individual or general wastewater discharge
permit shall apply for individual or general wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with §
55.154, a minimum of 120 calendar days prior to the expiration of the
user’s existing individual or general wastewater discharge permit.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.177  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.



   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another
municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Superintendent shall
enter into an inter-municipal agreement with the contributing municipality.



   (B)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by division (A)
above, the Superintendent shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:



      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;



      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and



      (3)   Such other information as the Superintendent may deem
necessary.



   (C)   An inter-municipal agreement, as required by division (A)
above, shall contain the following conditions:



      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt
a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
local limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs), which
are at least as stringent as those set out in §§ 50.019(C) and (D). The
requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as
necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or local limits;



      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to
submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;



      (3)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual or general wastewater discharge permit
issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by
the contributing municipality and the Superintendent;



      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to 
provide the Superintendent with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing municipality’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;



      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing
municipality’s discharge;



      (7)   A provision ensuring the Superintendent access to the
facilities of users  located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Superintendent;



      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of
the terms of the inter-municipal agreement; and



      (9)    A provision which establishes that the city has the
right to initiate enforcement action under the terms of the contributing
municipality’s sewer use ordinance, or directly impose and enforce
pretreatment standards and requirements (including BMPs) against dischargers
in the contributing municipality in the event that the contributing
jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to initiate such action.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 55.190  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in § 55.199(B). At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in § 55.199(B). A new source shall report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below:



      (1)   General. All information required in §§
55.154(A)(1)(a), (A)(2),(A)(3)(a),(A)(4), and(A)(6).



      (2)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The user shall provide the information required in
§§ 55.154(A)(5)(a) through (A)(5)(d).



         (b)   The user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this division (B)(2).



         (c)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream
from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the
pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has
been calculated in accordance with 40 3716 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit
along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority;



         (d)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with §§ 55.199 and 55.200;



         (e)   The Superintendent may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures;



         (f)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date
and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected
pollutant discharges to the POTW.



      (3)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the
user’s authorized representative as defined in § 55.004(F) and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are
being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



      (4)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in § 55.191.



      (5)   Signature and report certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with § 55.203(A) and
signed by an authorized representative as defined in § 55.004.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.191  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 55.190(B)(4):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No progress increment referred to in division (A) above shall
exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Superintendent
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than two months elapse between progress
reports required by division (C).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.192  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report containing the information described in §§
55.154(A)(6) and (A)(7) and § 55.190(B)(2). For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
§ 55.017 [see also 40 CFR 403.6(c)], this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the user’s actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 55.203(A).  All sampling will be done in
conformance with § 55.200.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.193  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users must submit periodic
compliance reports at a frequency determined by the Superintendent (but in no
case less than twice per year during the months of June and December)
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average
and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice
(BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the Superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to
determine the compliance status of the user.



   (B)   The city may authorize a non-residential user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical pretreatment standard if the non-residential user has
demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant
is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present
only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the
pollutant due to activities of the non-residential user [see 40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)].  This authorization is subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from
the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.



      (2)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of
the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no
case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the
waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual
wastewater discharge permit. See § 55.154(A)(8).



      (3)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not
present, the non-residential user must provide data from at least one
sampling of the facility’s process wastewater prior to any treatment
present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all
processes.



      (4)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed by an
authorized representative as defined in § 55.004, and include the
certification statement in § 55.203(A) [See 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(H)].



      (5)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant
was used in the analysis.



      (6)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Superintendent
must be included as a condition in the user’s permit. The reasons
supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its
request for the waiver must be maintained by the Superintendent for three
years after expiration of the waiver.



      (7)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of
the user’s permit by the Superintendent, the non-residential user must
certify on each report with the statement in § 55.203(C) below, that there
has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of
the non-residential user.



      (8)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be
present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
user’s operations, the user must immediately: comply with the monitoring
requirements of division (A) above, or other more frequent monitoring
requirements imposed by the Superintendent, and notify the Superintendent.



      (9)   This provision does not supersede certification
processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards,
except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (C)   All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified
in accordance with § 55.203(A).



   (D)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (E)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Superintendent, using the procedures
prescribed in § 55.200, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.194  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the Superintendent of plans for any significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 45 calendar days before the
change.



   (A)   The Superintendent may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 55.154.



   (B)   The Superintendent may issue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit under § 55.176 or modify an existing individual
or general wastewater discharge permit under § 55.173 in  response to
changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of implementation of this requirement,
“SIGNIFICANT CHANGE” shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Changes resulting in the discharge to the POTW of
additional, or previously unreported pollutants.



      (2)   Increases in the wastewater flow discharged to the POTW
which equal or exceed 15%.



      (3)   Addition of previously unused raw materials or chemicals
used in operations conducted at the facility.



      (4)   Substitution or elimination of raw materials or
chemicals used in operations conducted at the facility.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.195  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might
cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone
and notify the Superintendent of the incident. This notification shall
include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Superintendent, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.196  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Superintendent as
the Superintendent may require.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.197  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a non-residential user indicates a violation,
the user must notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30
days after becoming aware of the violation.  Re-sampling by the
non-residential user is not required if the city performs sampling at the
user’s facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at
the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the
time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if
the city has  performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
non-residential user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.198  DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   The discharge to the POTW of any pollutant, waste, substance
or material which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261, is prohibited unless a written authorization is issued by
the Superintendent allowing the discharge.



   (B)   The discharge of hazardous wastes as defined in division (A)
above without a written authorization from the Superintendent shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and be subject to the enforcement
remedies contained in §§ 55.240 through 55.247, §§ 55.255 through 55.258,
and §§ 55.290 through 55.292.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.199  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA
determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Superintendent or other parties approved by EPA.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.200  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.



   (A)   Except as indicated in divisions (B) and (C)below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. Where time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be 
authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



      (1)   Where samples are collected for a pollutant listed in
this division (B) having a daily maximum limit established under § 55.019:



         (a)   A minimum of four time-proportional grab samples
shall be collected for each 24-hour period during which wastewater monitoring
is performed.



         (b)   Each time-proportional grab sample shall be
analyzed separately and the results of all analyses for samples collected
during the same 24-hour period shall be averaged to determine compliance; or
such samples shall be composited as required by the approved analytical
method prior to analysis.



      (2)   Where samples are collected for a pollutant listed in
this division (B) having an instantaneous maximum limit established under §
55.019; the results of analysis for individual grab samples shall be compared
to the applicable instantaneous maximum limit to determine compliance or
establish noncompliance.



   (C)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
90-day compliance reports required in §§ 55.190 and 55.192 [40 CFR
403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are  available, the
Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by §
55.193 [40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the non-residential user is required
to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (D)   For sampling required to determine compliance with an
applicable categorical discharge standard, samples should be taken
immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or
immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists.
If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary
to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to
evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate
concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to
the control authority.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.201  DATE OF RECEIPT OF REPORTS.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.202  RECORDKEEPING.



   (A)   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices
established under § 55.019(H).



   (B)   Records of information described in division (A) above shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   The date of sampling or monitoring;



      (2)   The exact place of sampling or monitoring;



      (3)   The method of sampling or monitoring;



      (4)   The time of sampling or monitoring;



      (5)   The name of the person or persons that performed the
sampling or monitoring;



      (6)   The field sampling sheets, chains of custody and other
such sampling and custody records;



      (7)   The dates of performance of analyses;



      (8)   The names of the person(s) who performed the analyses;



      (9)   The analytical technique(s) or method(s) used;



      (10)   The documentation of quality control procedures used in
the performance of all analyses; and



      (11)   The results of such analyses.



   (C)   These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of
any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Superintendent.



   (D)   The user shall provide copies of information described in
division (A) and (B) above upon request of the Superintendent. Such
documentation shall be provided to the Superintendent within ten days of the
request, unless a longer period is provided by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.203  CERTIFICATION STATEMENTS.



   (A)   Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial
monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required to be
signed and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with § 55.156; users submitting baseline monitoring reports under §
55.190(B)(5) [see 40 CFR 403.12(l)]; users submitting reports on compliance
with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under § 55.192 [see 40
CFR 403.12(d)]; users submitting periodic compliance reports required by §
55.193(A) through (D) [see 40 CFR 403.12(e) and (h)]; and users submitting an
initial request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of §
55.193(B)(4) [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)(iii)]. The following certification
statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in §
55.004:



      I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.



   (B)   Annual certification for non-significant categorical
industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user by the Superintendent pursuant to §§ 55.004 (definition of
“AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER”) and 55.156(C) must annually
submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the
signatory requirements in § 55.004 (definition of “AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER”) and 40 CFR 403.120(1). This certification must
accompany an alternative report required by the  Superintendent:



      Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40
CFR    , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during
the period from      [month, day, year] to            [month, day,
year]:



         (a)   The facility described as_               
  [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical
industrial user as described in §§ 55.004 and 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2);



         (b)   The facility complied with all applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and



         (c)   The facility never discharged more than 100
gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this
reporting period.



      This compliance certification is based on the following
information:



                                                 
                                                   
                             



   (C)   Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an
approved monitoring waiver based on § 55.193(B) must certify on each report
with the following statement that there has been no increase in the pollutant
in its wastestream due to activities of the user.



      Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR     
[specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)], I certify that,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the
level of                   [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters
due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic
report under § 55.193(A).



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 55.215  RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises
of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements
of this chapter and any individual or general wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Superintendent ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



   (C)   The Superintendent shall have the right to document inspection
activities through photographic means, digital recordings, handwritten notes,
personal interviews, or other means as necessary; in order to document
compliance, noncompliance, or other information gained through inspection
activities.



   (D)   The Superintendent shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



   (E)   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated annually using a primary standard to ensure their
accuracy. The Superintendent may, at his or her discretion, require a user to
calibrate devices used to  measure wastewater flow and quality at a higher
frequency.



   (F)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent. The
obstruction shall not be replaced once it has been removed. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the user.



   (G)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to
the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter. A delay of
greater than 20 minutes shall be considered “unreasonable” for the
purposes of determining whether a violation of this section has occurred.



   (H)   The Superintendent shall be allowed to conduct the activities
mentioned in divisions (A) through (D) above without interference of any kind
from the user. Any action taken by the user which impedes the ability of the
Superintendent to conduct these activities shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.



   (I)   The refusal of the Superintendent to sign any waiver, access
agreement, or similar document shall not constitute grounds for the denial of
access to the user’s property for the purpose of conducting the activities
outlined in divisions (A) through (D) above.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.216  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   (A)   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, the Superintendent may
seek issuance of a search warrant from the court of competent jurisdiction
within the City of Kokomo and/or Howard County, Indiana.



   (B)   Where the Superintendent requires a search warrant for the
reasons in division (A) above, the Corporate Counsel for the City of Kokomo
shall file the appropriate application with the court of competent
jurisdiction within the City of Kokomo and/or Howard County, Indiana. The
presiding judge shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing
therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall
specify the extent and limitation of the activities authorized to be
conducted by the Superintendent on the property described. Such warrant shall
be served at reasonable hours by the Superintendent in the company of a
uniformed police officer from the law enforcement agency specified by the
judge issuing the warrant.



   (C)   In the event of an emergency affecting public health and
safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. Such
inspections shall, if necessary, be coordinated with the appropriate law
enforcement agency or other emergency response agency having jurisdiction
within the City of Kokomo and/or Howard County, Indiana.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



§ 55.225  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge
permits, general wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs, and from
the Superintendent’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available
to the public in accordance with applicable state law regarding access to
public records. Compliance with the Indiana Access to Public Records Act (IC
5-14-3) shall dictate policy with regard to the release of information
maintained by the control authority.



   (B)   Information shall be provided to the general public in
accordance with IC 5-14-3, unless the user specifically requests, and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, that the release of
such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data.



   (C)   When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a
report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be
made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not
be recognized as confidential information and shall be available to the
public without restriction.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE



§ 55.230  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term  “significant
noncompliance” shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or
any other non-residential user that violates divisions (C), (D) or (H) of
this section) and shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits as defined in §§ 55.015 through 55.024;



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement (including instantaneous
limits as defined by §§ 55.015 through 55.024) multiplied by the applicable
criterion value (the criterion value is 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease; while the criterion value is 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by §§ 55.015 through 55.024 (i.e., daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Superintendent
determines has caused (either alone or in combination with other discharges)
interference or pass through, including  endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;



   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
exercise of the Superintendent’s emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet, within 60 calendar days of the scheduled
date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 calendar days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Superintendent determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 55.240  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may serve upon that user a
written notice of violation. Within 30 calendar days of the receipt of such
notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions,
shall be submitted by the user to the Superintendent. Submission of such a
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section
shall limit the authority of the Superintendent to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
notice of violation.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.241  CONSENT ORDERS.



   The Superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of
compliance, or other similar documents establishing agreements with  any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include compliance
schedules containing specific remedial action to be taken by the user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such documents shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user
and by the Superintendent. Such documents may also include stipulated fines.
The entrance into consent orders or other such agreements by a user shall
constitute neither an admission of liability for purposes of civil litigation
nor a plea of guilty for purposes of criminal prosecution. Consent orders or
other similar agreements issued hereunder shall have the same force and
effect as  the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 55.243 and
55.244 and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.242  SHOW CAUSE ORDERS.



   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the Superintendent and show cause
why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause order
shall be served on the user and shall specify the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and
include a request that the user “show cause” or otherwise provide
evidence in support of their case that the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The show cause order shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least seven
calendar days prior to the hearing date. The show cause order may be served
on any authorized representative of the user as defined in § 55.004 and
required by § 55.156. A show cause order shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.243  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the
time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to
address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.244  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations
are likely to recur, the Superintendent may issue an order to the user
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user
to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   A cease and desist order may be issued immediately upon
discovery of noncompliance, or following a hearing.  In an emergency, the
Superintendent may issue a cease and desist order to a user by verbal
communication, electronic mail correspondence, or facsimile transmittal;
provided that a written cease and desist order is subsequently issued and
served upon the user in person or via certified mail with return receipt
requested.  In non-emergency situations, the Superintendent shall issue and
serve the written cease and desist  order upon the user in person or via
certified mail with return receipt requested.



   (C)   The Superintendent, at his or her sole discretion, may issue a
cease and desist order to effect the immediate cessation of a user’s
discharge to the collection system regardless of the user’s compliance
status if such action is necessary for the following reasons:



      (1)   To prevent or halt:



         (a)   The occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows; or



         (b)   The occurrence of combined sewer overflows; or



         (c)   The occurrence of other hydraulic overloading of
the POTWs wastewater collection system or wastewater treatment facility; or



         (d)   The occurrence of other negative impact to the
POTW, the receiving stream, or the environment.



      (2)   To implement an emergency suspension in accordance with
§ 55.246.



   (D)   The Superintendent, at his or her discretion, may use a cease
and desist order as a means of suspending or permanently revoking an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit.



   (E)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.245  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent may fine such user
in an amount not to exceed $2,500 per violation, per day. The assessment of
administrative fines on a per-violation, per-day basis shall be at the
discretion of the Superintendent. In the case where violations of monthly or
other long-term average discharge limits are documented, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 25% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 5% per month. A lien against
the user’s property shall be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and
penalties.



   (C)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.246  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears
to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent may also immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.



   (B)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Superintendent
may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of  the Superintendent that the period of endangerment
has passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 55.247 are initiated
against the user.



   (C)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§ 55.242 or 55.247.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 6619l, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.247  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions in § 55.175, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



      (1)   Violation of individual or general wastewater discharge
permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, sampling or other activities
provided in § 55.215; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 55.015
through 55.024.



   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 55.242 why the
proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 55.255  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Superintendent may petition the court of
competent jurisdiction through the City  Attorney for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit,
general wastewater discharge permit, an order issued hereunder, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The
Superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal
and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a
bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.256  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty in an amount not
less than $1,000 or greater than $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case
of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall
accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



   (B)   A user who is named in or directed by an emergency order under
§ 55.246 and violates the order is liable for an additional civil penalty
not to exceed $500 per hour of violation of the emergency order. Such
additional civil penalty shall be assessed in an action brought by the
Superintendent in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   The Superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the city.



   (D)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any
other factor as justice requires.



   (E)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.257  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (A)   It is recognized that Indiana law does not grant
municipalities the authority to “impose” criminal sanctions for
violations of local ordinances; however, the Corporate Counsel for the City
of Kokomo is authorized, where appropriate, to “seek” criminal sanctions
for such violations by referring matters involving possible violation of
criminal statutes to the Howard County Prosecutor for  criminal prosecution.
Where such criminal sanctions are “sought” by the control authority in a
criminal action filed by the Howard County Prosecutor, the control authority
shall seek criminal penalties equal to at least $1,000 per violation per day
in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A). The total amount of criminal
liability; however, shall be determined by the court of competent
jurisdiction.



   (B)   The Superintendent also reserves the right to refer suspected
negligent, willful or knowing violations of environmental statutes to the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, or other state or federal enforcement
agency, as appropriate, for possible criminal prosecution.



   (C)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall,
upon conviction, be subject to applicable sanctions provided by state and
federal criminal statutes.



   (D)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be subject to applicable sanctions provided by state and federal
criminal statutes. Such sanctions shall be in addition to any other cause of
action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.



   (E)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, general wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or
knowingly renders inaccurate any  monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to applicable sanctions
provided by state and federal criminal statutes.



   (F)   All reports and other documents required to be submitted
pursuant to this chapter are subject to:



      (1)   The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Sec. 1001 relating to fraud
and false statements;



      (2)   The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water
Act, as amended, governing false statements, representations or
certifications; and



      (3)   The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water
Act, as amended, regarding responsible corporate officers.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.258  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user. Enforcement actions concerning violations of
pretreatment standards will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Superintendent may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further,  the
Superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



§ 55.270  PENALTIES FOR LATE REPORTS.



   A penalty of $2 per day shall be assessed to any user for each day that
a report required by this chapter, or a permit or order issued hereunder, is
late. Where such required reports are greater than thirty calendar days
overdue, a value of $4 per day shall be used to calculate the total penalty
owed. Actions taken by the Superintendent to collect late reporting penalties
shall not limit the Superintendent’s authority to initiate other
enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.271  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond,
payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the
Superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.272  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the
POTW caused by its discharge.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.273  PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.



   The Superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any
outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of
this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit,
or order issued hereunder.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.274  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Superintendent. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be  subject to the provisions of applicable
sections of the Code of Ordinances for the City of Kokomo governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.275  CONTRACTOR LISTING.



   Users which have not achieved compliance with this chapter and
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to
receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the City of
Kokomo. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held
by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment
standards or requirements may be terminated at the  discretion of the
Superintendent.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.276  VIOLATION OF NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any user having at least one employee that fails to notify
employees as required by § 55.316, or that does not otherwise comply with a
requirement implemented under § 55.317 or 55.318, shall be considered to be
in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Such users, having failed to provide the required
notification, shall liable for an administrative fine in the amount of $200;
provided that the user had previously received a copy of the required notice
or otherwise had knowledge of the requirement.



   (C)   Administrative fines issued for violations of notification
requirements contained in §§ 55.315 through 55.319 are the minimum fines
assessable for such violations and shall not be administratively waived or
adjusted downward.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 55.290  UPSET.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, “UPSET” means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance  with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (C) below are met.



   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five calendar days):



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.291  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
55.016(A) or the specific prohibitions in §§ 55.016(B)(3) through (B)(7) or
§§ 55.016(B)(9) through(B)(19) if it can prove that it did not know, or
have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in  conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and
that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.292  BYPASS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section:



      (1)   “BYPASS” means the intentional diversion of
wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      (2)   “SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE” means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass.
“SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE” does not mean economic loss caused by delays in
production.



   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) below.



   (C)   Bypass notifications.



      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Superintendent, at least ten calendar days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a  description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,  including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Superintendent may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



   (D)   Bypass.



      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C) above.



      (2)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) above.



APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS



§ 55.305  APPEAL TO BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Any user who receives an order of the Superintendent issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; has an administrative fine levied
against them pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; or who is subject to
orders issued or actions taken by the Superintendent as otherwise provided by
this chapter may appeal such order, administrative fine, or action in
accordance with the procedure set forth in § 55.306.



   (B)   Orders issued, fines levied, or actions taken pursuant to this
chapter, shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal; provided that the
Board of Public Works and Safety (i.e., Board) determines that the request
for appeal has merit and should be granted in accordance with the procedure
set forth in § 55.306.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.306  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Requests for appeals. A request for appeal of a decision,
fine, levy, or other order of the Superintendent shall be granted by the
Board of Public Works and Safety if the user requesting the appeal is
aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision, order, fine or levy and all
of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   A written request for appeal must be submitted to the
Secretary of the Board of Public Works and Safety not later than ten calendar
days from the date of service of the decision, order, fine or levy.  All
requests for appeal received after the tenth calendar day shall be denied,
unless the tenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. In such
cases, a request for appeal shall be accepted on the next regular business
day following the tenth calendar day.



      (2)   The request for appeal must include the following
information:



         (a)   The name and address of the person or user
requesting the appeal;



         (b)   The particular provision of this chapter which is
the basis for the appeal;



         (c)   The legal and/or factual basis for the appeal;



         (d)   The alternate provision, if any, that should be
applied and/or imposed;



         (e)   The manner in which the user is aggrieved or
adversely affected;



         (f)   A statement of the relief sought or alternate
resolution proposed.



   (B)   Initial response. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall
grant or deny a request for appeal provided that the appeal is in compliance
with the provisions of division (A) above. Notice of the Board’s decision
to grant or deny a request for appeal shall be sent to the Superintendent;
other representatives of the POTW as appropriate; the user requesting the
appeal; and any affected user.



      (1)   If the Board grants a request for appeal, the notice
shall state the location, date and time of the hearing scheduled for
consideration of the appeal.



      (2)   If the Board denies the appeal, the notice shall state
that the decision, order, fine, levy or other action that is the subject of
the appeal has been affirmed by the Board and is the final order of the Board
for purposes of judicial review.



      (3)   All notices provided by the Board pursuant to this
section shall be served personally or by certified mail (return receipt
requested). Notice shall be served upon the user requesting the appeal at the
address provided in the request for appeal. Notice may also be served upon
any agent or officer of a corporation.



      (4)   Notice of a hearing shall be served so that it is
received at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing.



   (C)   Appeal hearings. The following procedures shall be followed
when hearings are conducted to address appeals filed by users in accordance
with division (A) above.



      (1)   Hearings conducted by the Board in order to consider an
appeal filed under this section shall be open to the public.



      (2)   The Board may conduct the hearing and take evidence, or
may elect to designate any Board member to perform the following actions:



         (a)   Issue the notice of hearing pursuant to division
(B) above requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in any such  hearing;
and



         (b)   Take testimony and evidence relevant to the appeal.



      (3)   At any appeal hearing, testimony taken before the full
Board (or any designee) must be under oath and recorded stenographically or
electronically. The transcript shall be made available to the public, upon
receipt of payment of the reasonable and customary charges for copying a
public document in accordance with applicable state law.



   (D)   Post-hearing actions and final Board decision.



      (1)   Where appeal hearings are conducted by a designee of the
Board, the designee shall prepare and transmit a report of the evidence and
summary of the hearing (including transcripts and other evidence) together
with recommendations for the disposition of the appeal to the full Board for
final action.



      (2)   After the Board has reviewed the evidence and any
recommendation submitted by a designee of the Board (if the hearing was not
conducted by the full Board), the Board shall issue an order sustaining,
modifying, or revoking the matter under appeal.



      (3)   The order of the Board sustaining, modifying, or
revoking the matter under appeal shall be considered the final order of the
Board when it has been entered into the record by the Secretary of the Board.
The Board shall serve notice of its final order to all parties to the appeal
in the same manner set forth in division (B)(3) above.



      (4)   A party to the appeal, or the permit applicant in the
case of an appeal of a industrial permit decision, may obtain judicial review
of a final order of the Board if a petition for review is filed in the court
of record in Howard County, Indiana, as provided in state law for perfecting
appeals from the actions of governmental entities. Aggrieved parties seeking
judicial review must file petitions for review with the appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction within 30 calendar days of the date of the final
administrative decision issued by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



EMPLOYEE PROTECTIONS



§ 55.315  GENERAL.



   (A)   Section 507 of the Act, as codified in 33 U.S.C. section 1251
et seq., provides that “No person shall fire, or in any other way
discriminate against, or cause to be fired or discriminated against, any
employee or any authorized representative of employees by reason of the fact
that such employee or representative has filed, instituted, or caused to be
filed or instituted any proceeding under this Act, or has testified or is
about to testify in any proceeding resulting from the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this Act.”



   (B)   In the implementation of the control authority’s delegated
pretreatment program, the control authority implements those parts of the Act
applicable to the National Pretreatment Program. Control authority
enforcement personnel regularly interact with users and employees of users
covered by the requirements of the Act. Such  employees are afforded
protections from discrimination when they engage in protected activities such
as but not limited to participation in compliance assurance activities
conducted by control authority enforcement personnel.



   (C)   In accordance with Section 507 of the Act and the purpose and
policy set forth in § 55.001, the following requirements are established to
ensure that information on the employee protections afforded by the Act is
readily available to all persons afforded such protections under the Act.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.316  NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   All users having at least one employee shall notify employees
of the protections from discrimination afforded by the Act. Such notification
shall be provided by posting the United States Department of Labor Fact Sheet
explaining whistleblower protections provided under the Act, entitled
“Whistleblower Protections and the Environment.” Alternatively, such
users may post a notice provided by the Superintendent which contains the
same information.



   (B)   The user shall ensure that the notice required by division (A)
above shall be posted in its entirety in a prominent location where employee
postings and notifications are regularly displayed. The required notification
must be easily visible and no portion of the notice shall be obstructed from
view. The notice may not be reduced in a manner that the font in the notice
is smaller than 10-point in size.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.317  PERMITTED DISCHARGERS.



   (A)   The Superintendent shall include a prohibition against
discrimination and a statement concerning employee protections provided by
Section 507 of the Act in all individual and general wastewater discharge
permits issued to users that discharge wastewater to the POTW.



   (B)   The Superintendent shall also include a notification
requirement, as provided in § 55.316, in all individual and general
wastewater discharge permits issued to users that discharge to the POTW.



   (C)   The Superintendent shall provide a copy of the notification
required by § 55.316(A) to all users controlled by individual or general
wastewater discharge permits that were issued prior to the effective date of
this chapter. The Superintendent shall also provide a copy of the required
notification upon initial issuance of individual or general wastewater
discharge permits to users receiving such permits on or after the effective
date of this chapter.



   (D)   Users having been provided an initial copy of the required
notification in accordance with division (C) shall be responsible for
ensuring that the required notice is posted in accordance with § 55.316.
Such users shall thereafter be responsible for obtaining additional copies
from the Superintendent, or the United States Department of Labor, in order
to maintain compliance with the requirements of § 55.316.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.318  ALL OTHER DISCHARGERS.



   (A)   All users that are not controlled through an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit which have at least one employee shall
also provide the notification required by § 55.316.



   (B)   If, upon inspection, the Superintendent discovers that a user
covered by division (A) is unaware of the requirement of § 55.316; the
Superintendent shall provide a copy of the notification required by §
55.316(A) to such user and require immediate compliance with the 
notification requirement of § 55.316.



   (C)   Users having been provided an initial copy of the required
notification in accordance with division (B) above shall be responsible for
ensuring that the required notice is posted in accordance with § 55.316.
Such users shall thereafter be responsible for obtaining additional copies
from the Superintendent, or the United States Department of Labor, in order
to maintain compliance with the requirements of § 55.316.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



§ 55.319  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any user having at least one employee that fails to notify employees as
required by § 55.316, or that does not otherwise comply with a requirement
implemented under § 55.317 or 55.318, shall be considered to be in violation
of this chapter. The Superintendent shall implement supplemental enforcement
actions provided in § 55.276 to address such violations.



(Ord. 6619, passed 1-28-13)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         71.   TRAFFIC RULES



         72.   PARKING



         73.   JUNK VEHICLES



         74.   BICYCLES



         75.   PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS



         76.   SNOW ROUTES



         77.   RESERVED



         78.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



         79.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles



   70.03   Riding bicycles



   70.04   Public employees or officers; authorized emergency  vehicles



   70.05   Required obedience to traffic laws



   70.06   Obedience to official traffic-control signs and signals



   70.07   Obedience to police officers



   70.08   Parental responsibility



   70.09   Certain uses of motorized vehicles



   70.10   Registration



Administration and Enforcement



   70.15   Enforcement



   70.16   Impoundment of vehicles



   70.17   Traffic Commission



Traffic Accident Reports



   70.25   Application



   70.26   Definitions



   70.27   Establishment of fee; deposition; expenditure of fees



 



   70.99   Penalty



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      “MOPED.” A motorized vehicle with two or three wheels that is
propelled by an internal combustion engine or a battery powered motor, and if
powered by an internal combustion engine, has the following:



         (a)   An engine rating of not more than two horsepower
and a cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters;



         (b)   An automatic transmission; and



         (c)   A maximum design speed of not more than 25 miles
per hour on a flat surface.



      “MOTORIZED VEHICLE.”  Any two-wheeled or three-wheeled
device that has handlebars, is designed to be stood upon or seated upon by
the operator; and any four-wheeled device that is not required to have a
license plate under the rules and regulations set forth by the State Bureau
of Motor Vehicles; and is powered by a motor, either gas, diesel, electric,
solar or any combination thereof, that is capable of propelling the device,
with or without human propulsion, at a speed of more than 15 miles per
hour.  Any additions or modifications to these devices will not alter its
basic nature and will not render the provisions of this chapter
inapplicable.  This definition shall not be interpreted to include any
device designed for use as transportation by a person with physical
disabilities, and which is actually used for that purpose.



      “POCKET BIKE.”  Any wheeled device ridden by a person or
used as transportation, powered or assisted by any on-board power source,
either gas, diesel, electric, solar or any combination thereof, other than
the rider’s own physical efforts, that has a handlebar height of 30 inches
or less, measured from the highest point of the handlebar, or a seat height
of 24 inches or less, as measured from the highest point of the horizontal
seat surface actually designed to bear the weight of the rider.  Any
additions or modifications to these devices will not alter its basic nature
and will not render the provisions of this chapter inapplicable.  This
definition shall not be interpreted to include any device designed for use as
transportation by a person with physical disabilities, and which is actually
used for that purpose.



      “TRAFFIC AUTHORITY” or “TRAFFIC COMMISSION.”  The City
Traffic Commission.



   (B)   Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not
defined in this code but are defined in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on
Highways, such definitions shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases.



('75 Code, § l5-1)  (Am. Ord. 2005-6394, passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 6672,
passed 5-14-12)



Statutory references:



   Statutory definitions, see IC 9-13-2-1 et seq.



§ 70.02  RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.



   Every person riding an animal or driving any animal drawing a vehicle 
on a roadway  shall  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of this
chapter, applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which
by their nature can have no application.



('75 Code, § 15-2)



Statutory reference:



   Riding animals, see IC 9-21-1-10



§ 70.03  RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle on a roadway shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as
to those provisions which by their nature can have no application.



('75 Code, § l5-3)



Cross-reference:



   Bicycles, see Ch. 74



Statutory reference:



   Riding bicycles, see IC 9-21-11-2



§ 70.04  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES OR OFFICERS; AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of
vehicles on a highway shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this section with reference to
authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other
equipment while actually engaged in work on the surface of a highway but
shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from work.



   (C)   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law or when responding, but not on returning from a
fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section but subject
to the conditions herein stated.



   (D)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not
endanger life or property;



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.



   (E)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and
visual signals meeting the requirements of law, except that an authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a red and blue lights visible from in front of the vehicle.



   (F)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.



('75 Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC LAWS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-5)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Obedience to traffic laws, see IC 9-21-1-1 - 9-21-20-3



§ 70.06  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND SIGNALS.



   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic-control sign, signal, device, or marking which is placed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless at the time otherwise
directed by a police officer.



('75 Code, § 15-6)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Obedience to traffic-control devices, see IC 9-21-4-18



§ 70.07  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any police officer made pursuant to this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Police Department, see §§ 32.10 through 32.24



Statutory reference:



   Obedience to police officers, see IC 9-21-8-1



§ 70.08  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The parent of any child and the guardian of any protected person shall
not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or protected person to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Parental responsibility, see IC 9-21-11-1



§ 70.09  CERTAIN USES OF MOTORIZED VEHICLES.



   (A)   The use of motorized vehicles, as defined above, is permitted
on all streets within the city only under the following conditions.



      (1)   For motorized vehicles required to be registered and
plated by state law, the operator of the motorized vehicle must be properly
licensed, insured, equipped and registered, pursuant to applicable state laws.



      (2)   For motorized vehicles not required to be registered or
plated by state law:



         (a)   The operator must be age 15 or over;



         (b)   The operator must carry a state-issued
identification card that shows the operator’s age or a valid operator’s
license;



         (c)   An operator from 15 to 18 years of age must wear a
helmet and goggles or a face shield; and



         (d)   The vehicle must have headlights, taillights,
brake lights and turn signals that are clearly visible to other traffic and
functioning properly.



         (e)   The vehicle must not be capable of traveling at a
speed more than 25 miles per hour on a flat surface.



   (B)   The use of pocket bikes is prohibited on any and all roadways,
public rights-of-way, sidewalks and parking lots within the city.



(Ord. 2005-6394, passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 6672, passed 5-14-12)



§ 70.10  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   All persons operating a moped within the city must have the
moped owned or operated by them registered annually with the City of Kokomo
Police Department.



   (B)   The annual registration form shall be accompanied in person at
the Kokomo Police Department Headquarters between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (excluding holidays) at the Kokomo Police
Department Records Office.



   (C)   Such annual registration form shall require: the name of the
record owner of the moped; his or her address and telephone number; date of
birth of operator; the make, model and serial number of the moped; and the
color, size and other identifying characteristics of the moped.



   (D)   Upon completion of the registration form and payment of the
registration fee, the Kokomo Police Department shall issue a registration
decal. Such registration decal shall remain affixed to the moped at all times
while the moped is in operation.



   (E)   The registration fee shall be as follows:



      (1)   Initial registration fee: $25.



      (2)   Renewal registration fee: $10.



   (F)   The Kokomo Police Department shall not issue the registration
or decal until all required items are submitted and payment is made.



(Ord. 6672, passed 5-14-12) Penalty, see § 70.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 70.15  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Traffic Division and all police officers of
this city to enforce the state and city traffic regulations.  In the event
of any emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the Police and Fire Departments may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-21)



§ 70.16  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The members of the Police Department may remove a vehicle from
a public street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city to a garage
or other place of safety or to a garage designated by the Police Department
when that vehicle is:



      (1)   Left unattended on any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or
in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic.



      (2)   On a street and is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason
of physical injury incapacitated to such extent as to be unable to provide
for its custody or removal, or when a vehicle on a street is so disabled as
to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of such
vehicle or the owner of such vehicle allows and permits such vehicle to
remain standing or parked upon the street for a period of time in excess of
72 hours.



      (3)   Left unattended on a public street, public alley,
municipal parking lot owned and operated by the city, or a public sidewalk,
and is parked illegally in such a manner as to constitute a definite hazard
or obstruction to the normal and safe movement of traffic, or in the case of
a vehicle improperly parked on a municipal parking lot where such vehicle is
parked in such a manner as to obstruct the normal and safe movement and
parking of vehicles on such municipal parking lot.



      (4)   Parked in violation of official signs other than parking
meters regulating the standing of vehicles.



      (5)   Left standing or parked on a public street because the
operator of the vehicle has been arrested and taken into custody by a member
of the Police Department or other law enforcement body.



   (B)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle as authorized under this
section, he shall enter such fact on the records of the Police Department
maintained for such purpose, and such record shall be kept to show the type
of vehicle, name of the registered owner thereof, license number thereof, and
the name and address of the operator of such vehicle at the time it became
impounded, if such information is available to such officer.  Thereafter, on
the request of the owner of any such vehicle for the return of his vehicle,
the Police Department shall issue its order directing the owner of the garage
to which such vehicle had been removed to forthwith return such vehicle to
its owner or his agents or representatives on payment of the charges incurred
as a result of such vehicle being towed to a place of safety.



   (C)   Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this
section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner
thereof, or for any other reason is unable to give notice to the owner of its
being impounded, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner
within a period of three days, the Police Department shall send a written
report of such removal by mail to the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles, and
shall file a copy of such notice with the proprietor of the garage in which
the vehicle is stored. Such notice shall include a complete description of
the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reason for
such removal, and name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.



   (D)   A police officer having probable cause to believe a person has
violated § 70.09 above may immediately confiscate the motorized vehicle or
pocket bike and remove it to a garage or other place of safety as designated
by the Police Department.



      (1)   Whenever an officer removes a motorized vehicle or
pocket bike as authorized under this section, he or she shall enter such fact
on the records of the Police Department maintained for such purpose, and the
records shall be kept to show the type of vehicle, name of the registered
owner, license number, and the name and address of the operator of the
vehicle at the time it became impounded, if that information is available to
the officer.



      (2)   Thereafter, on the request of the owner of any such
vehicle for its return, the Police Department shall issue its order directing
the owner of the garage to which the vehicle had been removed to return the
vehicle to its owner, or his or her agents or representatives, on payment of
the charges incurred as a result of the vehicle being towed to a place of
safety.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the Common Council hereby finds
that there is a compelling governmental interest in imposing the following
discretionary penalty section for minor children, in order to encourage
parental intervention and responsibility for the violations of § 70.09 by
the minor children.



      (1)   The city further finds that impoundment is more likely
to prevent repeat offenses by minors than the imposition of monetary
penalties.



      (2)   In lieu of the penalty described in division (D), any
police officer may, at his or her discretion, utilize the following penalty
provisions for violations by minor children.



         (a)   First offense.  On the child's first offense in a
365-day period, the city shall issue a written warning and notification to
the child's parent or guardian of the violation.



         (b)   Second offense.  On the child's second offense in
a 365-day period, the city shall issue a written notice of violation, and the
investigating officer may take custody of the motorized vehicle or pocket
bike and hold it for safekeeping for 60 days or until it is claimed by the
child's parent or guardian.  The child's parent or guardian shall be
responsible for any charges incurred by the city for impounding the motorized
vehicle or pocket bike, including but not limited to towing and storage.



         (c)   Third and subsequent offense(s).  On the child's
third offense in a 365-day period, the city shall include a civil fine, not
to exceed $100. The arresting officer may take custody of the motorized
vehicle or pocket bike and hold it for safekeeping for 60 days.  An officer
or his or her superior may waive the imposed civil fine and/or impoundment,
if the parent and child agree to the child’s attendance and completion of a
motorized vehicle safety course.



('75 Code, § l5-22)  (Am. Ord. 2005-6394, passed 11-14-05)



Statutory reference:



   Impoundment, see IC 9-22-1-11



§ 70.17  TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   (A)   Established.  There is established a Traffic Commission. ('75
Code, § 15-41)  (Ord. 3928, passed 2-12-68)



   (B)   Composition.  The Traffic Commission shall consist of the
City Police Department Accident Investigation Division, Chief of Police, or,
in his absence, the Assistant Chief of Police, a member of the Common Council
of the city chosen by the Council, the Corporation Counsel, or, in his
absence, the City Civil Engineer, a member appointed by the Mayor, with such
member being a city resident and serving for a term of one year, and a member
appointed by the Council, with such member being a city resident and serving
for a term of one year.  ('75 Code, § 15-42)  (Ord. 3928, passed 2-12-68)



   (C)   Compensation.  The members of the Traffic Commission shall
serve without compensation.  ('75 Code, § 15-44)  (Ord. 3928, passed
2-12-68)



   (D)   Duties.  It shall be the duty of the Traffic Commission to
coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic
matters, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to
receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to recommend to the
Common Council ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the
administration and enforcement of traffic regulations.  ('75 Code, § 15-45)



   (E)   The Traffic Commission may determine and designate by proper
signs, distances not exceeding 90 feet at places where the stopping of any
vehicle would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual
delay to traffic.  (Ord. 4576, passed 11-8-76)



   (F)   The Traffic Commission may make temporary rules regulating
traffic or intersection control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
No such temporary rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect for more
than 30 days.  (Ord. 4576, passed 11-8-76)



TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS



§ 70.25  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The fee prescribed by this subchapter shall be charged in all
cases where a request is made to an officer of the city, by a qualified
individual, requesting a photocopy of police accident reports compiled as a
result of traffic accidents which are the subject of Police Department
investigations.



   (B)   The fee prescribed by this subchapter shall not be charged in
cases where the request for an accident report is made by another unit of
government.



(Ord. 5106, passed 11-23-81)



Cross-reference:



   Accident reports, see § 70.19(D)



§ 70.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ACCIDENT REPORT.”  Shall consist of the following information.



      (1)   The name and address of the owner and operator of any
vehicle involved in an accident.



      (2)   The license number and description of any such vehicle
involved in said accident.



      (3)   The time and place such accident occurred.



      (4)   The names and addresses of any persons injured or
fatally injured in such accident.



      (5)   The names and addresses of any persons who were
witnesses to such accident.



   “QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL.”  Any person who has sustained any loss or
damage, by reason of the injury or death of any person or damage to property
caused by or resulting from the operation, maintenance or use of any vehicle
on the public streets or highways located in or about the city, or that
person’s duly authorized agent or attorney.



(Ord. 5106, passed 11-23-81)



§ 70.27  ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE; DEPOSITION; EXPENDITURE OF FEES.



   (A)   The fee established for the provision of the accident report
described by this subchapter shall be $5.



   (B)   To whom fee paid.  The fee established by this subchapter
shall be collected by the city officer providing such copy at the time the
copy is released to a qualified individual.  The city officer will provide
the person requesting the report with an appropriate receipt evidencing
payment of the fee set out herein.



   (C)   Disposition of fee.  All fees collected under this subchapter
shall be turned over to the office of the City Controller who shall deposit
such fees in a separate account known as the accident report account as
provided by state law.



   (D)   Expenditure of fees.  The fees collected under this
subchapter shall be used for the purposes set out in state law.



(Ord. 5106, passed 11-23-81)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this title for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $1,000.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
70.09, or any person who aids, abets or assists therein shall, after having
been found to have violated any of the provisions contained therein, pay a
fine or penalty for each violation in a sum of not less than $10 nor more
than $500. In addition to the fine or penalty, the violator shall pay the
fees assessed by the court.



   (C)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 70.10
shall be subject to a fine of $100 and the moped shall be subject to impound
until such violation is remedied to the satisfaction of the Kokomo Police
Department.



(Am. Ord. 2005-6394, passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 6672, passed 5-14-12)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   71.01   Commercial vehicle routes



   71.02   Driving on sidewalks



   71.03   Noise



§ 71.01  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE ROUTES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE."  A truck, tractor, semitrailer, and a
trailer, or any combination thereof.



      "LOCAL DELIVERY."  The operation of a commercial vehicle from or
to a point of origin or destination or when being used for the purpose of
local pickups or deliveries of freight, property, and other material in the
city.



      "REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT."  The weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles without load, plus the weight of any load thereon.



   (B)   No commercial vehicles shall be driven on any streets, except
those through commercial vehicle routes.



   (C)   No commercial vehicles with a registered gross weight in
excess of l0,000 pounds shall be driven over any street except when being
operated or driven for the purpose of local delivery, and when operated as
such shall use and proceed on the nearest commercial vehicle routes.



('75 Code, § 15-82)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



Commercial vehicle routes, see Ch. 78, Sched. I



§ 71.02  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on any
sidewalk or any grass plot along or within any public street, except where
crossing a sidewalk on a driveway.  Where no driveway provides access to any
premises, a temporary crossing may be made with planks laid on sidewalk to
properly protect it.



('75 Code, § 15-98)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 97



Statutory reference:



   Prohibition of vehicles on sidewalks, see IC §§ 36-9-2-5 and 36-9-2-7



§ 71.03  NOISE.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section the following defini-
tions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      "A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL."  The sound pressure level in decibels
using the A-weighting network.  The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.



      "DECIBEL (dB)."  A unit of sound pressure measurement as defined
by the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.



      "dB(A)."  A weighted scale for measuring decibel as defined in
the American National Standards Institute Bulletin.



      "MODIFIED EXHAUST SYSTEMS."  An exhaust system in which the
original noise abatement devices have been physically altered causing them to
be less effective in reducing noise or the original noise abatement devices
have either been removed or replaced by noise abatement devices which were
not effective in reducing noise as their original devices, or devices have
been added to the original noise abatement devices such that noise levels are
increased.



      "MOTOR VEHICLES."  Any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motor scooter, dune buggy, snowmobile, all terrain vehicles, go-
carts, minibikes, trail bikes, and trucks with gross vehicular weight of less
than 8,000 pounds.



      "NOISE LEVELS."  The A-weighted sound level produced by a motor
vehicle.



      "SOUND LEVEL METER."  An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector integrator or time averager, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.  Such instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American Standard Association.  Reading
shall be made on a dB(A) scale.



      "TRAFFIC NOISE."  A sound made by a motor vehicle operated
either on a public right-of-way or private property.



      (2)   All definitions and terminology used in this section not
defined herein, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on the streets of the
city in such a manner or with such equipment as to make, create, facilitate,
increase or maintain any loud, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, or health
of others.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise levels from
the operation of motor vehicles in excess of 80 dB(A) in any area within the
corporate limits of the city, at any time of the day, and regardless of the
specified speed limit up to 45 mph zones.  Such noise level limit of 80
dB(A) shall be based on distance of not less than l5 feet from the noise
source.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle
which causes excessive noise levels, as a result of a defective or modified
exhaust system, or as a result of an unnecessary rapid acceleration,
deacceleration, revving, or tire squeal, or as the result of the operation of
audio devices such as, but not limited to, radios, phonographs, tape players
and CD players on or from such vehicle.



   (E)   In any criminal prosecution of a violation of this section,
the court may admit evidence of a noise level as tested by any sound level
meter which meets or exceeds the American National Standards Institute
specifications for type II equipment.



   (F)   Any emission of noise from any motor vehicle source in excess
of the limitations established by this section shall be deemed and is
declared to be a public nuisance.



(Ord. 4691, passed 11-28-77; Am. Ord. 4995, passed 8-26-80; Am. Ord. 5937,
passed 9-12-94)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Noise, see Ch. 132



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Owner's responsibility



   72.02   Loading zones; permit for backing



   72.03   Passenger zones



   72.04   Parking in alley



   72.05   Marking and leasing taxicab parking zones



   72.06   Selling vehicle or goods



   72.07   Trucks in residence districts



   72.08   Procedure for establishing loading zones



   72.09   Parking not to obstruct traffic



   72.10   Parking near mailboxes



   72.11   Parking in yards prohibited



Metered Parking



   72.20   Two-hour zones



   72.21   Overtime parking or parking without payment



   72.22   Loading permit



   72.23   Placement of lines



Fire Lanes



   72.40   Definitions



   72.41   Parking prohibited



   72.42   Nuisance declared



   72.43   Abatement of nuisance



   72.44   (Reserved)



   72.45   Modification of fire lanes



   72.46   Loading zones and customer pickup zones



   72.47   Enforcement



Handicapped Parking



   72.55   Definitions



   72.56   Parking for physically handicapped required



   72.57   Compliance with state law required



   72.58   Reciprocity with other states



   72.59   State provisions to control



   72.60   Violations



   72.61   Enforcement



   72.62   Application of subchapter



   72.63   Enclusiveness of state parking permits



Parking on Protected Properties



   72.70   Definitions



   72.71   Prohibitions



   72.72   Enforcement prerequisites



 



   72.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Power of local authorities to regulate parking, see IC 9-21-16-1 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.



   No person shall knowingly allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any street in this city in
violation of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-111)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.02  LOADING ZONES;  PERMIT FOR BACKING.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time other than the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup
and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect.  In no case
shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials exceed 15 minutes.



   (B)   Where stopping for the purpose of loading or unloading of
merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation
of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge
loads when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit issued by the Traffic
Commission granting him such privilege and such permit shall be either in the
possession of the driver or on the vehicle at the time such vehicle is backed
against the curb to take on or discharge a load and it shall be unlawful for
any owner or driver to violate any of the terms or conditions of any such
special permit.



('75 Code, § 15-117)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.03  PASSENGER ZONES.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose except
the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a
passenger zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such passenger
zone are effective and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.



('75 Code, § 15-118)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.04  PARKING IN ALLEY.



   No person shall park a vehicle in an alley except for the purpose of
loading or unloading.



('75 Code, § 15-120)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.05  MARKING AND LEASING TAXICAB PARKING ZONES.



   (A)   The Traffic Commission is empowered and directed to mark three
parking zones in front of each taxicab company for use of each respective cab
company as taxicab parking.  The Traffic Commission may, in its own
discretion, decide whether to require lease payments for these three spaces.



   (B)   The Traffic Commission is authorized to lease to the
respective cab companies additional parking zones at $l50 per year per zone
to be used as taxicab zones if in the opinion of the Traffic Commission it is
reasonably necessary for the conduct of the cab company's business for the
cab company to use the additional parking zones as cab stands.  The maximum
number of additional parking zones to be leased shall be three.



('75 Code, § 15-123)  (Ord. 4172, passed 3-12-73; Am. Ord. 6517, passed
11-26-07)



§ 72.06  SELLING VEHICLES OR GOODS.



   No person shall at any time stand or park a vehicle on any roadway
within the business or commercial district for the purpose of displaying it
for sale or selling, exhibiting for sale, displaying or advertising goods,
wares, merchandise, produce, or commercial articles of any kind or character
at retail, unless a permit from the Traffic Commission is secured therefor.



('75 Code, § l5-l25)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.07  TRUCKS IN RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.



   The driver of any commercial vehicle, including a truck or tractor with
a registered gross weight in excess of 7,000 pounds, or any semitrailer,
tractor, or trailer, is prohibited from parking such vehicle on a street in a
residence district except in an emergency such as delivery of construction
equipment and materials to a building site, or temporarily during such time
as such vehicle is being loaded or unloaded.



('75 Code, § 15-126)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.08  PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   Requests for the establishment of passenger or freight loading
or unloading zones within the city shall be made by application to the
Traffic Commission.  Such application will describe the specific location of
the proposed loading zone, and will set out the reasons why the establishment
of such a zone is advisable.  At its regular monthly meeting, the Traffic
Commission will consider such application, giving all interested parties an
opportunity to be heard. The Traffic Commission shall forward the application
to the City Clerk, together with its written recommendation as to the
advisability of establishing the loading zone requested.  The City Clerk
shall place such application upon the agenda of the Common Council for
consideration.



   (B)   The Common Council, by ordinance, may establish passenger or
freight loading or unloading zones within the City of Kokomo.  The enabling
ordinance will set out the location of such loading zone, and shall indicate
the hours during which restricted parking provisions will be in effect. 
Upon passage of such an ordinance, approval by the Mayor, and publication as
required by law, the Traffic Commission is authorized to place and maintain
appropriate signs, markings, or lines, indicating the loading zone and
indicating the hours during which restricted parking provisions are in effect.



(Ord. 55l0, passed 12-2-85)



§ 72.09  PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle on the street or alley in
such a manner or under such conditions if the parking of a vehicle leaves
less than five feet of width from the centerline which would obstruct the
traffic way and hinder the free movement of traffic.



   (B)   No person shall park a truck that is wider than eight feet or
higher than ten feet or longer than 28 feet, which dimensions shall include
any load carried thereon on any street, except when loading or unloading as
provided by this chapter or other ordinances of the city.



   (C)   No person shall park a semitrailer, either alone or coupled to
a tractor on any street, that is when alone or coupled to a trailer, wider
than eight feet, or higher than ten feet or longer than 36 feet, which
dimensions shall include any load carried thereon, except when loading or
unloading as provided by this chapter or other ordinances of the city.



   (D)   No person shall park a bus that is wider than eight feet or
higher than ten feet or longer than 26 feet on any street, except when
loading or unloading as provided by this chapter or other ordinances of the
city.



   (E)   No person shall park any vehicle whose gross weight, including
any load, exceeds 7,000 pounds on any street, except when loading or
unloading as provided by this chapter or other ordinances of the city.



   (F)   No person shall park any vehicle over seven feet high within
eighty feet of any intersection except when loading or unloading as provided
by this chapter or other ordinances of the city.



   (G)   The provisions of divisions (B), (C), (D), and (E) above shall
not apply to any state highway within the city, nor to any vehicle which
incurs mechanical failure when the person in charge of the disabled vehicle
has placed at least one lighted flare or other illuminated or reflective
warning device at least 100 feet in front of such vehicle, and a similar
warning device 100 feet to the rear of such vehicle.



   (H)   No person shall park a recreational vehicle or trailer of any
kind or type on any street in the city for a continuous period in excess of
72 hours.  The definition of "park" in this instance shall be considered to
include a 100 foot area from the original parking spot.



   (I)   The Chief of Police or City Traffic Commission may for
specific purposes, and for a limited time, grant approval for parking  of
vehicles not in compliance with this section.



   (J)   No person shall park any vehicle on any street in such a
manner or under such conditions that the vehicle is facing the opposite
direction of the flow of traffic in the lane directly adjacent to the parking
space or parking area.



(Ord. 6156, passed 4-25-00; Am. Ord. 6420, passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 6652,
passed 10-24-11; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



§ 72.10  PARKING NEAR MAILBOXES.



   No person shall park any vehicle so close to any mailbox that the
vehicle hampers access of postal employees to any mailbox.



(Ord. 6499, passed 8-27-07)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.11  PARKING IN YARDS PROHIBITED.



   Vehicles and trailers must be parked on a hard surface, including but
not limited to concrete, asphalt, or gravel. No person shall operate or park
any vehicle or trailer on any portion of a lot in any residential district
other than on a drive or approved parking area. No person shall operate or
park any vehicle or trailer on any portion of a lot in any residential
district in a way requiring driving the vehicle over the curb instead of
through a curb cut.



(Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13) Penalty, see § 72.99(H)



METERED PARKING



§ 72.20  TWO-HOUR ZONES.



   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful, exclusive of
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, for any person to permit a vehicle to
remain continuously parked in any parking space in a metered parking zone, as
designated in Chapter 79, Schedule I for a period longer than two hours
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. daily.



('75 Code, § 15-l34)  (Ord. 4070, passed 8-9-71; Am. Ord. 4846, passed
7-8-79)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.21  OVERTIME PARKING OR PARKING WITHOUT PAYMENT.



   The parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of time fixed
for a parking zone shall be a violation of this section, and the parking of a
vehicle without payment of the rates set forth in § 72.22 shall be a
violation of this section.



('75 Code, § 15-139; Am.  Ord. 4846, passed 7-8-79)  Penalty, see §
72.99(B)



§ 72.22  LOADING PERMIT.



   (A)   The Traffic Commission is authorized to issue to any owner of
a vehicle used to transport merchandise or material a permit allowing the
driver the privilege of loading and unloading while parked in any metered
zone on the streets if in its opinion such privilege is reasonably necessary
in the conduct of the owner's business and will not seriously interfere with
traffic.



   (B)   The Traffic Commission shall issue those permits in sticker
form for the sum of $48 per year.



   (C)   The permit shall exempt the permittee from payment of the
parking meter rate on the metered zones on the streets for a maximum of l5
minutes for any one unloading or loading stop and only during the time that
the vehicle is being used for loading and unloading purposes.



   (D)   The permit shall be renewed annually.



   (E)   The Traffic Commission shall have the authority to revoke any
such permit on a showing that a permittee has been found guilty of violating
this section twice within a l2-month period.



('75 Code, § 15-143)  (Ord. 4171, passed 3-12-73)



Cross-reference:



   Loading zones, see §§ 72.02 through 72.04, 72.13, and Ch. 78, Sch. XI



§ 72.23  PLACEMENT OF LINES.



   The Mayor, or his delegate, shall direct that lines or marks on the
curb be placed on the street about or alongside of each parking meter to
designate the parking space for which the meter is to be used.



('75 Code, § 15-144)



FIRE LANES



§ 72.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "FIRE LANE."  An unobstructed lane to be used as access for fire-
fighting equipment including fire trucks, hoses, and other equipment used by
the Fire Department.



   "PUBLIC BUILDINGS."  All buildings that are open to the general public
or are used for housing by more than one family, including but not limited to
business buildings, stores, shopping centers, apartment buildings, and
apartment complexes.



('75 Code, § 15-156)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)



§ 72.41  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any vehicle in a fire lane.



('75 Code, § 15-157)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.42  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   A public building that does not maintain continuously a fire lane
giving access to the building constitutes a fire hazard, and therefore, is
deemed to be a public nuisance, the maintenance of such a public nuisance
shall be unlawful.



('75 Code, § 15-158)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.43  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to abate a public
nuisance as defined in this subchapter.  The Board shall first give a
ten-day notice to abate to the owner or occupier of the public nuisance.  In
the event that the nuisance is not abated at the end of the ten-day period,
then the Board is authorized to request the City Attorney to proceed to
either file a civil suit on behalf of the city against the owner or occupier
to abate the nuisance or to prosecute the violation of this division in the
city court.



('75 Code, § 15-159)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)



§ 72.44  (RESERVED)



§ 72.45  MODIFICATION OF FIRE LANES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall affect the right of the owners or
tenants of any public place to remodel or add to existing structures, or to
establish or discontinue temporary outdoor selling or display areas
contiguous thereto.  In the event any change is made, the outlines of the
adjoining fire lane shall be redrawn and posted to conform to the revised
outline of the building an its contiguous selling or display areas.



('75 Code, § 15-161)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)



§ 72.46  LOADING ZONES AND CUSTOMER PICKUP ZONES.



   The owner or proprietor of any business establishment in any public
place is authorized to utilize the area immediately adjacent to his loading
dock or rear service entrance for the purpose of loading and unloading
delivery trucks, service vehicles, or other vehicles used in the conduct of
his business and is further authorized to utilize the area adjacent to any
entrance to load or unload customer vehicles where bulky or heavy merchandise
must be handled, the driver of a customer vehicle must attend the vehicle
while the merchandise is being loaded or unloaded.



('75 Code, § 15-162)(Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73)  Penalty, see § 72.99(A)



§ 72.47  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department and the Fire Department shall patrol all fire
lanes and may cause any illegally parked vehicle to be towed from the fire
lane at the expense of the vehicle's owner.  A violation written under §
72.41 will result in a fee of $50 to be made payable in accordance with §
72.99(A).



('75 Code, § 15-164)  (Ord. 4182, passed 5-14-73; Am. Ord. 6539, passed
5-19-08; Am. Ord. 6568, passed 12-8-08)



Cross-reference:



   Impoundment of vehicles, see § 70.16



HANDICAPPED PARKING



§ 72.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE." Has the meaning set forth in IC 9-13-2-105.



   "PARKING FACILITY." Any facility or combination of facilities for motor
vehicle parking which contains parking spaces for the public, whether
publicly or privately owned. This definition does not include a parking
facility that charges a fee for parking spaces.



   "PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON." A person who has been issued a placard
under IC 5-16-9-1 et seq., or a handicapped registration plate for motor
vehicles by the State Bureau of Motor Vehicles under IC 9-18-18-1 et seq. and
IC 9-18-22-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



§ 72.56  PARKING FOR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of any parking facility shall provide reserved
parking for physically handicapped individuals. The number of reserved spaces
so provided shall, as a minimum, comply with the provisions of IC 5-16-9-2.



   (B)   The City Traffic Commission shall reserve parking spaces on
municipally owned lots as prescribed by state law. The number of reserved
spaces so provided shall, as a minimum, comply with the provisions of IC
5-16-9-2. In addition, the Commission shall reserve parking on city streets
as required, to be used for the exclusive use of physically handicapped
persons.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.57  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW REQUIRED.



   The manner of posting notice of reserved handicapped parking, and the
size and location of parking spaces shall comply with the provisions of IC
5-16-9-2 and IC 5-16-9-4.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.58  RECIPROCITY WITH OTHERS STATES.



   As required by IC 5-16-9-9(d), a motor vehicle displaying an unexpired
handicapped parking permit, an unexpired disabled veteran's registration
plate, or an unexpired handicapped registration plate or decal issued under
the laws of another state shall be permitted to stand or park in spaces
reserved for the physically handicapped, but only when the vehicle is being
used to transport a physically handicapped person.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



§ 72.59  STATE PROVISIONS TO CONTROL.



   The provisions of this subchapter are intended as being supplemental
to, and not in replacement of, the provisions of IC 5-16-9-1 et seq. Should a
conflict be found to exist, the provisions of IC 5-16-9-1 shall be deemed as
controlling. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting the
enforcement of the provisions of IC 5-16-9-1 et seq. as therein provided.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



§ 72.60  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person who parks a motor vehicle which does not have
displayed a valid and unexpired handicapped person's or disabled veteran's
registration plate, placard, or decal, issued under the laws of the state, or
under the laws of another state, in a parking space reserved under this
subchapter for a handicapped person's vehicle, shall be deemed to be in
violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   Any person who knowingly parks in a reserved handicapped
parking space while displaying a placard, decal, or registration plate to
which neither the person or the person's passenger is entitled shall be
deemed to be in violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   Any person who displays for use in parking in a reserved
handicapped space a placard or license plate not issued under the laws of the
state, or some other state, shall be deemed in violation of this subchapter.



   (D)   Any person, being the owner of a parking facility, who fails
to comply with the provisions of IC 5-16-9-1 et seq. relating to reserved
parking spaces for handicapped individuals shall be deemed in violation of
this subchapter. For the purpose of this division, notice of a violation of
this subchapter shall be deemed given to the owner of the parking facility
when served upon the local agent in charge of the operation of the parking
facility. Pursuant to the provisions of IC 36-1-6-2, before any action to
enforce compliance with the provisions of this subchapter is brought under
this division, all persons holding a substantial interest in the property
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to bring the property into compliance.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.61  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of § 72.60(A), (B), and (C) may be enforced as
follows:



      (1)   The violator may be issued a citation for the commission
of a Class C infraction pursuant to the provisions of IC 5-16-9-5 of the
state statute concerning parking facilities for physically handicapped
persons; or



      (2)   The violator may be issued a citation for violation of
this subchapter.



   (B)   The provisions of § 72.60(D) shall be enforced through
issuance of a citation for violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



§ 72.62  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter are enforceable on all parking
facilities subject to the provisions of IC 5-16-9-1 et seq., regardless of
whether the parking facility is privately or publicly owned.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



§ 72.63  EXCLUSIVENESS OF STATE PARKING PERMITS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require a person to
obtain or display any permit, registration plate, or registration decal other
than those specified in IC 5-16-9-9(c) in order to stand or park in a space
reserved for the physically handicapped as established pursuant to IC
5-16-9-1 et seq., or this subchapter.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89)



PARKING ON PROTECTED PROPERTIES



§ 72.70  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “PROTECTED PROPERTY.” Any business, church, organization, or
property to which the public has access and that has a conspicuously posted
notice that identifies the property as being protected by this subchapter.
Said notice shall be in substantially the following form: “This property is
protected by the terms of Ordinance 6272 of the City of Kokomo, Indiana,
regarding unauthorized parking.”



(Ord. 6272, passed 7-28-03)



2004 S-22



§ 72.71  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally block entrances or exits
to any parking area on a protected property in any manner unless at the
direction of the owner or manager such parking is permitted. Blocking of
entrances and exits shall include the parking of any vehicle in such a manner
that it creates difficulties or limitations in entering or exiting the
premises of the protected property, except for the purposes of repairs by
municipal authorities or private contractors engaged by the owner or manager
of the protected property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle
through any parking area or driveway of any protected property without intent
to park such vehicle for purposes of conducting business at the protected
property.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave an unoccupied
motor vehicle upon a walkway, driveway, or parking area of a protected
property and leave such premises to go elsewhere without the knowledge and
consent of the owner or manager of the protected property.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the walkway,
driveway or parking area of a protected property unless the individual
entering the premises does so for the purposes of conducting business or does
so with the knowledge and consent of the owner or manager or the protected
property.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for anyone other than the owner or his
authorized agent to remove, deface, or tamper with any sign or notice posted
pursuant to this subchapter.



(Ord. 6272, passed 7-28-03)



§ 72.72  ENFORCEMENT PREREQUISITES.



   (A)   If the owner of a business, church, organization, or property
to which the public has access, wishes to declare and post their property as
"protected property", the owner shall give notice to the city of such posting
and shall cooperate in the prosecution of any person charged with violation
of this subchapter pursuant to any such posting.



   (B)   Notices will be filed with the Police Department, which shall
maintain a current list of all such protected properties within the city.
Copies of all such notices shall be provided by the Police Department to the
Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (C)   The city shall furnish a form to be executed by the property
owner which shall constitute notice to the city of the property owner's
election to be covered by the provisions of this subchapter. For a fee to be
set by the Board of Public Works and Safety, the owner shall be issued
standardized notice signs to be posted and maintained by the owner. Such
notices shall be posted in conspicuous places designating property as a
protected property, and only upon the proper posting of such notices shall
compliance with this subchapter be enforced by the city.



(Ord. 6272, passed 7-28-03)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who has received a notice to appear and answer to
any violation under this chapter, may, within the time specified in the
notice, appear at the Traffic Division office to charges set forth in such
notice.  At the time of appearance the person shall pay the prescribed fee
of $15, except when another fee is explicitly defined in this code, and in
writing admit the charge, waive a hearing in court, and give authority to the
person in charge of the office to make entry and pay the prescribed fine. 
Payment of this fine shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation
and the violator shall be given a receipt which so states.



('75 Code, § 15-127)  (Ord. 4180, passed 4-24-73; Am. Ord. 4846, passed
7-8-79; Am. Ord. 6568, passed 12-8-08)



   (B)   Any person who has received notice to appear and answer to a
violation under § 72.60, shall be subject to a fine of $50.  This fine
shall be payable in the same manner as prescribed in division (A) of this
section.  ('75 Code, §§ 15-139 and 15-163; Am. Ord. 4846, passed 7-8-79;
Am. Ord. 4957, passed 7-14-80)



   (C)   Any person who fails to pay an assessed fee or formally deny
the alleged violation under this chapter, within 30 days of the violation,
shall be charged an additional penalty of $15 payable in the same manner as
outlined in division (A) of this section.  (Ord. 6539, passed 5-19-08)



   (D)   Nothing in division (C) above shall be construed as preventing
enforcement of handicapped parking violations pursuant to the provisions of
IC 5-16-9-5.



   (E)   Any person found in violation of § 72.60(D) who fails to
provide required reserved handicapped parking spaces, after having been given
a reasonable opportunity to do so, shall be subject to a fine of $50. Each
day that the failure to bring the parking facility into compliance with the
provisions of §§ 72.56 through 72.63 and state statute continues shall be
considered a separate offense.



   (F)   The operator of any motor vehicle found to be in violation of
the terms of § 72.71 shall be subject to a fine of $50 for a first offense,
and $100 for each subsequent offense to occur within one year of the first
offense.



   (G)   Unattended vehicles found to be parked in violation of §
72.71 may be towed at the expense of the vehicle's owner. The owner shall
also be responsible for any fees that may accrue in connection with the
storage of the vehicle after the towing has occurred.



   (H)   Any person found to be in violation of § 72.14 or § 72.16
will be subject to a fine of $100.  This fine shall be payable in the same
manner described in division (A) of this section.  Vehicles in violation of
§ 72.14 or § 72.16 may be towed at the expense of the vehicle's owner. 
The owner shall also be responsible for any fees that may accrue in
connection with the storage of the vehicle after the towing has occurred.



(Ord. 5704, passed 10-30-89; Am. Ord. 6272, passed 7-28-03; Am. Ord. 6420,
passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 6539, passed 5-19-08; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



CHAPTER 73:  JUNK VEHICLES



Section



   73.01   Definitions



   73.02   Exclusions



   73.03   Officers responsible for chapter enforcement



   73.04   Adoption of state law



   73.05   Responsibility of owner



   73.06   Powers of the Board of Public Safety



   73.07   Notice tag required



   73.08   Preparation of report



   73.09   Disposition of vehicles; effect of valuation



   73.10   Towing and storage charges



   73.11   Abandoned vehicle fund



   73.12   Means of disposition



§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   “ABANDONED VEHICLE.”



      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally.



      (2)   A vehicle left on public property for 72 hours without
being moved at least 100 feet from the original parking spot.



      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as
to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way.



      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without
the consent of the owner or persons in control of that property for more than
48 hours.



      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or
differential has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property.



      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or
public agency upon the request of an officer enforcing a statute or an
ordinance other than this chapter if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or
redeemed by the owner or owner’s agent within 20 days of the vehicle’s
removal.



      (7)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is
mechanically inoperable, and is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 20 days.



      (8)   Vehicle parts which meet the criteria set out in
division (1) through (7) of this section shall also be treated in the same
manner as an abandoned vehicle for the purpose of this chapter.



      (9)   A vehicle located on public property in such a way that
it is an obstruction to the free use of the property, so as essentially to
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.



   “BUREAU.”  Refers to the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



   “MOTOR VEHICLE.”  A vehicle which is self-propelled, provided that
the term shall not include a farm tractor or instrument of husbandry.



   “OFFICER.”



      (1)   A regular member of the Police Department.



      (2)   Any individual of another municipal agency designated
within this chapter.



   “VEHICLE.”  A device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is, or may be, transported or drawn upon a highway. The term includes an
automobile, a motorcycle, a truck, a trailer, a semitrailer, a tractor, a
bus, a school bus, a recreational vehicle, or a motorized bicycle.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00; Am. Ord. 6652, passed 10-24-11)



§ 73.02  EXCLUSIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
constructed for operation in privately owned raceways.



   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed
forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment.



   (C)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial
vehicle servicing facility.



   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an
automobile scrap yard.



   (E)   A vehicle registered and licensed under applicable state law
as an antique vehicle.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.03  OFFICERS RESPONSIBLE FOR CHAPTER ENFORCEMENT.



   Any regular member of the Police Department, or any City Building
Inspector, is vested with the authority and responsibility to perform the
duties ascribed to city officers under the provisions of I.C. § 9-22-1 and
under the terms of this chapter.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.04  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the removal and
disposal of abandoned vehicles. The city hereby in all respects adopts the
powers and procedures for the removal, storage, disposal and impoundment of
abandoned vehicles and parts as set forth in I.C. § 9-22-1 and as those
provisions may from time to time be amended by the legislature. In addition,
the city reserves its rights under Home Rule to supplement or clarify state
law and procedure to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.



   The owner of an abandoned vehicle or parts is responsible for the
abandonment and is liable for all costs incidental to the removal, storage,
and disposal of an abandoned vehicle or parts under this chapter.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.06  POWERS OF THE BOARD OF PUBLIC SAFETY.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is hereby authorized to
enter into towing contracts, employ personnel, and acquire equipment,
property, and facilities, subject to available appropriation, for the purpose
of removal storage, and disposition of abandoned vehicles and parts.



   (B)   Should the Board of Public Works and Safety elect to enter
into contracts for the towing, storage, and disposition of abandoned
vehicles, such contracts may provide that the entity with whom the city
enters into a contract shall be responsible for making abandoned vehicle
reports required under I.C. § 9-22-1-19, and shall be further responsible
for coordinating ultimate disposal of the vehicle through sale by the Indiana
Bureau of Motor Vehicles as provided at I.C. § 9-22-1-22. Such contract may
provide that the net proceeds from charges paid by owners or lien holders to
reclaim their vehicles, or from the disposal or sale of unclaimed vehicles,
shall become the sole property of the entity with whom the city enters a
contract, and shall be in lieu of any other charges against the city. The
contract may provide that the city shall not be responsible for any monetary
difference between actual charges accrued for the towing, storage, or
disposal of an abandoned vehicle and the proceeds received by the entity with
whom the city enters into a contract from reclamation, sale, or other
disposal of the vehicle in question.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.07  NOTICE TAG REQUIRED.



   An officer who finds or is notified of a vehicle or parts believed to
be abandoned shall attach in a prominent place a notice tag containing the
following information.



   (A)   The date, time, officer’s name, public agency and address
and telephone number to contact for information.



   (B)   That the vehicle or parts is considered abandoned.



   (C)   That the vehicle or part will be removed after 72 hours.



   (D)   That the person who owns the vehicle will be held responsible
for all costs incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle.



   (E)   That the person who owns the vehicle may avoid costs by
removal of the vehicle or parts with 72 hours.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.08  PREPARATION OF REPORT.



   If a vehicle or a part is not removed as required under § 73.07 hereof
within the 72 hour period provided, the officer shall prepare a written
abandoned vehicle report of the vehicle or parts, including information on
the condition, missing parts, and other facts that might substantiate the
estimated market value of the vehicle or parts. Photographs shall be taken to
describe the condition of the vehicle or parts.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.09  DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES; EFFECT OF VALUATION.



   (A)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of an
abandoned vehicle upon which a report is made pursuant to § 73.08 hereof is
less than $500, the officer may order the vehicle to be immediately disposed
of at an automobile scrap yard. A copy of the report prepared pursuant to §
73.08, and photographs of the abandoned vehicle, shall be forwarded to the
Bureau. Originals of these materials shall be retained by the city for a
period of two calendar years, after which time the records may be disposed of.



   (B)   If, in the opinion of the officer, the market value of the
abandoned vehicle or parts upon which a report is made pursuant to § 73.08
hereof is at least $500 or more, the officer shall make a reasonable effort
to ascertain the person who owns the vehicle or parts or who may be in
control of the vehicle or parts. After 72 hours, the officer shall require
the vehicle to be towed to a storage area.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.10  TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.



   Should the city exercise is option to enter into contracts for the
towing, storage, and disposition of abandoned vehicles identified by the
city, the rates and service charges shall not exceed the following:



   Basic Towing Fee   $45



   Additional Fees:



   Storage   $9 per day



   Dolly/flatbed   $10



   For flatbed not notified by dispatcher, making return to lot
necessary   $15



   Utilization of Oil-Dry   $7.50



   Winch or disconnect drive shaft   $5



   Clean-up of street   $5



   Cycle sling   $10



(No extra charge for small moped)



   After one hour on scene



   Small wrecker   $10 per 15 min.



   Large wrecker   $15 per 15 min.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



§ 73.11  ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.



   As required by I.C. § 9-22-1-30, there is established an abandoned
vehicle fund. This account shall be funded by annual appropriation sufficient
to carry out the requirements of this chapter. Money remaining in the fund at
the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the fund and not revert to the
general fund.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned vehicle fund, see IC  9-22-1-30



§ 73.12  MEANS OF DISPOSITION.



   As required by I.C. § 9-22-1-30, it shall be the policy of the city
that the disposition of abandoned vehicles processed by the city shall, with
the exception of vehicles disposed of through immediate transport to an
automobile scrap yard, be through sale by the Bureau. The city may enter into
contracts which make the processing of abandoned vehicles through the Bureau
an administrative responsibility of the entity with whom the city enters into
a contract.



(Ord. 6153, passed 2-29-00)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES



Section



General Provisions



   74.01   Reserved



Bikeway Plan



   74.15   Adoption



   74.16   Application



   74.17   Limitation on liability



   74.18   Designation and construction of routes



   74.19   Financing improvements



Cross-reference:



   Bikeway routes, see Ch. 78, Sch. X



   Riding bicycles, see § 70.03



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of bicycles, see IC 9-21-11-1 - 9-21-11-14



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 74.01  RESERVED.



BIKEWAY PLAN



§ 74.15  ADOPTION.



   There is adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations for the
establishment of routes designated for use by human powered vehicles a
bikeway plan for the urbanized area of Kokomo and Howard County, dated
February l983, as prepared by the Kokomo and Howard County Governmental
Co-ordinating Council.  The whole of the bikeway plan, save and except the
portions as are deleted, modified, or amended, shall be kept on file in the
office of the city Clerk with no less than three copies being made available
for public inspection. Deletions, modifications, or amendments to the plan
shall be reflected in the copies kept on file by the Clerk upon the
promulgation of the deletions, modifications, or amendments recommended by
the Kokomo and Howard County Governmental Co-ordinating Council and approved
by the Common Council of the city.  Subject to the provisions herein set
forth, the bikeway plan is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein and shall be controlling within the city limits.



(Ord. 5276, passed 4-25-83)



§ 74.16  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Design criteria set out in the bikeway plan shall be followed
should bikeways be constructed.  Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to require the construction of the bikeways unless specific
authorization for the construction is granted by the Common Council by
ordinance.



   (B)   Bikeway routes described in the bikeway plan are for purposes
of planning and recommendation only.  Specific bikeway routes cannot be
created without authorization by the Council by separate ordinance.



(Ord. 5276, passed 4-25-83)



§ 74.17  LIMITATION ON LIABILITY.



   The establishment or construction of bikeways shall not expand the
liability exposure of the city for property damage or personal injury arising
from the use thereof more than that arising from the use of city streets and
thoroughfares generally.



(Ord. 5276, passed 4-25-83)



§ 74.18  DESIGNATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF ROUTES.



   (A)   Bikeway routes may be designated by the Common Council without
provision being made for funding the construction thereof according to the
design criteria set out in the bikeway plan.



   (B)   Construction may be authorized by the Council at a later date
when appropriate funding is available.



(Ord. 5276, passed 4-25-83)



Cross-reference:



   Bikeway routes, see Ch. 78, Sch. X



§ 74.19  FINANCING IMPROVEMENTS.



   No public monies shall be expended on improvement of bike routes
hereinafter created to bring them into conformity with the design criteria
set out in the bikeway plan without separate Council approval and
appropriation, the approval and appropriation being dependent on the
availability of funds for the purpose.



(Ord. 5277, passed 4-25-83)



CHAPTER 75:  PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS



Section



   75.01   Definitions



   75.02   Duties of permittee



   75.03   Public conduct



   75.04   Permit required; exceptions



   75.05   Application



   75.06   Standards for issuance



   75.07   Notice of rejection



   75.08   Appeal procedure



   75.09   Alternate permit



   75.10   Notice of issuance



   75.11   Contents of permit



   75.12   Chairman to carry permit



   75.13   Revocation



   75.14   Designated parade route



   75.15   Signs



§ 75.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "DIRECTOR."  The Traffic Supervisor or his designate.



   "PARADE."  Any parade, march, ceremony, show exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or rallies or demonstrations, or any similar display,
in or on any street or other outdoor place owned or under control of the city.



   "PARADE PERMIT."  The permit required by this chapter.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.02  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.



   A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit directions
and conditions and with applicable laws, provisions of this code, and other
city ordinances.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Power to regulate assemblages, see IC 36-8-2-9



§ 75.03  PUBLIC CONDUCT.



   (A)   Interference.  No persons shall unreasonably hamper,
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any
person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of any vehicle shall
drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles
or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade routes.  The Director shall have authority
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a highway, or part thereof, constituting a part of the route of a
parade.  The Traffic Department shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof.



   (D)   Violations:



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present,
or conduct, or attempt to stage, present, or conduct, a parade without first
having obtained a permit therefore as provided in this chapter, or which
shall otherwise violate any of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a
parade on the city streets for which a permit has not been granted.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with all directions and conditions of the parade permit issued pursuant to
this chapter.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   When required, except as provided in division (B) below, no
person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any parade unless
a parade permit therefore has been obtained from the Director as provided in
this chapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions.



      (2)   Lawful picketing in a labor dispute or orderly
processions on the sidewalks that do not violate the provisions of the code
or other city ordinances.



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.05  APPLICATION.



   Any person seeking the issuance of a parade permit as required by this
section shall file an application therefore with the Director on forms
provided by his office, which application shall be governed by the following
provisions:



   (A)   Filing period.  An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the Traffic Supervisor not less than 60 days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the parade unless waived by the Traffic
Supervisor.  The application shall be signed by the applicant and notarized.



   (B)   Contents.  An application for a parade permit shall set forth
the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade.



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, by an organization, the name, address, telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized responsible heads of
such organization.



      (3)   No parade permit for any parade involving vehicles and
animals shall be issued unless the applicant therefore shall obtain a
comprehensive general liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state, with coverage that includes
the assembly area, the parade route, the disbanding area of the parade, and
any other area used by the participants of the parade.  The policy limits of
said insurance shall not be less than:



         (a)   Property damage.      $ 5,000 each occurrence



         (b)   Bodily injury or death.   25,000 each person



                        50,000 each occurrence



      (4)   At the time of the application for the parade permit
satisfactory proof that the required insurance has been obtained must be
presented to the Director.  The requirement for satisfactory proof may be
complied with either by depositing the insurance policy itself or by
furnishing a certificate of insurance.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.06  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Director shall issue a permit as provided by this section when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he shall find that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the area contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city.



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of
march and areas contiguous thereto.



   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.



   (E)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire.



   (F)   The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause
injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.



   (G)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to
its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en
route.



   (H)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit, however, the prohibition against advertising any
product, goods, or event, shall not apply to signs identifying organizations
or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring floats or transportation for the parade.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.07  NOTICE OF REJECTION.



   The Director shall act on the application for a parade permit within 38
days after the filing thereof.  If the Director disapproves the application,
he shall mail to the applicant, by registered mail within 38 days after the
date on which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating the
reasons for his denial of the permit.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.08  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any persons aggrieved by the action of the Director on a parade permit
application shall have the right to appeal the denial to the City Council. 
The appeal shall be taken within five days after receipt of the notice of
denial.  The City Council shall act on the appeal at the next regular
meeting.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.09  ALTERNATE PERMIT.



   The Director, in denying an application for a parade permit shall be
empowered to amend the permit as to the conduct of the parade, the date of
the parade, and the route of the parade.  This amendment shall occur at the
Traffic Commission meeting on approval of the Board.  If the applicant
agrees to the amendment, he shall state his agreement at the meeting.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.10  NOTICE OF ISSUANCE.



   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, the Director shall send
a copy thereof to the following:



   (A)   The office of the Mayor.



   (B)   The Director of Civil Defense.



   (C)   The Chief of Police.



   (D)   The Fire Chief.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.11  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   The date of the parade.



   (B)   The starting time and termination time of the parade.



   (C)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade.



   (D)   The number of persons, animals, and motor vehicles that will
be in the parade.



   (E)   Such other information as the Director shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.12  CHAIRMAN TO CARRY PERMIT.



   The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit on his person during the conduct of the parade.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.13  REVOCATION.



   The Traffic Supervisor or Traffic Commission shall have the authority
to revoke a parade permit issued pursuant to this division, on violation of
the standards for issuance as prescribed in this chapter.  The Traffic
Supervisor or Traffic Commission shall also have the power to amend the
parade permit in any way necessary in the case of an emergency or to protect
the public welfare.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.14  DESIGNATED PARADE ROUTE.



   Except where the applicant for a parade permit demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director that there are factors requiring an exception or
where in the judgment of the Director a different route shall be followed;
all parades for which a permit is required shall confine themselves to and
follow this designated route:



      North on Apperson Way from Superior Street to Sycamore Street;
west on Sycamore Street to Union Street; north on Union Street to Jefferson
Street; west on Jefferson Street to Main Street; south on Main Street to
Superior Street to Apperson Way.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)



§ 75.15  SIGNS.



   Any plaquett or sign carried by any person in any parade shall consist
of a cardboard sign and a wooden stick in a size not to exceed one inch wide
by one inch thick by 36 inches long unless a specific exemption is granted by
the Traffic Supervisor or the Traffic Commission and is expressly written on
the face of the parade permit.



(Ord. 4948, passed 7-28-80)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 76:  SNOW ROUTES



Section



   76.01   Definitions



   76.02   General provisions



   76.03   Snow routes



 



   76.99   Penalty



§ 76.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "SNOW."  Any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets,
including snow, sleet, hail, ice, and freezing rain.



   "SNOW REMOVAL COORDINATOR."  The Mayor or the person designated by the
Mayor.



   "SNOW REMOVAL CONDITIONS."  A state of street conditions that are
hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic and so declared by the Snow
Removal Coordinator.



   "SNOW ROUTES."  All streets in the city so designated in § 76.03.



   "VEHICLES."  All self-propelled motorized vehicles using city streets
and highways.



(Ord. 4951, passed 7-14-80)



§ 76.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall, by regulation,
designate streets which are heavily traveled and are necessary thoroughfares
for the movement of vehicular traffic throughout the city as snow routes, and
shall be signed as such.



   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Snow Removal Coordinator, the
actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous or dangerous
highway conditions for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, he shall have
authority to declare a snow removal condition.



      (1)   The Snow Removal Coordinator shall immediately inform
the public of the snow removal conditions by issuing a press release to the
local radio, television and news services.



      (2)   The snow removal condition shall continue in force and
effect until the Snow Removal Coordinator declares it to be over in the same
manner as provided for in division (C) (l).



   (C)   After a snow removal condition has been declared and during
its existence:



      (1)   No vehicle shall be parked on a snow route.



      (2)   Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under
its own power, or left unattended on any street designated as a snow route
may be impounded.



      (3)   The Snow Removal Coordinator may declare any snow route
or any part of a snow route to be free from the restrictions herein imposed,
when, in his opinion, the weather or street conditions warrant such an
exclusion.  The Snow Removal Coordinator shall give notice of this
determination in the manner provided for in division (C) (1) above.



(Ord. 4951, passed 7-14-80)



§ 76.03  SNOW ROUTES.



 

Street
 
DESCRIPTION
 
DIRECTION




Alto Rd.
 
East city limits to West city limits
 


Apperson Way
 
city limits to Home Ave.
 


erkley Rd.
 
Columbus Blvd. to Markland Ave.
 


erkley Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh to Zartman Rd.
 


oulevard
 
Dixon Rd. to Goyer Rd.
 


Carter St.
 
Berkley Rd. to Dixon Rd.
 


Davis Rd.
 
Washington St. to city limits
 
North


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Dixon Rd. to Park Rd.
 


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Courtland Ave. to Home Ave.
 


Dixon Rd.
 
City limits-north to city limits
 
South


Gano St.
 
Washington St. to Bypass
 


Hoffer St.
 
Washington St. to U.S. 31 Bypass
 


Home Ave.
 
Lincoln Rd. to Union St.
 


Jefferson Rd.
 
City limits-east to city limits
 
West


La Fountain St.
 
City limits-south to Hoffer St.
 


Lincoln Rd.
 
City limits-east to city limits
 
West


Main St.
 
North to Hoffer
 
South


Markland Ave.
 
City limits-east to city limits
 
West


Morgan St.
 
City limits-east to Phillips St.
 


McCann St.
 
Sycamore St. to Park Ave.
 


North St.
 
Phillips St. to Touby Pike
 


Ohio St.
 
Vaile Ave. to city limits
 
North


Park Ave.
 
Washington St. to Deffenbaugh Rd.
 


Park Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh to city limits
 
South


Phillips St.
 
Morgan St. to Park Ave.
 


Southway Blvd.
 
Southlea Drive to city limits
 
West


Sycamore St.
 
City limits-east to city limits
 
West


Union St.
 
Jefferson North to Hoffer
 
South


Vaile Ave.
 
Main to city limits
 
East


Washington St.
 
City limits
 


Webster St.
 
Boulevard to city limits
 
South


Zartman Rd.
 
Park Rd. to Dixon Rd.
 




 



(Ord. 4951, passed 7-14-80; Am. Ord. 5701, passed 8-28-89)



§ 76.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
more than $20 plus all charges of impounding such vehicles.



(Ord. 4951, passed 7-14-80)



CHAPTER 77:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 78:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



   Schedule



   I.   Commercial vehicle routes



   II.   No left turn streets



   III.   No passing zones



   IV.   One-way streets and alleys



   V.   Speed limits generally



   VI.   Speed in school zones



   VII.   Stop streets and alleys



   VIII.   Yield intersections



   IX.   Traffic-control signals



   X.   Bike routes



   XI.   No right turn on red



   XII.   Pedestrian Ways



SCHEDULE I:  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE ROUTES.



   (A)   The following streets shall be through commercial vehicle
routes:



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
ORD. NO.


Davis Rd.
 
Washington St.
 
north edge of city limits
 



Markland Ave.
 
Washington St.
 
east edge of city limits
 



Sycamore St.
 
Washington St.
 
west edge of  city limits
 



Washington St.
 
north edge of city limits
 
Markland Ave.
 




 



   (B)   The following streets shall be local commercial vehicle routes:



 


STREET

 

FROM

 

TO

 

ORD. NO.






Apperson Way

 

Home Ave.

 

Markland Ave.

 






Apperson Way

 

Markland Ave. north

 

city limits

 

4403




Berkley Rd.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Sycamore St.

 






Boulevard St.

 

U.S. 3l Bypass

 

Goyer Rd.

 

4403




Boulevard St.

 

U.S. 31

 

Home Ave.

 

5731




Brandon St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Park Ave.

 






Carter St.

 

U.S. 3l Bypass

 

Waugh St.

 

4403




Courtland Ave.

 

Deffenbaugh St.

 

Markland Ave.

 






Davis Rd.

 

Washington St. north

 

City limits

 

4403




Deffenbaugh St.

 

Courtland Ave.

 

Home Ave.

 






Deffenbaugh St.

 

Dixon Rd.

 

Park Ave.

 






Deffenbaugh St.

 

Jay St.

 

Delphos St.

 

4403




Delphos St.

 

Deffenbaugh St.

 

Hoffer St.

 

5731




Diamond St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Vaile St.

 






Dixon Rd.

 

Boulevard south

 

City limits

 

4403




Dixon Rd.

 

Deffenbaugh St.

 

Sycamore St.

 






Faulkner St.

 

Superior St.

 

Maple St.

 

5731




Firmin

 

Delphos St.

 

Home Ave.

 

4403




Goyer Rd.

 

Boulevard St.

 

Lincoln Rd.

 

5731




Havens

 

Rank Pkwy.

 

U.S. 31 Bypass

 

4403




Hoffer St.

 

Home Ave.

 

U.S. 31 Bypass

 






Home Ave.

 

Boulevard

 

Lincoln Rd.

 

4403




Home Ave.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Boulevard St.

 






Jay St.

 

Maple St.

 

Superior St.

 

4403




Jay St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Belt Railroad

 






Jefferson St.

 

Ohio St.

 

U.S. 3l Bypass

 






Leeds St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Park Ave.

 






Lincoln Rd.

 

Goyer Rd.

 

Dixon Rd.

 

4403




Lindsay St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Park Ave.

 






Main St.

 

Morgan St.

 

North St.

 

4403




Maple St.

 

Waugh St.

 

Jay St.

 

4403




Market St.

 

Morgan St.

 

North St.

 

4403




Markland Ave.

 

Dixon Rd.

 

Washington St.

 






Morgan St.

 

Phillips St.

 

U.S. 31 Bypass

 






Morgan St.

 

U.S. 31

 

Touby Pike

 

5731




North St.

 

Ohio St.

 

Touby Pike

 

4403




North St.

 

Phillips St.

 

Apperson Way north

 






Ohio St.

 

Jefferson St.

 

Morgan St.

 






Ohio St.

 

Vaile Ave.

 

Jefferson St.

 

4403




Park Ave.

 

Deffenbaugh St.

 

Washington St.

 






Phillips St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Morgan St.

 






Plate St.

 

Boulevard

 

Markland Ave.

 

4403




Plate St.

 

Virginia Ave.

 

Markland Ave.

 






Rank Pkwy.

 

North

 

Havens St.

 

4403




South La Fountain St.

 

Washington St.

 

U.S. 31 Bypass

 






Southway  Boulevard

 

La Fountain St.

 

U.S. 31 Bypass

 






Superior St.

 

Jay St.

 

Apperson Way

 

4403




Superior St.

 

Jay St.

 

Faulkner St.

 

5731




Touby Pike

 

North St. south

 

city limits

 

4403




Touby Pike

 

Morgan St.

 

North St.

 

5731




Vaile Ave.

 

Diamond St.

 

Penn-Central Railroad right-of-way

 






Washington St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

South La Fountain St.

 






Washington St.

 

Sycamore St. north

 

city limits

 

4403




Waugh St.

 

Markland Ave.

 

Penn-Central Railroad right-of-way

 






Webster St.

 

North St.

 

Davis Rd.

 













('75 Code, §§ 15-83 and 15-84)



SCHEDULE II:  NO LEFT TURN STREETS.



 


STREET

 

AT INTERSECTION WITH

 

DIRECTION

 

TIME

 

ORD. NO.




Lincoln Rd.

 

Maple Crest Shopping Center (entrance)

 

West

 

All hours

 

4522




La Fountain St.

 

Alto Rd.

 

North

 

All hours

 

5870




 



('75 Code, § 15-86)(Ord. 5678, passed 3-27-89)



SCHEDULE III:  NO PASSING ZONES.



 

STREET
 
FROM
 
TO
 
ORD. NO.




Apperson Way
 
Fischer St.
 
The city limits
 



Bell St.
 
Fischer St.
 
The south property line of Bon-Air School
 



Davis Rd.
 
Morgan St.
 
1,500 feet north
 
6711


Gerhart St.
 
Apperson Way
 
Purdum St.
 



Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
Carter St.
 
South 600 feet
 
6711


Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
Arnold St.
 
Markland Ave.
 
6711


Rd. 50 East
 
Rd. 300 North
 
U.S. 31 (Smith Rd.)
 
6711


Rd. 50 South  (Defenbaugh)
 
Dixon Rd.
 
West 1,320 feet
 
6711


Rd.50 South (Defenbaugh) Eastbound
 
Beginning west 1,320 feet From Dixon Rd.
 
West 1,320 feet
 
6711


Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh) Westbound
 
Beginning west 2,640 feet From Dixon Rd.
 
West 1,000 feet
 
6711


Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh)
 
Beginning west 3,640 feet From Dixon Rd.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa)
 
6711


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
Dixon Rd.
 
Versailles Dr.
 
6711


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Eastbound
 
Versailles Dr.
 
St. Louis Dr.
 
6711


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Westbound
 
St. Louis Dr.
 
West to railroad crossing
 
6711


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Westbound
 
Rollingstone Dr.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
6711


Rd. 150 West (Park Rd.) Northbound
 
5719 S. Park Rd.
 
5603 S. Park Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 150 West (Park Rd.) Southbound
 
5603 S. Park Rd.
 
5109 S. Park Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 150 West (Park Rd.) Northbound
 
4901 S. Park Rd.
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
6711


Rd. 150 West (Park Rd.)
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
500 feet North
 
6711


Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
6711


Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.) Southbound
 
St. Joan of Arc Church First Entrance
 
St. Joan of Arc Church Second Entrance
 
6711


Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.) Second Entrance
 
St. Joan of Arc Church
 
Valley View Dr.
 
6711


Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
700 feet south of Valley View Dr.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6711


Rd. 200 East
 
Rd. 200 South (Southway Blvd.)
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6711


Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
Berkley Rd.
 
200 Feet north and south
 
6711


Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
Dixon Rd.
 
650 Feet north and south
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
Park Rd.
 
600 Feet west
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) Westbound
 
600 feet west of Park Rd.
 
1604 W. Alto Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) Eastbound
 
1604 W. Alto Rd.
 
1720 W. Alto Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
2217 W. Alto Rd.
 
2519 W. Alto Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) Eastbound
 
2519 W. Alto Rd.
 
2801 W. Alto Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) Westbound
 
Carmeleta Blvd.
 
3210 W. Alto Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
3210 W. Alto Rd.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Northbound
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
South 530 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Southbound
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Beginning south 1,580 feet
 
Thence south 1,060 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Beginning south 2,640 feet
 
Thence south 1,060 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Northbound
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard) Beginning south 3,696 feet
 
Thence south 1,060 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Southbound
 
Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
2105 South 300 West
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
2282 South 300 West
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Southbound
 
Rd. 50 South
 
Covey Lane
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) Southbound
 
Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh)
 
500 feet north of Doud Street
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Sycamore St.
 
South 1,000 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Sycamore St.
 
Jefferson St.
 
6711


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Jefferson St.
 
North 550 feet
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) Eastbound
 
2805 E. Center Rd.
 
Rd.200 East
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
Pineridge Dr.
 
Springdale Dr. (East Entrance)
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
828 E. Center Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
946 E. Center Rd.
 
1076 E. Center Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
1094 E. Center Rd.
 
1156 E. Center Rd.
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) Eastbound
 
Park Rd.
 
Crooked Stick Dr.
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) Westbound
 
Kennington Woods
 
750 feet west
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) (Eastbound)
 
750 feet west of Kennington Woods
 
600 feet west
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) Westbound
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
Water Stone Place
 
6711


Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
Water Stone Place
 
City limits west
 
6711


Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
Rd. 50 East
 
800 feet east
 
6711


Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
Davis Rd.
 
400 feet east
 
6711


Webster St.
 
Redwood Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
5467




 



('75 Code, § 15-89)



SCHEDULE IV:  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The following streets shall be one-way in the direction
indicated:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
DIRECTION
 
ORD. NO.




Armstrong St.
 
Mulberry St. and Jefferson St.
 
North
 



Carter St.
 
Phillips St. and Kingston Rd.
 
East
 
4428


Gateway Gardens
 
The north-south public driveways and the east driveway
 
North
 



Gateway Gardens
 
The north-south public driveways and the west driveway
 
South
 



Havens St.
 
Purdum St. and Jay St.
 
East
 
6245, 6246


Jay St.
 
Havens St. and Madison St.
 
South
 
6245, 6246


Mackinaw Circle
 
Bridgewater Blvd. and Golden Gate Way
 
South
 
6412


Mulberry St.
 
Apperson Way and Phillips St.
 
West
 



Mulberry St.
 
Washington St. and Phillips St.
 
West
 
6679 (Amending 6412)


Park Ave.
 
Main St. and Union St.
 
East
 
6422


Taylor St.
 
Apperson Way and Phillips St.
 
East
 
6395


Taylor St.
 
Apperson Way and Washington St.
 
East
 



Taylor St.
 
Washington St. and Phillips St.
 
East
 
6679 (Amending 6395)


Webster St.
 
Jefferson St. and Sycamore St.
 
South
 





 



   (B)   (1)   The following alleys shall be one-way in the
direction indicated:



 

ALLEYS
 
DESCRIPTION
 
DIRECTION
 
ORD. NO.




Alley whose direction is north-south
 
Between Buckeye St. and Main St. north of Markland Ave. north to first alley
intersection
 
North
 
6707


Alleys whose direction is north-south
 
Between Sycamore St. and Mulberry St. and within Washington St. and Union St.
 
North
 



Alleys whose direction is north-south
 
Between Mulberry St. and Taylor Ave. and within Washington St. and Buckeye St.
 
North
 



Alleys whose direction is north-south   
 
Between Sycamore St. and Superior St. and within Washington St. and Union St.
 
South
 



Alley whose direction is east-west
 
Between Apperson Way and Market St. first alley north of Sycamore St.
 
West
 
6703


Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Main St. and Union St. and within Superior St. and Mulberry St.
 
East
 



Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Washington St. and Buckeye St. and within Walnut St. and Mulberry St.
 
East
 



Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Washington St. and Buckeye St. and within Sycamore St. and Superior
St.
 
East
 



Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Main St. and Buckeye St. and within Mulberry St. and Superior St.
 
West
 



Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Buckeye St. and Washington St. and within Walnut St. and Sycamore St.
 
West
 



Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
Between Webster St. and Courtland Ave. first alley north of Markland Ave.
 
East
 
5468


Alleys whose direction is east-west
 
and Home Ave. and within Hoffner St. and Wheeler St.
 
West
 
4604




 



   (2)   In order to pick up or gather by vehicle or container on
wheels any trash, refuse, wastepaper, or garbage within the alleys designated
above between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and l:00 p.m., the Street Department
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.



('75 Code, §§ 15-90 and 15-91) (Ord. 5468, passed 8-12-85)



SCHEDULE V:  SPEED LIMITS GENERALLY.



   (A)



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
M.P.H.
 
ORD. NO.




Alameda Blvd.
 
Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South) to U.S. 31
 
30
 
6710


Albright Rd.
 
Brooke Rd. south to Center Rd.
 
35
 
6023


Albright Rd.
 
Center Rd. and Alto Rd.
 
30
 
6322


Albright Rd.
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South) south to city limits
 
50
 
6710


Albright Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd. to Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
40
 
6710


Albright Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd. to Alto Rd.
 
40
 
6710


Algonquin Trail
 
Mohawk Dr. to Wea Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Alley
 
Sycamore Street and Jefferson Street along east side of Forest Park Shopping
Center
 
20
 
5979


Alta Ln.
 
Webster St. to Yale Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Alto Rd.
 
Albright Rd. and Brooke Rd.
 
30
 
6322


Alto Rd.
 
Brooke Rd. to 1,050 feet west of Albright Rd.
 
35
 
6023


Alto Rd. (westbound)
 
Cartwright Dr. to western corporate limits
 
35
 
6181


Alto Rd. (westbound)
 
La Fountain St. and Southway Blvd.
 
35
 
5637


Alto Rd. (eastbound)
 
La Fountain St. and a point ll89 feet west
 
35
 
5637


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
1,320 feet west of Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
50
 
6710


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
100 West (Park Rd.) to 300 feet east of Liberty St.
 
50
 
6710


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
300 feet east of Liberty St. to 1,320 feet west of Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West)
 
30
 
6710


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
Park Rd. (Rd. 100 West) to Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
50
 
6710


Anjou Ct.
 
Baton Rouge Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Apperson Way
 
North property line of Bon Air School north to the city limits
 
35
 
6215


Apperson Way
 
Washington St. to Gerhart St.
 
35
 
6710


Arrow St.
 
Kimberly Dr. to Arrowhead Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Arrowhead Blvd.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Baton Rouge Dr.
 
Elva Dr. to Versailles Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Beachwood Ln.
 
Southway Blvd. (Rd. 200 South) to Grey Twig Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Beauvior Ct.
 
Baton Rouge Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Benair Dr.
 
Zartman Rd. south
 
25
 
6385


Berkley Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd. and Hartman Rd.

When children present
 
40

25
 
4973


Berkley Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh and Zartman Rd.
 
35
 
5711


Berwick Dr.
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Elva Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Birch Ct.
 
Mendota Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Bittersweet Ln.
 
Eastbrook Dr. southwest to end
 
30
 
6710


Blue Spruce
 
Mill St. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Boulder Way
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to end
 
30
 
6710


Boulevard (Rd. 100 South)
 
Dixon Rd. (200 West) to Malfalfa Rd. (300 West)
 
35
 
6725


Boulevard St. east
 
Goyer Rd. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
40
 
 


Boulevard St. east
 
Home Ave. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
40
 
 


Boulevard St.
 
Home Ave. and La Fountain St.
 
30
 
 


Boulevard St.
 
Berkley Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
45
 
 


Boulevard St.
 
Park St. and Berkley Rd.
 
35
 
 


Boulevard St.
 
Wabash Ave. and Park Rd.
 
30
 
 


Boulevard St.
 
Dixon Rd. and 660 feet west of Berkley Rd.
 
40
 
6313


Bluegrass Trail
 
Bridle Way north to end
 
25
 
6395


Brave Ct.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Briarwood Ct.
 
Willow Springs Rd. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Bridgestone Cir.
 
Rollingstone Dr. to Rollingstone Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Bridgewater Blvd.
 
Center Rd. and Golden Gate Way
 
25
 
6412


Brooke Rd.
 
Albright Rd. and Alto Rd.
 
30
 
6322


Brooke Rd.
 
Alto Rd. south to Albright Rd.
 
35
 
6023


Brown Ave.
 
Princeton Dr. to Webster St.
 
30
 
6710


Bryan Ln.
 
Carmelita Blvd. to Holiday St.
 
30
 
6710


Buckskin Ct.
 
Buckskin Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Buckskin Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Burgundy Dr.
 
Rouge Dr. southeast to end
 
30
 
6710


Burr Oak Ct.
 
Northwoods Dr. north
 
25
 
6220


Canoe St.
 
Miami Blvd. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Canyon Dr.
 
Southway Blvd. to Melody Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) south to end
 
30
 
6710


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) north to end
 
30
 
6710


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) south to end
 
30
 
6710


Carolyn Ct.
 
Stoneview Dr. southeasterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Carson Ct.
 
Melody Ln. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Carter Rd. east
 
U.S. 31 Bypass and Ohio St.
 
35
 
 


Carter St. (Rd. 50 North)
 
Palm St. to Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
45
 
6710


Carter St. (Rd. 50 North)
 
U.S. 31 to Palm St.
 
35
 
6710


Center Rd. east
 
Albright Rd. to western corporate limits (east property line of Indian
Heights Subdivision)
 
45
 
6181


Center Rd. east
 
U.S. 31 to corporate limits (Orleans Dr.)
 
40
 
6181


Center Rd.
 
U.S. 31 to Park Rd.
 
40
 
6181; 6395


Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
Park Rd. (Rd.100 West) west to city limits
 
50
 
6710


Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
Rd.200 East to Orleans Dr.
 
45
 
6710


Chateau Ct.
 
W. St. Louis Dr. northwest to end
 
30
 
6710


Chippawa Ln.
 
Wea Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Chris Ct.
 
Carmelita Blvd. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Chrystal Woods Dr. west
 
Dixon Rd. to end of roadway
 
25
 
6181


Cobble Ln.
 
Stoneview Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Cobblestone Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to end
 
30
 
6710


Colter Dr.
 
Albright Rd. and Colter Ct.
 
25
 
6322


Columbus Blvd.
 
Dixon Rd. west
 
25
 
6220


Council Ct.
 
Council Ring Blvd. northeasterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Council Ring Blvd.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South) to Arrowhead Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Country Ln.
 
U.S. 31 to Patricia Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Covey Ln.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) east to end
 
30
 
6710


Dartmouth Ct.
 
Yale Blvd. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Dauphine Ct.
 
W. St. Louis Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Davis Rd.
 
2300 N. Davis Rd. to Washington St.
 
35
 
6710


Davis Rd.
 
Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.) to 2300 N. Davis Rd.
 
45
 
6710


Davis St. north
 
1601 North Davis and the northern city limits
 
35
 
 


Dee Ann Dr.
 
Albright Rd. to Dee Ann Ct.
 
25
 
6322


Deffenbaugh St. west
 
Park Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
40
 
 


Dellwood Dr.
 
Westmoor Dr. to Terrace Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Dixon Rd.
 
From Sycamore St. and south to Westdale Ct.
 
35
 
5265; 6289


Dixon Rd.
 
Westdale Ct. to Zartman Rd.
 
40
 
5265; 6289


Dixon Rd. (northbound lane)
 
Jefferson Street North 1,121 feet to city limits
 
35
 
5674


Dixon Rd. (southbound lane)
 
Jefferson Street North 2,640 feet to city limits
 
35
 
5674


Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West)
 
200 feet south of Mill St. to S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
50
 
6710


Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West)
 
Zartman Rd.(Rd. 200 South) to 200 feet south of Mill St.
 
40
 
6710


Duke Ct.
 
Duke Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Duke Dr.
 
Princeton Dr. to Webster St.
 
30
 
6710


East Carter Rd.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass and Ohio St.
 
35
 
4308


East Murden St.
 
Elizabeth St. and Vaile Ave.
 
20
 
5536


East North St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass and Ohio St.
 
40
 
4307


Eastbrook Dr.
 
Grey Twig Dr. to Bittersweet Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Elaine Ct.
 
Elva Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Elva Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to Burgundy Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Fennie Lee Dr.
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Elva Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Field Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd. to Mayfair Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Fieldstone Way
 
Bridgestone Dr. to Weathered Rock Cir.
 
30
 
6710


50 East
 
Smith Rd. north to city limits
 
45
 
6215


Flint Ct.
 
Flint Way west to end
 
30
 
6710


Flint Way
 
Arrowhead Blvd. to Katanna Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Fox Cove Dr.
 
Fox Haven Dr. to Fox Fire Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Fox Fire Ln.
 
Timber Valley Dr. to 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
30
 
6710


Fox Haven Dr.
 
Fox Fire Ln. to Fox Fire Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Garden Place
 
Alameda Blvd. to Mayfair Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Gateway Gardens
 
Gateway Gardens semicircular Dr.
 
20
 
5294


Gerhart St.
 
Apperson Way and Jay St.
 
20
 
 


Ginny Dr.
 
Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh) to Stoneview Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Golden Gate Way
 
Mackinaw Circle north to end
 
25
 
6412


Gordon Ct.
 
Gordon Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Gordon Dr.
 
Covey Ln. to Stoneview Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Goyer Rd. (southbound)
 
Lincoln Rd. and Boulevard St.
 
40
 
5563


Goyer Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd. and Mohr Dr.
 
45
 
4525


Goyer Rd.
 
North city limits and Boulevard
 
35
 
4881


Granite Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to end
 
30
 
6710


Grey Rock Ln.
 
Boulder Way to Granite Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Grey Twig Dr.
 
Willow Springs Rd. north and west to end
 
30
 
6710


Harvard Ct.
 
Harvard Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Harvard Dr.
 
Yale Blvd. to Yale Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Hawthorne Ln.
 
Grey Twig Dr. to Eastbrook Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Hillsdale Ln.
 
Rd. 400 South (S.R. 26) to Alta Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Hoffer St.
 
Home Ave. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
35
 
4763


Holiday St.
 
Oxford St. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Home Ave.
 
Boulevard and Apperson Way

When children present
 
35

25
 
5095


Home Ave.
 
State St. and Wheeler St.
 
30
 
 


Honey Ct.
 
Honey Ln. northeasterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Hunters Cove Cir.
 
Hunters Cove to Hunters Cove
 
20
 
6710


Hunters Cove
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Hunters Cove Cir.
 
20
 
6710


Ivy Ct.
 
Ivy Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Ivy Dr.
 
Princeton Dr. to Webster St.
 
30
 
6710


Janice Dr.
 
Orleans Dr. to Alameda Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Jefferson St.
 
Dixon Rd. and west city limits (Wallace School zone)

When children present
 
45

 

25
 
4603


John D. Dr.
 
Colter Ct. to Albright Rd.
 
25
 
6322


Kickapoo Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Kiowa St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. to Seneca Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Kirk's Row
 
Albright Rd. (Rd. 100 East) to Honey Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Kody Ct.
 
Granite Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Kurtis Ct.
 
John D. Dr. north to end
 
25
 
6322


Kyle Ct.
 
Kyle Ln. west to end
 
25
 
6322


Kyle Ln.
 
Center Dr. and Albright Rd.
 
25
 
6322


La Fountain St. south
 
Boulevard St. and Washington St.
 
35
 
 


La Fountain St. south
 
South Washington St. and Alto Rd.
 
40
 
 


Lamplighter Ct.
 
West of Pine Ridge Dr.
 
25
 
6259


Lance Dr.
 
Wea Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Liberty St.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) south to end
 
30
 
6710


Lincoln Rd.
 
Goyer Rd. and La Fountain St.
 
40
 
 


Lincoln Rd.
 
Park Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
35
 
5571


Lincoln Rd.
 
Webster St. and Park Rd.
 
35
 
4395


Linda Dr.
 
Orleans Dr. to Tulip Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Live Oak Ct.
 
North and south of Northwoods Dr.
 
25
 
6220


Longbow Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Mackinaw Circle
 
Bridgewater Blvd. and Golden Gate Way
 
25
 
6412


Mackinaw Way
 
Bridgewater Blvd. and Golden Gate Way
 
25
 
6412


Main St.
 
Boulevard and Ricketts
 
25
 
4881


Main St.
 
Park Ave. and Deffenbaugh
 
30
 
5095; 6635


Markland Ave. west
 
Park Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
35
 
 


Markland Ave.
 
Washington St. and a point 1,200 feet west of Goyer Rd.
 
30
 
 


Markland Ave.
 
Berkley Rd. to Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West)
 
35
 
6710


Marne Ct.
 
Versailles Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Marsha Ct.
 
Marsha Dr. northwesterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Marsha Dr.
 
Orleans Dr. to Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South)
 
30
 
6710


Maumee Dr.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Mayfair Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd. to U.S. 31
 
30
 
6710


Meadow View Dr.
 
Valley View Dr. to Hunters Cove
 
20
 
6710


Melody Ct.
 
Melody Ln. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Melody Ln.
 
Orleans Dr. to Melody Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Mendota Ct.
 
Mendota Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Mendota Dr.
 
Maumee Dr. to Monona Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Menomonee Ct.
 
Menomonee Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Menonomee Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Miami Blvd.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Miami Ct.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. southwest to end
 
30
 
6710


Mill Ct.
 
Mill St. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Mill St.
 
Carmelita Blvd. to Liberty St.
 
30
 
6710


Moccasin Trail
 
Chippawa Ln. to Peace Pipe Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Mollee Ct.
 
Albright Rd. west to end
 
25
 
6322


Monona Dr.
 
Seneca Trail to Maumee Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Morgan St.
 
Apperson Way and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
35
 
4525


Morgan St.
 
Phillips and Apperson Way
 
35
 
5653


Morgan St.
 
U.S. 31 and Touby Pike
 
40
 
5653


Morrow Dr.
 
North and south of Zartman Rd.
 
25
 
6385


Mowhawk Dr.
 
Wea Dr. to Algonquin Trail
 
30
 
6710


North St. east
 
U.S. 31 Bypass and Ohio St.
 
40
 
 


Northwoods Dr.
 
Friendship Blvd. to Live Oak Ct.
 
25
 
6220


Ohio St.
 
North St. and the north city limits
 
35
 
4794


Ojibway Dr.
 
Mowhawk Dr. to Mohawk Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Orleans Ct.
 
Orleans Dr. northwesterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Orleans Dr.
 
Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South) to Alameda Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Orleans Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) north to end
 
30
 
6710


Oswego St.
 
Council Ring Blvd. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Oxford St.
 
Carmelita Blvd. to Holiday St.
 
30
 
6710


Pamela Ct.
 
Marsha Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Papoose St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. to Algonquin Trail
 
30
 
6710


Park Rd. north
 
Center Rd. to north corporate limits (south of Alto Rd.)
 
45
 
6181


Park Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh and Phillips St.
 
35
 
4339


Park Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd. and corporate limits south
 
40
 
4525


Park Rd. (100 West)
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South) to S.R. 26
 
50
 
6710


Patricia Dr.
 
Country Ln. to Country Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Peace Pipe Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd. to Tepee Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Peshewa Ct.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Pond View Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Pond View Dr.
 
Timber Valley Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Plate St. south
 
Boulevard and State St.
 
35
 
 


Princeton Ct.
 
Princeton Dr. southeast to end
 
30
 
6710


Princeton Dr.
 
Yale Blvd. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh)
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) to Dixon Rd.
 
50
 
6710


Rd. 50 East
 
U.S. 31 to Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
45
 
6710


Rd. 80 West
 
Rd. 300 North to city limits
 
55
 
6710


Rd. 100 East (Busby Rd.)
 
Morgan St. to Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
40
 
6710


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
Goyer Rd. to Rd. 300 East
 
55
 
6710


Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Malfalfa Rd. (Rd. 300 West)
 
45
 
6710


Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
Park Rd. (Rd. 100 West) to Berkley Rd.
 
40
 
6710


Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Rd.300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
45
 
6710


Rd.200 East
 
Markland Ave. (Rd. 00 N/S) to Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
50
 
6710


Rd. 200 South (Southway Blvd.)
 
Goyer Rd. to Rd. 200 East
 
45
 
6710


Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
Rd. 50 East to Rd. 100 East
 
45
 
6710


Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
Webster St. to Davis Rd.
 
50
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.) to Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh St.)
 
45
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh St.) to S.R. 22 (Sycamore St.)
 
50
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
S.R. 22 (Sycamore St.) north to city limits
 
55
 
6710


Red Bud Ln.
 
Linda Dr. to Alameda Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Red Rock Ct.
 
Boulder Way northwesterly to end
 
30
 
6710


Reed Rd.
 
Terrace Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Renoir Ct.
 
Elva Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Revere St.
 
Carmelita Blvd. to Holiday St.
 
30
 
6710


Ring Ct.
 
Council Ring Blvd. southeast to end
 
30
 
6710


Rollingstone Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to Bridgestone Cir.
 
30
 
6710


Rouge Dr.
 
Baton Rouge Dr. southwest to end
 
30
 
6710


Ryan Ct.
 
John D. Dr. south to end
 
25
 
6322


Sand Walk Dr.
 
North and south of Zartman Rd.
 
25
 
6385


Schick Dr.
 
Mohr Dr. East Jct. to Mohr Dr. West Jct.
 
25
 
6422


Scout St.
 
Council Ring Blvd. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Sea Biscuit Ln.
 
Silver Charm Dr. and Bluegrass Trail
 
25
 
6395


Seattle Slew Ln.
 
Bluegrass Trail west to end
 
25
 
6395


Seneca Trail
 
Maumee Dr. to Monona Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Shannon Ln.
 
Chrystal Woods Dr. west end of roadway
 
25
 
6181


Silver Charm Dr.
 
Sea Biscuit Ln. north to end
 
25
 
6395


Smith Road
 
Webster St. and Co. Rd. 50 East
 
40
 
6215


Somers Dr.
 
Zartman Rd. south
 
25
 
6385


South Webster
 
Lincoln Rd. and Redwood Dr.
 
30
 
5574


Southway Blvd. east
 
Alto Rd. to eastern corporate limits
 
35
 
6181


Southway Blvd.
 
Goyer Rd. to Albright Rd.
 
40
 
6181


Southway Blvd.
 
South La Fountain and Alto Rd.
 
35
 
 


Southway Blvd.
 
Alto Rd. to Albright Rd.
 
35
 
6710


Spring Grove Dr.
 
Springdale Dr. to Springdale Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Springdale Ct.
 
Springdale Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Springdale Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) to 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
30
 
6710


St. Dennis Ct.
 
Versailles Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


St. Louis Ct.
 
W. St. Louis Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Stafford Dr.
 
Mohr Dr. and Prairie Dr.
 
25
 
6422


Stoneview Dr.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) to Covey Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Susan Ct.
 
Susan Dr. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Susan Dr.
 
Southway Blvd. to Kirk's Row
 
30
 
6710


Sycamore St.
 
A point 500 feet east of Laramie Ln. to Washington St.
 
35
 
 


Sycamore St.
 
U.S. 31 to Rd. 200 East
 
40
 
6710


Tally Ho Ct.
 
Tally Ho Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Tally Ho Dr.
 
Albright Rd. (Rd. 100 East) to Williams Ct.
 
30
 
6710


Tepee Dr.
 
Chippawa Ln. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Terrace Ct.
 
Orleans Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Terrace Dr.
 
Reynolds Dr. to U.S. 31
 
30
 
6710


Timber Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Timber Ridge Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Timber Valley Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Timber Valley Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.) to S.R. 26
 
30
 
6710


Tomahawk Blvd.
 
U.S. 31 to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Toni Dr.
 
Dee Ann Dr. to Dee Ann Dr.
 
25
 
6322


Touby Pike
 
North Street to Norfolk and Western Railroad track
 
40
 
5711


Treaty Ln.
 
Wigwam Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Tribal St.
 
Wea Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Tulip Ln.
 
Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South) to Alameda Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Union St.
 
Park Ave. and Deffenbaugh
 
30
 
5095;


 
 
When children present
 
25
 
6635


Valerie Ct.
 
Dee Ann Dr. north to end
 
25
 
6322


Valley View Dr.
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) east to end
 
20
 
6710


Versailles Ct.
 
Versailles Dr. northwest to end
 
30
 
6710


Versailles Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to Elva Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Versailles Dr.
 
Elva Dr. to Boulevard (Rd. 100 South)
 
30
 
6710


W. St. Louis Dr.
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South) to Berwick Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Wampum Dr.
 
Treaty Ln. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


War Admiral Trail
 
Bluegrass Trail west to end
 
25
 
6395


Washington St. south
 
Boulevard and South La Fountain St.
 
40
 
 


Washington St. north
 
Davis Rd. and north to city limits
 
35
 
4525


Washington St. north
 
Gerhart St. and all areas within the city limits
 
40
 
6205


Washington St.
 
Sycamore St. and a point 300 feet south of West Harrison St.
 
35
 
 


Washington St.
 
A point 300 feet south of West Harrison St. to Markland Ave.
 
35
 
4525


Washington St.
 
500 feet north of Smith Rd. (300 North) to U.S. 31
 
45
 
6710


Washington St.
 
Gerhart St. to 500 feet north of Smith Rd. (Rd. 300 North)
 
40
 
6710


Washington St. south
 
Markland Ave. and Lincoln Rd.
 
30
 
6778


Washington St. south
 
Lincoln Rd. and South LaFountain St.
 
40
 
6778


Water St.
 
Rd.250 South (Alto Rd.) to Mill St.
 
30
 
6710


Waubesa Ct.
 
Waubesa Way east to end
 
30
 
6710


Waubesa Way
 
Council Ring Blvd. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Wea Dr.
 
Mohawk Dr. to Tomahawk Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Weathered Rock Cir.
 
Cobblestone Dr. to Cobblestone Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Webster St.
 
Cambridge Dr. and Center Rd.
 
20
 
6208


Webster St.
 
Lincoln Rd. south and city limits
 
45
 
4525


Webster St.
 
Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.) to Gerhart St.
 
45
 
6710


Webster St.
 
Alta Ln. north to end
 
30
 
6710


Westmoor Dr.
 
Terrace Dr. to Dellwood Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Westover Ct.
 
Versailles Dr. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Wigwam Ct.
 
Wigwam Dr. south to end
 
30
 
6710


Wigwam Dr.
 
Lance Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
30
 
6710


Williams Dr.
 
Southway Blvd. to Tally Ho Dr.
 
30
 
6710


Willow Springs Rd.
 
Grey Twig Dr. to Bittersweet Ln.
 
30
 
6710


Wingra Ct.
 
Monona Dr. east to end
 
30
 
6710


Woodhaven Dr.
 
Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) to Woodhaven Trail
 
25
 
6710


Woodhaven Trail
 
North and south of Woodhaven Trail to end
 
25
 
6710


Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
Jefferson St. to Columbus Blvd.
 
25
 
6220


Yale Blvd.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd.400 South) to Webster St.
 
30
 
6710


Yale Ct.
 
Yale Blvd. west to end
 
30
 
6710


Zartman Rd.
 
Dixon Rd. and Berkley Rd.
 
40
 
6313




 



('75 Code, § 15-87)



   (B)   All streets not posted with speed limit signs, the speed will
be 30 m.p.h.



(Ord. 4525, passed 5-24-76)



SCHEDULE VI:  SPEED IN SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   The streets within a radius of one city block and passing any
elementary, secondary, or parochial school in the city are designated as
school zones.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over
and on a street or within a school zone at a speed greater than 30 m.p.h.,
except as follows:



 

STREET
 
SCHOOL ZONE
 
BETWEEN
 
M.P.H.
 
ORD. NO.




Berkley Rd.
 
Kokomo High School and Boulevard
 
A point 300 feet north of Boulevard to Zartman Road
 
35
 
5710



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Dixon Rd.
 
Wallace
 
From Jefferson St. north 750 feet
 
35
 
5674



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



East Fisher St.
 
Bon Air
 
La Fountain St. and Ohio St.
 
25
 



East Hoffer St.
 
Jefferson
 
Home Ave. and Plate St.
 
35
 
4764



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



East Morgan St.
 

 
Apperson Way and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
35
 
4513



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



East Sycamore
 
Sycamore
 
Ohio St. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
35
 




 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Goyer Rd.
 
Darrough Chapel School
 
Markland Ave. and Arnold St.

When children are present
 
25
 
6711


Goyer Rd.
 
Temple Baptist Church
 
Mohr Rd. and Boulevard
 
35
 
4914



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Lincoln Rd.
 
Maple Crest
 
La Fountain and Webster St.
 
35
 




 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Park Rd.
 
Maple Crest
 
Deffenbaugh St. and Lincoln Rd.
 
35
 
4525



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



South Washington St.
 
Washington
 
Markland Ave. and Boulevard St.
 
35
 




 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Tepee Dr.
 
Indian Heights School
 
Peace Pipe Dr. and Chippawa

When children are present
 
25
 



Washington St.
 
Roosevelt
 
Davis Rd. and the northern city limits
 
35
 
4486



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



West Boulevard
 
Boulevard
 
A point 300 feet east of Berkley Rd. and a point 650 feet west of Berkley Rd.
 
35
 
5627



 

 
When children are present
 
25
 



Wigwam Dr.
 
Indian Heights School
 
Treaty Ln. and Lance Dr.

When children are present
 
25
 





 



('75 Code, § 15-88)



SCHEDULE VII:  STOP STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   Stop signs shall be erected on the following streets and
alleys:



 

STREET
 
AT INTERSECTION WITH
 
ORD. NO.




Abby Place Dr.
 
Smith Rd.
 
6216


Alameda Blvd.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Alameda Blvd.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6710


Alameda Blvd.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Albany
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Albright Rd.
 
Alto Rd.
 
4820


Aldridge
 
Wabash St.
 
5458


Aldridge
 
Webster
 
4509


Algonquin Trail
 
Wea Dr.
 
6710


Almquist Ln.
 
Rainbow Dr.
 
6001


Alta Ln.
 
Yale Blvd.
 
6710


Alto Rd.
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Alto Rd.
 
South Way Boulevard
 
4509


Alton Dr.
 
Lody Ln. (north)
 
5545


Alton Dr.
 
Lody Ln. (south)
 
5545


Ambassador Ln.
 
Whitehouse Dr.
 
5984


Anjou Ct.
 
Baton Rouge Dr.
 
6710


Ann St.
 
North St.
 
4509


Apperson Way
 
Gano
 
4509


Apperson Way
 
Smith Rd.
 
6216


Ariel Ct.
 
Abby Place Dr.
 
6216


Ariel Dr.
 
Abby Place Dr.
 
6216


Armstrong
 
Morgan
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Broadway
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Elm
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Havens
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Monroe
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Walnut
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Taylor
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Armstrong
 
King
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Markland
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Armstrong
 
Gerhart
 
5545


Arrow St.
 
U.S. 31
 
5984


Arrow St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Arrowhead Blvd.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Arrowhead Blvd.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Artisan Dr.
 
Artisan Ct.
 
6138


Asbury Ct.
 
Wellesley Ln.
 
5768


Augusta Ct.
 
Pebble Beach Dr.
 
5545


Austin Rd.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
6070


Austin Rd.
 
Carol Lynn Dr.
 
6185; 6203


Avalon Ct.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Bagley Dr.
 
Westbrook Ln.
 
4509


Bagley East
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Bagley Ct. West
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Balmoral
 
Maplewood Dr.
 
4509


Balmoral
 
Gleneagles Dr.
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Cooper
 
4820


Barkdol St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Delphos
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Waugh
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Jay
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Purdum
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Bell
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Market
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Barkdol St.
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Baton Rouge Dr.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Baton Rouge Dr.
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Baxter
 
Goyer Rd.
 
4509


Beachwalk Ln.
 
Gulf Shore Blvd.
 
6203


Beauvoir Ct.
 
Baton Rouge Dr.
 
6710


Beechwood Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
5953


Beechwood Dr.
 
Waverly Blvd.
 
5953


Beechwood Ln.
 
Southway Blvd. (Rd. 200 South)
 
6710


Bell St.
 
Gerhart St.
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Bell St.
 
North
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Elm
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Jackson
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Vaile
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Harrison
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Wheeler
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Bell St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Belmont Ave.
 
Woodland Ave.
 
6150


Belmount Ave.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Belvedere Dr.
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Benair Rd.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6385


Bennett St.
 
Forest Dr.
 
4509


Bennett St.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Berkley Rd.
 
Markland Ave.
 
4509


Berkley Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Berkley Rd.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Berkley Rd.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
4509


Berkley Rd.
 
Judson Rd.
 
6101


Berwick Dr.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
6710


Birch Ct.
 
Mendota Dr.
 
6710


Blue Spruce Ct.
 
Mill St.
 
6710


Bluegrass Trail
 
Bridle Way
 
6396


Bluegrass Trail
 
Silver Charm Dr.
 
6396


Boca-Raton Blvd.
 
Balmoral Blvd.
 
4509


Boca-Raton Blvd.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Boston Dr.
 
Philadelphia Dr.
 
5545


Boulder Way
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Boulevard
 
Dixon
 
4509


Boulevard
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Boulevard
 
Webster
 
4509


Boulevard
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Branded Blvd.
 
Maple St.
 
4820


Branded Ct.
 
Maple St.
 
4820


Brandon Ct. Blvd.
 
Maple St.
 
4509


Brandon Court
 
Maple St.
 
4509


Brandon St.
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Brandon St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Brave Ct.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Brentwood
 
Ohio St.
 
4509


Brentwood Dr.
 
Locke St.
 
5545


Briar Court
 
Carter St.
 
4509


Briarwick Dr.
 
Alto Road
 
5914


Bridgewater Blvd.
 
Center St.
 
6412


Bridgewater Blvd.
 
Golden Gate Way
 
6412


Bridle Way
 
Jefferson St.
 
6396


Bridle Way
 
Seattle Slew Ln.
 
6396


Brighton Ct.
 
Waverly Blvd.
 
5953


Broadway
 
Ohio
 
4509


Broadway
 
Delphos
 
4509


Broadway
 
Locke
 
4509


Broadway
 
Purdum
 
4509


Broadway
 
Bell
 
4509


Broadway
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Broadway
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Broadway
 
Main
 
4509


Broadway
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Broadway
 
Washington
 
4509


Broadway
 
Webster
 
4509


Broadway
 
Morrison
 
4509


Broadway
 
Wabash
 
4509


Broadway
 
Phillips
 
4509


Broadway
 
Burk
 
4509


Broadway
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
5545


Brooke Rd.
 
Albright Rd.
 
6323


Brooks
 
Carter
 
4509


Brown Ave.
 
Princeton Dr.
 
6710


Brown Ave.
 
Webster St.
 
6710


Bruce Ct.
 
Oakhurst Dr.
 
5467


Bryan St.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Bryan St.
 
Holiday St.
 
6710


Buckeye 
 
Superior
 
4634


Buckeye St.
 
Gerhart
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Homelawn
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Spraker
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Lordeman
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
North St.
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Elm St.
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Jackson
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Harrison
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Buckeye St.
 
Madison St.
 
5545


Buckeye St.
 
Havens St.
 
5545


Buckley
 
Jay St.
 
4509


Buckskin Ct.
 
Buckskin Dr.
 
6710


Buckskin Dr.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Buckskin Dr.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Buckworth
 
Kingston Rd.
 
4509


Buick Ln.
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Buick Ln.
 
Mohr Dr.
 
4509


Buick Court
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Burgundy Dr.
 
Rouge Dr.
 
6710


Burk St.
 
North St.
 
5545


Burr Oak Ct.
 
North Woods Dr.
 
6070


Burningtree Ln.
 
Maplewood
 
4509


Burningtree Ln.
 
Gleneagles Dr.
 
4509


Burton Dr.
 
Westbrook Dr.
 
4509


Burton Dr.
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Burton Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Main
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Morrison
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Butler St.
 
Ohio St.
 
5545


Butler St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Cadillac Dr. East
 
Mohr Dr.
 
4509


Cadillac Dr. East
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Cadillac Dr. West
 
Mohr Dr.
 
4509


Cadillac Dr. West
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Carter
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Calumet St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Candy Ln.
 
Sugar Lane
 
4820


Candy Ct. North
 
Candy Ln.
 
4820


Candy Ct. South
 
Candy Ln.
 
4820


Candy Ln.
 
South Way Boulevard
 
4509


Canoe St.
 
Algonquin
 
6710


Canoe St.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Canterbury
 
Cherry Hill Ln.
 
4509


Canterbury
 
Pebble Beach Dr.
 
4509


Canyon Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Capitol Hill Ct.
 
Congress Dr.
 
6181


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Carmelita Blvd.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6710


Carol Lynn Dr.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
6101


Carolyn Ct.
 
Stoneview Dr.
 
6710


Carr Dr.
 
Rd. 150 East (Albright Rd.)
 
6710


Carriage Dr.
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5953


Carter Ct.
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5792


Carter St.
 
Branded Blvd.
 
4820; 5545


Carter St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Ohio St.
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Union
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Western
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Berkley St.
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Magnolia
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Dixon
 
4509


Carter St.
 
Phillips St.
 
54l3


Carter St. South
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5822


Cartwright
 
Alto Rd.
 
4509


Cartwright Dr.
 
Center Rd.
 
6110


Cedar Ct.
 
Oakhurst Dr.
 
5467


Center Rd.
 
Webster St.
 
6395


Chaplin Ct.
 
Springwater Rd.
 
6181


Chartress Ct.
 
Conti Ln.
 
5545


Chateau Ct.
 
West St. Louis Dr.
 
6710


Chelsea Ct.
 
Woodbridge Cr.
 
4820


Cherry Hill Ln.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Cherry Hill Ln.
 
Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
4509


Chestnut St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Chevy Ct.
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Chippawa Ln.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Chippawa Ln.
 
Wea Dr.
 
6710


Chris Ct.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Chrystal Woods Dr.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
6181


Citrus Lake Dr.
 
Gulf Shore Blvd.
 
6203


Clinton Dr.
 
Albany Dr.
 
5984


Clinton Dr.
 
Kentucky Dr.
 
6110


Cobble Ln.
 
Stoneview Dr.
 
6710


Cobble Stone Dr.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Cobble Stone Dr.
 
Weathered Rock Circle
 
6710


Colter Dr.
 
Albright Rd.
 
6323


Columbus Blvd.
 
Havens
 
4509


Columbus Blvd.
 
Korby
 
4509


Columbus Blvd.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Concord Ave.
 
Alto Rd.
 
4820


Concord Ave.
 
Williamsburg Dr.
 
4820


Congress Dr.
 
Executive Dr.
 
4820


Congress Dr.
 
Whitehouse Dr.
 
6079


Conradt Ave.
 
Sycamore
 
4534


Conradt Ave.
 
Carter
 
4534


Conradt Ave.
 
Kingston Rd.
 
4534


Conti Ln.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Morgan
 
4675


Cooper St.
 
Dodge
 
4692


Cooper St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Superior
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Maple
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
State
 
4509


Cooper St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Cornell Rd.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Cornell Rd.
 
Locke St.
 
5545


Corvair Ct.
 
Cadillac Dr.
 
5545


Corvette Dr.
 
Buick Ln.
 
4509


Corvette Dr.
 
Pontiac
 
4509


Corvette Dr.
 
Cadillac West
 
4509


Council Ct.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Road)
 
6710


Council Ring Blvd.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Country Ln.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Country Club Rd.
 
Highland Dr.
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Spraker
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
North
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Broadway
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Elm
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Havens
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Davis Rd.
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Ricketts
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Maple Crest Dr.
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Aldridge Dr.
 
4509


Courtland St.
 
Markland Ave.
 
5167


Covey Ln.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
6710


Cranbrook
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Cricket Hill Ln.
 
Sherwood Dr.
 
4820


Cricket Hill Ln.
 
Albright Rd.
 
4820


Crickett Hill Ln.
 
Albright Rd.
 
4509


Crooked Stick Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Crystal
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Cypress Ct.
 
Oakhurst Dr.
 
5467


Danbury
 
Locke St.
 
4509


Danbury St. (westbound)
 
Delphos St.
 
5545


Darby
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Darby Ave.
 
Woodland Ave.
 
6150


Dartmouth Ct.
 
Yale Blvd.
 
6710


Darwin Ln.
 
Sherwood Dr.
 
4820


Dauphine Ct.
 
West St. Louis Dr.
 
6710


Davis Rd.
 
Washington
 
4509


Dee Ann Ct.
 
Albright Rd.
 
6323


Dee Ann Dr.
 
Albright Rd.
 
5545; 6323


Deffenbaugh
 
Elizabeth
 
4692


Deffenbaugh
 
Dixon
 
4509


Deffenbaugh
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh
 
Park Dr.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh
 
Main St.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh
 
Delphos
 
4509


Deffenbaugh
 
Plate St.
 
4509


Dellwood Dr.
 
Terrace Ct.
 
6710


Delon Ave.
 
Dixon
 
4509


Delon Ave.
 
Magnolia
 
4509


Delon Ct.
 
Delon Ave.
 
5545


Delphos
 
Gano
 
4509


Delphos
 
Morgan
 
4509


Delphos
 
Spraker
 
4509


Delphos
 
Lordeman
 
4509


Delphos
 
North
 
4509


Delphos
 
Elm
 
4509


Delphos
 
Havens
 
4509


Delphos
 
Monroe
 
4509


Delphos
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Delphos
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Delphos
 
Markland
 
4509


Delphos
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Delphos
 
Elmhurst Dr.
 
5545


Delphos
 
Richmond St.
 
5545


Delphos
 
Alley west of Richmond St.
 
5545


Delray St.
 
Villas Dr. North
 
6052


Delray St.
 
Villas Dr. South
 
5792


Devonshire
 
Carter
 
4509


Devonshire
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Diamond
 
Gano
 
4509


Diamond
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Diamond
 
Vaile
 
4509


Diamond
 
Markland
 
4509


Diplomat Ln.
 
Whitehouse Dr.
 
5984


Dixon Rd.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Dixon Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Dixon Rd.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Dixon St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Dixon St.
 
Delphos
 
4509


Dixon St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Dixon St.
 
Purdum
 
4509


Dodge St.
 
Elizabeth
 
4692


Dodge St.
 
Seventeenth St.
 
5787


Duke Dr.
 
Princeton Dr.
 
6710


Duke Dr.
 
Webster St.
 
6710


Edgewater Dr.
 
Washington
 
4509


Elaine Ct.
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Elizabeth St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
U.S. 3l Bypass
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Carter
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Elizabeth St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Elliot Ct.
 
Superior
 
4509


Elliot Ct.
 
Carter
 
4509


Elliot Ct.
 
Haynes
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Purdum
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Bell
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Main
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Morrison
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Leeds
 
4509


Elm St.
 
Washington St.
 
5341


Elm St.
 
Burk St.
 
5545


Elmwood Ct.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Elva Dr.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Elva Dr.
 
Burgundy Dr.
 
6710


Emerald Blvd.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Emerald Ct.
 
Emerald Blvd.
 
6710


Emerald Ln.
 
Emerald Ln.
 
6710


Enclave Ct.
 
Lamplighter Ln.
 
6138


Espanol Dr.
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Espanol Dr.
 
Washington
 
4509


Essex Ct.
 
Wellesley Ln.
 
5768


Executive Dr.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4820


Executive Dr.
 
Whitehouse Dr.
 
4820


Executive Ct.
 
Executive Dr.
 
4820


Faith Rd.
 
North
 
4509


Faith Rd.
 
U.S. 3l Bypass
 
4509


Faulkner St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Faulkner St.
 
Superior
 
4509


Faulkner St.
 
Maple
 
4509


Fenley St.
 
Delphos St.
 
5545


Fennie Lee Dr.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
6710


Fennie Lee Dr.
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Fern Court
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Field Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Field Dr.
 
Mayfair Dr.
 
6710


Field Stone Way
 
Bridgestone Circle
 
6710


Field Stone Way
 
Weathered Rock Circle
 
6710


Finley St.
 
Waugh St.
 
5953


Firmin St.
 
l7th St.
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Cooper St.
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Plate
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Harris Rd.
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Delphos
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Market
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Union
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Main
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Firmin St.
 
Alley west of Indiana St.
 
5545


Firmin St.
 
Home Ave.
 
6202


Fisher St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Fisher St.
 
Purdum
 
4509


Fisher St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Fisher St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Fisher St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Fisher St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Flint Ct.
 
Flint Way
 
6710


Flint Way
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Flint Way
 
U.S. 31
 
5984


Floyd Ct.
 
Almquist Ln.
 
6001


Forest Dr.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Forest Dr.
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Forest Dr.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Forest Dr.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Forest Dr.
 
Wildwood Dr.
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Cooper
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Calumet
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Elizabeth
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Ohio St.
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Delphos St.
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Waugh
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Jay
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Purdum
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Bell
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Home Ave.
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Main
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Foster St.
 
Leeds
 
4509


Foster Park West Dr.
 
McCann St.
 
4509


Foster Park Dr. North
 
Superior
 
4509


Fox Cove Dr.
 
Fox Fire Ln.
 
6710


Fox Cove Dr.
 
Fox Haven Dr.
 
6710


Fox Fire Ln.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Fox Fire Ln.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Fox Haven Dr.
 
Fox Fire Ln.
 
6710


Frances Ln.
 
Rainbow Dr.
 
5984


Friendship Boulevard
 
Dixon Road
 
5679


Gano
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Gano
 
Ohio
 
4509


Gano
 
Jay
 
4509


Gano
 
Purdum
 
4509


Gano
 
Bell
 
4509


Gano
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Gano
 
Washington
 
4509


Gano
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Gano
 
Webster
 
4509


Garden Place
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Garden Place
 
Mayfair Dr.
 
6710


Gentilly Ct.
 
Conti Ln.
 
5545


Gerhart
 
Ohio
 
4509


Gerhart
 
Bell
 
4509


Gerhart
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Gerhart
 
Washington
 
4509


Gerhart
 
Webster St.
 
5545


Gettysburg Dr.
 
Alto Rd.
 
5545


Gilbert St.
 
Audri Ln.
 
6070


Gilbert
 
Wickersham Dr. South
 
4509


Gilbert
 
Walker Ave.
 
5545


Ginny Dr.
 
Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh St.)
 
6710


Ginny Dr.
 
Stoneview Dr.
 
6710


Glenbrook Ct.
 
Millbrook Ln.
 
5545


Gleneagles Dr.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Gleneagles Dr.
 
Park
 
4509


Gordon Ct.
 
Gordon Dr.
 
6710


Gordon Dr.
 
Covey Ln.
 
6710


Gordon Dr.
 
Stoneview Dr.
 
6710


Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
Carter St. (Rd. 50 North)
 
6710


Granite Dr.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Greenbriar St.
 
Devonshire Dr.
 
5545


Greenbriar St.
 
Ridgewood Dr.
 
5545


Greentree Ln.
 
S.R. 200 West
 
4509


Greentree
 
Dixon Rd.
 
4820


Grey Rock Ln.
 
Granite Dr.
 
6710


Grey Rock Ln.
 
Boulder Way
 
6710


Grove
 
Indiana
 
4509


Grove
 
Wabash
 
4509


Gulf Shore Blvd.
 
Park Rd.
 
6203


Harris Rd.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Harris Rd.
 
Laguna
 
4509


Harrison
 
Waugh
 
4509


Harrison
 
Apperson Way
 
5167


Harrison
 
Locke
 
4509


Harrison
 
Jay
 
4509


Harrison
 
Bell
 
4509


Harrison
 
Market
 
4509


Harrison
 
Union
 
4509


Harrison
 
Main
 
4509


Harrison
 
Washington
 
4509


Harrison
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Harrison
 
Webster
 
4509


Harrison
 
Courtland
 
4509


Harrison
 
Brandon
 
4509


Harrison
 
Lindsay
 
4509


Harrison St.
 
Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
6710


Harvard Dr.
 
Yale Blvd.
 
6710


Havens
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Havens
 
Ohio
 
4509


Havens
 
Locke
 
4509


Havens
 
Purdum
 
4509


Havens
 
Bell
 
4509


Havens
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Havens
 
Main
 
4509


Havens
 
Washington
 
4509


Havens
 
Webster
 
4509


Havens
 
Indiana
 
4509


Havens
 
McCann
 
4509


Havens
 
Korby
 
4509


Havens
 
Berkley
 
4509


Havens
 
Witherspoon Dr.
 
4509


Havens
 
Phillips St.
 
5167


Hawthorne Ln.
 
Eastbrook Ln.
 
6710


Haynes Ave.
 
Kingston Rd.
 
5545


Haynes Mall Blvd.
 
Satellite St.
 
5545


Highland St.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Highland St.
 
Country Club Rd.
 
4509


Highland Springs Ct.
 
Highland Springs Dr.
 
6181


Highland Springs Dr.
 
Center Rd.
 
6181


Highland Springs Dr.
 
Springwater Rd.
 
6181


Hillis Ct.
 
Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
5545


Hillside Dr.
 
Alta Ln.
 
6710


Hillside Dr.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Hoffer St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Hoffer St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Hoffer St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Hoffer St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Hoffer St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Holly Ln.
 
Wabash St.
 
5458


Holly Ln.
 
James Dr.
 
5458


Home Ave.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Homelawn
 
Washington
 
4509


Homelawn
 
Main
 
4509


Honey Ct.
 
Honey Ln.
 
6710


Honey Ln.
 
Susan Dr.
 
6710


Hunters Cove
 
Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
6710


Hunters Cove Circle
 
Hunters Cove
 
6710


Huston Ln.
 
Washington St.
 
6710


Huston Ln.
 
Webster St.
 
6710


Imperial Dr.
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Independence Dr.
 
Alto Rd.
 
4820


Independence Dr.
 
Philadelphia
 
5545


Indiana
 
Foster
 
4958


Indiana
 
Morgan
 
4509


Indiana
 
Spraker
 
4509


Indiana
 
Preble
 
4509


Indiana
 
North
 
4509


Indiana
 
Broadway
 
4509


Indiana
 
Elm
 
4509


Indiana
 
Monroe
 
4509


Indiana
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Indiana
 
Taylor
 
4509


Indiana
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Indiana
 
Walnut
 
4509


Indiana
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Indiana
 
Superior
 
4509


Indiana
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Indiana
 
Harrison
 
4509


Indiana
 
Markland
 
4509


Indiana
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Indiana
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Indiana
 
Maple Crest
 
4509


Indiana
 
Ricketts
 
4509


Inland Dr.
 
Wickersham Dr. North
 
4509


Inventory St. No. 16
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Inventory St. No. 20
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Ivy Ct.
 
Ivy Dr.
 
6710


Ivy Dr.
 
Princeton Dr.
 
6710


Ivy Dr.
 
Webster St.
 
6710


Jackson St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Jay
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Market
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Main
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
McCann
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Jackson St.
 
Western
 
4509


James Dr.
 
Webster
 
4509


James Dr.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


James Dr.
 
Sherman Dr.
 
5458


James Dr. (eastbound)
 
Wabash St.
 
5458


Janice Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Janice Dr.
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Jasper St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Jasper St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Jasper St.
 
Morrison
 
4509


Jasper St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Jasper St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Jay St.
 
North
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Superior
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Gerhart
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Vaile
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Harrison
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Foster
 
4509


Jay St.
 
Morgan St.
 
5167


Jayne Dr.
 
Highland Dr.
 
4675


Jayne Dr.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
Touby
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
Dixon
 
4509


Jefferson St.
 
Touby Pike
 
6710


John D. Drive
 
Albright Road
 
5679


John D. Drive
 
Colter Drive
 
5869


Justice Lane
 
Congress Drive
 
6079


Justice Lane
 
Whitehouse Drive
 
6079


Kassi Ct.
 
Nathan Dr.
 
6070


Katanna Dr.
 
Arrow St.
 
5984


Katanna Dr.
 
Flint Way
 
5984


Kennington Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Kentucky Dr.
 
Cartwright Dr.
 
6110


Kentucky Dr.
 
U.S. 31
 
6110


Kimberly Dr.
 
Arrow St.
 
5984


Kimberly Dr.
 
Center Rd.
 
5984


Kickapoo Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


King
 
Alley east of Jay St.
 
5545


King
 
Dixon Rd.
 
4509


King
 
Courtland
 
4509


King
 
Washington
 
4509


King
 
Main
 
4509


King
 
Union
 
4509


King
 
Market
 
4509


King
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


King
 
Bell
 
4509


King
 
Purdum
 
4509


King
 
Jay
 
4509


Kingston
 
Carter
 
4509


Kingston
 
Phillips
 
4509


Kingston
 
Superior
 
6395


Kingston
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Kiowa
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Kiowa
 
Seneca Trail
 
6710


Kirk
 
Courtland
 
4509


Kirk
 
Morrison
 
4509


Kirk
 
Indiana
 
4509


Kirk
 
Wabash
 
4509


Kirk
 
Webster
 
4509


Kirks Row
 
Albright Rd.
 
6710


Kody Ct.
 
Granite Dr.
 
6710


Kokomo St.
 
At dead end with alley
 
5545


Korby
 
Tate St.
 
5545


Korby
 
Schuler St.
 
5545


Korby
 
Havens
 
4509


Kyle David Way
 
Austin Rd.
 
6138


Kyle David Way
 
Tedlee Dr./Jancarol Ct.
 
6185; 6203


Kyle Court
 
Kyle Lane
 
6030


Kyle Lane
 
Albright Road
 
6030


Kyle Lane
 
Center Rd.
 
6259


Kyle Lane
 
Colter Drive
 
6030


La Fountain (northbound right turn lane)
 
Alto Rd.
 
5540


La Fountain
 
Gano
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Barkdol
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Morgan
 
4509


La Fountain
 
North
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Monroe
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Wheeler
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Boulevard
 
4509


La Fountain
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Lafayette Cir.
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
5545


Laguna St.
 
Alley west of Delphos St.
 
5545


Laguna
 
Plate
 
4509


Laguna
 
Delphos
 
4509


Lake Ct.
 
Lakeside Dr.
 
5953


Lakeside Dr. (westbound)
 
Lakeside Dr.
 
5953


Lakeside Drive
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5822


Lamplighter Ct.
 
Pine Ridge Dr.
 
6259


Lamplighter Ln.
 
Pine Ridge Dr.
 
6138


Lance Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Lance Dr.
 
Wea Dr.
 
6710


Laramie Ln.
 
Branded Blvd.
 
4509


Laramie Ln.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Lauren Ln.
 
Sister Martin Dr.
 
6181


Lauren Ln.
 
Stegall Dr.
 
6181


Leafy Ln.
 
Main
 
4509


Leafy Ln.
 
Union
 
4509


Leeds
 
Markland Ave.
 
4848


Leeds
 
Spraker
 
4509


Leeds
 
Lordeman
 
4509


Leeds
 
Tate
 
4509


Leeds
 
North
 
4509


Leeds
 
Broadway
 
4509


Leeds
 
Havens
 
4509


Leeds
 
Madison
 
4509


Leeds
 
Monroe
 
4509


Leeds
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Leeds
 
Jackson
 
4509


Leeds
 
Taylor
 
4509


Leeds
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Leeds
 
Park
 
4509


Leeds
 
Harrison
 
4509


Lewis St.
 
Boulevard
 
6710


Liberty St.
 
Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
6710


Liberty St.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6710


Lincoln Rd.
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Lincoln Rd.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Lincoln Rd.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Morgan
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Spraker
 
4509


Lindsay
 
North
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Broadway
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Elm
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Havens
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Madison
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Monroe
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Jackson
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Taylor
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Lindsay
 
Markland
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Gerhart
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Lordeman
 
4509


Locke St.
 
North
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Superior
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Maple
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Vaile
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Locke St.
 
State
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Spraker
 
4509


Locke St.
 
Hoffer St.
 
5341


Locke St.
 
Firmin St.
 
6169


Locust Ct.
 
Greentree Ln.
 
4509


Locust Ct. West
 
Greentree Ln.
 
5679


Lody Ln.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Longbow Dr.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Longbow Dr.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Longbranch Ct.
 
Branded Blvd.
 
4820


Longview St.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Longview St.
 
Walnut
 
4509


Longview St.
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Longview St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Longwood Dr.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Phillips
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Lindsay
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Indiana
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Morrison
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Courtland
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Webster
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Washington
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Market
 
4509


Lordeman
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Bell
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Purdum
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Jay
 
4509


Lordeman
 
Ohio
 
4509


Luke Ct.
 
Abby Place Dr.
 
6216


Luke Dr.
 
Abby Place Dr.
 
6216


Lynwood Dr.
 
Havens St.
 
5545


Lynwood Dr.
 
Witherspoon Dr.
 
5545


Mackinaw Way
 
Bridgewater Blvd.
 
6412


Madison Ct.
 
Madison St.
 
5545


Madison St.
 
La Fountain
 
4712


Madison St.
 
La Fountain
 
4712


Madison St.
 
Elizabeth St.
 
5545


Madison St.
 
Witherspoon Dr.
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Korby
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Madison St.
 
McCann
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Morrison
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Main
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Bell
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Jay
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Union
 
4509


Madison St.
 
Purdum St.
 
5545


Magnolia Dr.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Magnolia Dr.
 
Carter
 
4509


Magnolia Dr.
 
King St.
 
5545


Main St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Main St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Main St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Main St.
 
North
 
4509


Main St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Main St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Main St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Main St.
 
Gerhart St.
 
5545


Maple Ct.
 
Oakhurst Dr.
 
5467


Maple St.
 
Calumet
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Elizabeth
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Kingston Rd.
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Laramie Ln.
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Wickersham Dr.
 
4509


Maple St.
 
Devonshire Dr.
 
5545


Maple St.
 
Magnolia Dr.
 
5545


Maple Crest
 
Wabash
 
4509; 5458


Maple Crest
 
Webster
 
4509


Maplewood
 
Tam-O-Shanter
 
4509


Maplewood
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Marilyn Ct.
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Marjorie Ln.
 
Berkely Rd.
 
6455


Marjorie Ln.
 
Weston Dr.
 
6455


Market St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Market St.
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Market St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Market St.
 
North St.
 
4509


Market St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Market St.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Market St.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Market St.
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Market St.
 
Walnut
 
4509


Market St.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Market St.
 
Superior
 
4509


Market St.
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Market St.
 
Harrison
 
4509


Market St.
 
Markland
 
4509


Market St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Market St.
 
Wheeler
 
4509


Market St.
 
Richmond St.
 
5545


Market St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Market St.
 
State St.
 
5713


Market St.
 
Alley located 512 feet south of State St.
 
5713


Markland Ave.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Markland Ave.
 
Dixon Rd.
 
4509


Marne Ct.
 
Versailles Dr.
 
6710


Marsha Ct.
 
Marsha Dr.
 
6710


Marsha Dr.
 
Alto Rd.
 
6710


Marsha Dr.
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Maumee Dr.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Maumee Dr.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Mayfair Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Mayfair Dr.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Mayor Dr.
 
Justice Lane
 
6291


Mayor Dr.
 
Whitehouse Dr.
 
5984


McCann
 
Foster
 
4509


McCann
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


McCann
 
Superior
 
4509


McCann
 
Markland
 
4509


McCann
 
Harrison
 
4509


McCann
 
Sycamore
 
4509


McCann
 
Walnut
 
4509


McCann
 
Mulberry
 
4509


McCann
 
Taylor
 
4509


McCann
 
Jefferson
 
4509


McCann
 
Monroe
 
4509


McCann
 
Havens
 
4509


McCann
 
Elm
 
4509


McCann
 
Broadway
 
4509


McCann
 
North
 
4509


McCann
 
Lordeman
 
4509


McCann
 
Spraker
 
4509


Meadow Dr.
 
Rainbow Dr.
 
4820


Meadow Brook
 
Saratoga
 
4509


Meadow View Dr.
 
Hunters Cove
 
6710


Meadow View Dr.
 
Valley View Dr.
 
6710


Meadowbrook Dr.
 
Belvedere Dr.
 
5545


Meaghan Ct.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
6070


Melody Ln.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Mendota Ct.
 
Mendota Dr.
 
6710


Mendota Dr.
 
Maumee Dr.
 
6710


Mendota Dr.
 
Seneca Trail
 
6710


Menomonee Ct.
 
Menomonee Dr.
 
6710


Menomonee Dr.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Menomonee Dr.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Miami Blvd.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Miami Ct.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Mill St.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Mill St.
 
Liberty St.
 
6710


Mill St.
 
Mill Ct.
 
6710


Mill St.
 
Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
6710


Mirage Drive
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5822


Misty Autumn Ct.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
6101


Moccasin Trail
 
Chippawa Ln.
 
6710


Moccasin Trail
 
Peace Pipe Ln.
 
6710


Mohawk Dr.
 
Wea Dr.
 
6710


Mohr Dr.
 
Goyer
 
4509


Mohr Dr.
 
Meadow Brook
 
4509


Mohr Dr.
 
Cadillac Dr. West
 
4509


Monona Dr.
 
Maumee Dr.
 
6710


Monroe St.
 
Apperson Way North
 
4848


Monroe St.
 
Berkley
 
4692


Monroe St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Monroe St.
 
Bell
 
4509


Monroe St.
 
Western
 
4509


Monroe St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Monroe St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Monroe St.
 
Elizabeth St.
 
5545


Monroe St.
 
Cooper St.
 
5545


Morgan St.
 
Davis Rd.
 
4509


Morgan St.
 
Phillips
 
4509


Morningside Ct.
 
Morningside Dr.
 
5545


Morningside Dr.
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
4509


Morningside Dr.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Morningside Dr.
 
Taylor St.
 
5545


Morrison
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Morrison
 
Morgan
 
4509


Morrison
 
North
 
4509


Morrison
 
Spraker
 
4509


Morrison
 
Elm
 
4509


Morrison
 
Havens
 
4509


Morrison
 
Monroe
 
4509


Morrow Dr.
 
Mund Dr.
 
6385


Morrow Dr.
 
Sand Walk Dr.
 
6455


Morrow Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6385


Millbrook
 
Markland
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Calumet
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Ohio
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Delphos
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Phillips
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Ruddell
 
4509


Mulberry
 
Apperson Way
 
5167


Mund Dr.
 
Park Rd.
 
6385


Murden
 
Vaile
 
4509


Murden
 
Ohio
 
4509


Murden
 
Delon Ave.
 
5545


Murden
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Murden
 
Union
 
4509


Murden
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Murden Ct.
 
Delon Ave.
 
5545


Nathan Dr.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
6070


Nicholas Ct.
 
Austin Rd.
 
6070


North St.
 
Touby Pike
 
4820


North St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


North St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


North St.
 
Korby
 
4509


North St.
 
Phillips
 
4509; 5341


Northview
 
Morgan
 
4509


Northwest Park Dr.
 
Judson Rd.
 
4509


North Woods Drive
 
Friendship Boulevard
 
6030


North Woods Drive
 
Live Oak Court
 
6030


North Woods Drive
 
Wynterbrooke Drive
 
6030


Oak Ct.
 
South Webster St.
 
5467


Oak Hill
 
Tam-O-Shanter
 
4509


Oak Hill
 
Berkley
 
4509


Oakhurst Dr.
 
Southlea Dr.
 
5467


Oakmont Dr.
 
Oakhurst Dr.
 
5467


Oakmont Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
5467


Oakview Ct.
 
Artisan Ct.
 
6138


Ohio
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Ohio
 
Gano
 
4509


Ohio
 
Morgan
 
4509


Ohio
 
North
 
4509


Ohio
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Ohio
 
Carter
 
4509


Ohio
 
Vaile
 
4509


Ohio
 
State
 
4509


Ohio
 
Markland
 
4509


Ojibway Dr.
 
Mohawk Dr.
 
6710


Olds Ct.
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Olds Dr.
 
Cadillac Dr. West
 
4509


Olds Dr.
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Orchard Ln.
 
Bennett Dr.
 
5545


Orchard Ln.
 
Carter St.
 
5545


Orleans Dr.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Orleans Dr.
 
Alto Rd.
 
6710


Orleans Dr.
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
6710


Orleans Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Osage Dr. North
 
Berkley
 
4509


Osage Dr. South
 
Berkley
 
4509


Overlook Ct.
 
Springwater Rd.
 
6181


Oxford St.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Papoose St.
 
Algonquin
 
6710


Papoose St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Park Ave.
 
Markland Ave.
 
4509


Park Ave.
 
Union
 
4509


Park Ave.
 
Main
 
4509


Park Ave.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Park Rd.
 
Lincoln
 
4509


Park Rd.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Park Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Park Rd. (Rd.100 West)
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Patricia Dr.
 
Country Ln.
 
6710


Peace Pipe Dr.
 
Tepee Dr.
 
6710


Peace Pipe Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Peble Beach Dr.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Peble Beach Dr.
 
Cherry Hill Ln.
 
4509


Peshewa Way
 
Arrowhead Blvd.
 
6710


Philadelphia Dr.
 
Webster St.
 
5545


Phillip St.
 
Park Ave.
 
5361


Pine Ridge Dr.
 
Center Rd.
 
6138


Pine Ridge Dr.
 
Waterview Way
 
6138


Pinehurst Ln.
 
Maplewood Dr.
 
4509


Pinehurst Ln.
 
Boca-Raton Blvd.
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Barkdol
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Morgan
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Murden
 
4509


Plate St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Pinetree Ln.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Plum Ct.
 
Greentree Ln.
 
4509


Pond View Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Pond View Dr.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Pontiac
 
Mohr Dr.
 
4509


Pontiac Ct.
 
Pontiac Dr.
 
5545


Poplar
 
Bell
 
4509


Poplar
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Poplar
 
Union
 
4509


Preble
 
Webster
 
4509


Preble
 
Courtland
 
4509


Preble
 
Morrison
 
4509


Preble
 
Wabash
 
4509


President Ln.
 
Executive Dr.
 
4820


Primrose Ct.
 
Primrose Ln.
 
5545


Primrose
 
Northview Blvd.
 
4820


Princeton Dr.
 
Yale Blvd.
 
6710


Purdum
 
Gerhart
 
4509


Purdum
 
Fisher
 
4509


Purdum
 
Morgan
 
4509


Purdum
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Purdum
 
Taylor
 
4509


Purdum
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Purdum
 
Walnut
 
4509


Purdum
 
Harrison
 
4509


Purdum
 
Vaile Ave.
 
4509


Purdum
 
Markland
 
4509


Purdum
 
Jay
 
4509


Purdum
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Purdum
 
Ricketts
 
4509


Quail Run Blvd.
 
Goyer Rd.
 
5984


Railroad St.
 
Firmin St.
 
5545


Rainbow Dr.
 
Webster St.
 
5984


Rainbow Dr.
 
Westmoor Dr.
 
5545


Rank Parkway
 
Havens St.
 
5545


Rank Parkway
 
North
 
4509


Rebecca
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Red Bud Ln.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Redwood
 
Southlea Dr.
 
5467


Redwood
 
South Webster St.
 
5467


Redwood Ct.
 
South Webster St.
 
5467


Reed Rd.
 
Terrace Dr.
 
6710


Reed Rd. (Access U.S. 31)
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Reed Rd. southbound
 
Mayfair Dr. (Access from U.S. 31)
 
6710


Renoir Ct.
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Revere St.
 
Carmelita Blvd.
 
6710


Revere St.
 
Holiday St.
 
6710


Reynolds Dr.
 
South La Fountain
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Main
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Morrison
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Wabash
 
4509


Richmond St.
 
Korby St.
 
5545


Richmond St.
 
Lindsay St.
 
5545


Richmond St.
 
Alley west of Lindsay St.
 
5545


Ricketts
 
Bell
 
4509


Ricketts
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Ricketts
 
Market
 
4509


Ricketts
 
Union
 
4509


Ricketts
 
Main
 
4509


Ricketts
 
Wabash Ave.
 
5545


Ricketts
 
Webster
 
4509


Ridgewood
 
Carter
 
4509


Ridgewood
 
Devonshire Dr.
 
5545


Ring Ct.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Riverview Dr.
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5792


Rd. 50 East
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Rd. 80 West
 
Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
6710


Rd. 100 East
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Rd. 100 East (Busby Rd.)
 
Morgan St.
 
6710


Rd. 100 East (Busby Rd.)
 
Rd. 300 North
 
6710


Rd. 200 East
 
Boulevard (Rd. 100 South)
 
6710


Rd. 200 East
 
Center Rd. (Rd. 300 South)
 
6710


Rd. 200 East
 
Markland Ave. (Rd. 00 North South)
 
6710


Rd. 200 East
 
Sycamore St.
 
6710


Rd. 200 South (Zartman Rd.)
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
6710


Rd.300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
Davis Rd.
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6710


Roberts Dr.
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Roberts Dr.
 
Rockford Ln.
 
4509


Robin Dr.
 
Sugar Ln.
 
4820


Robin Ct.
 
Robin Dr.
 
4820


Robin Dr.
 
Candy Ln.
 
4820


Robin Ln.
 
Candy Ln.
 
4509


Rockford Ln.
 
Gleneagles
 
4509


Rockford Ln.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Rockford Ln.
 
Westbrook Dr.
 
4509


Rockford Ct.
 
Rockford Ln.
 
4820


Rockford Pl.
 
Rockford Ln.
 
4820


Rockford Pl.
 
Rockford Ct.
 
4820


Rollingstone Rd.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Rose Ln.
 
Berkley
 
4509


Rouge Dr.
 
Baton Rouge Dr.
 
6710


Ruddle Dr.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Ruddle Dr.
 
Walnut
 
4509


Ruddle Dr.
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Ruddle Dr.
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Ruddle Dr.
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
4509


Rue Royale Ct.
 
Rue Royale Dr.
 
5545


Rue-Royal-North
 
Berkley
 
4509


Rue-Royal-South
 
Berkley
 
4509


Ryan Ct.
 
John D. Dr.
 
5869


Sage Brash Dr.
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5545


St. Andrews Ct.
 
Cherry Hill Ln.
 
5545


St. Charles Ct.
 
Conti Ln.
 
5545


St. Dennis Ct.
 
Versailles Dr.
 
6710


St. Joseph Dr.
 
Jefferson St.
 
5869


St. Louis Ct.
 
St. Louis Dr.
 
6710


Salem Dr.
 
Independence Dr.
 
4820


Salem Dr.
 
Concord Ave.
 
4820


Sand Walk Dr.
 
Shore Bend Blvd.
 
6285


Sand Walk Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6385


Sante Fe Blvd.
 
Branded Blvd.
 
5545


Santa Fe Blvd.
 
Malfalfa Rd.
 
5953


Santa Fe Blvd.
 
Sycamore St.
 
4820


Saratoga
 
Cadillac Dr. West
 
4509


Saratoga
 
Goyer Rd.
 
4509


Saw Grass Ln.
 
Crooked Stick Dr.
 
6710


Saw Grass Ln.
 
Rd.100 West (Park Rd.)
 
6710


Schick Dr.
 
Mohr Dr.
 
6422


Scout St.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Sea Biscuit Ln.
 
Bluegrass Trail
 
6396


Sea Biscuit Ln.
 
Silver Charm Dr.
 
6396


Seattle Slew Ln.
 
Bluegrass Trail
 
6396


Senate Ln
 
Executive Dr.
 
4820


Seneca Trail
 
Maumee Dr.
 
6710


17th St.
 
Dodge
 
4692


17th St.
 
Markland
 
4509


17th St.
 
Wheeler
 
4509


Shady Glade
 
Leafy Ln.
 
5545


Shannon Ln.
 
Chrystal Woods Dr.
 
6181


Sherman Dr.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Sherwood Dr.
 
Sibley Dr.
 
5606


Silby Dr.
 
Goyer Rd.
 
4820


Silver Charm Dr.
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
6396


Sister Martin Dr.
 
Carter St.
 
6070


Somers Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6385


Somerset
 
Wabash St.
 
5458


Somerset Dr.
 
Webster
 
4509


Southdowns Dr.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Southdowns Dr.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Southland
 
Alto Rd.
 
4820


Southland
 
Southway Blvd.
 
4820


Southlea Dr.
 
Briarwick Dr.
 
5780


Southlea Dr.
 
Southway Blvd
 



Southlea Dr.
 
South Webster St.
 



Spraker
 
Ohio
 
4509


Spraker
 
Jay
 
4509


Spraker
 
Purdum
 
4509


Spraker
 
Bell
 
4509


Spraker
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Spraker
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Spraker
 
Market
 
4509


Spraker
 
Main
 
4509


Spraker
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Spraker
 
Washington
 
4509


Spraker
 
Davis Rd.
 
4509


Spraker
 
Courtland
 
4509


Spraker
 
Phillips
 
4509


Spring Grove Dr.
 
Springdale Dr. East
 
6710


Spring Grove Dr.
 
Springdale Dr. West
 
6710


Spring Hill Dr.
 
Springmill Dr.
 
6367


Spring Hill Dr.
 
Waterfront Dr.
 
6367


Springdale Ct.
 
Springdale Dr.
 
6710


Springdale Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Springmill Dr.
 
Highland Springs Ct.
 
6203


Springmill Dr.
 
Spring Water Rd.
 
6203


Springmill Dr.
 
Waterfront Dr.
 
6367


Springwater Rd.
 
Highland Springs Sr.
 
6181


Springwater Rd.
 
Springwater Ct.
 
6259


Stafford Dr.
 
Mohr Dr.
 
6422


Stafford Dr.
 
Prairie Dr.
 
6422


State
 
17th St.
 
4509


State
 
Cooper
 
4509


State
 
Plate
 
4509


State
 
Delphos
 
4509


State
 
Jay
 
4509


State
 
Home
 
4509


State
 
Union
 
4509


State
 
Main
 
4509


State
 
Buckeye
 
4509


State
 
Washington
 
4509


State
 
Armstrong
 
4509


State
 
Webster
 
4509


State
 
Courtland
 
4509


State
 
Leeds
 
4509


Stegall Dr.
 
Carter St.
 
6070


Stoneview Dr.
 
Covey Ln.
 
6710


Stoneview Dr.
 
Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.)
 
6710


Styer
 
Alley east of Deffenbaugh
 
5545


Styer
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Styer Ave.
 
Woodland Ave.
 
6150


Sugar Ln.
 
Candy Ln.
 
4820


Sugar Ln.
 
Alto Rd.
 
4820


Sundown Dr.
 
Tumbleweed
 
4820


Sundown Dr.
 
Branded Blvd.
 
5545


Sunnymeade Dr.
 
Carter
 
4509


Superior
 
Calumet
 
4509


Superior
 
Cooper
 
4509


Superior
 
Elizabeth
 
4509


Superior
 
Kingston
 
6395


Superior
 
McCann
 
4509


Superior
 
Phillips
 
4509


Superior
 
Western
 
4509


Supreme Ct.
 
Congress Dr.
 
6079


Susan Ct.
 
Susan Dr.
 
6710


Susan Dr.
 
Kirks Row
 
6710


Susan Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Sweetwood Dr.
 
Northview Blvd.
 
5545


Sylvan Ct.
 
Main St.
 
5545


Tally Ho Ct.
 
Tally Ho Dr.
 
6710


Tally Ho Dr.
 
Albright Rd.
 
6710


Tally Ho Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Tammie Ct.
 
Nathan Dr.
 
6101


Tam-O-Shanter Ct.
 
Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
5545


Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
Conti Ln.
 
5545


Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
4509


Tam-O-Shanter Ln.
 
Boca-Raton Blvd.
 
4509


Tate
 
Locke
 
4509


Tate
 
Jay
 
4509


Tate
 
Purdum
 
4509


Tate
 
Bell
 
4509


Tate
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Tate
 
La Fountain
 
4509


Tate
 
Market
 
4509


Tate
 
Main
 
4509


Tate
 
Courtland
 
4509


Tate
 
Morrison
 
4509


Tate
 
Indiana
 
4509


Tate
 
Wabash
 
4509


Tate
 
McCann
 
4509


Tate
 
Lindsay
 
4509


Tate
 
Phillips
 
4509


Tate
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Tate
 
Ann St.
 
5545


Tate
 
Washington St.
 
5545


Tate
 
Schuler St.
 
5545


Tate
 
Tedlee Dr.
 
6185; 6203


Taylor St.
 
Apperson Way
 
6707


Taylor
 
Calumet
 
4509


Taylor
 
Ohio
 
4509


Taylor
 
Delphos
 
4509


Taylor
 
Phillips
 
4509


Taylor
 
Wester
 
4509


Taylor
 
Ruddle Dr.
 
4509


Teasdale Ln.
 
Woodbridge Cr.
 
4820


Teasdale Ln.
 
Cricket Hill Ln.
 
4820


Tepee Dr.
 
Chippawa Ln.
 
6710


TePee Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Terrace Dr.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Terrace Dr.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Timber Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Timber Ridge Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Timber Valley Ct.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
6710


Timber Valley Dr.
 
Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Timber Valley Dr.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd.400 South)
 
6710


Tomahawk Blvd.
 
U.S. 31
 
6710


Toni Dr. (North)
 
Dee Ann Dr.
 
5545


Toni Dr. (South)
 
Dee Ann Dr.
 
5545


Tooley Ct.
 
Tedlee Dr.
 
6185; 6203


Touby Pike
 
Sycamore St.
 
6710


Treaty Ln.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Treaty Ln.
 
Wigwam Dr.
 
6710


Trialon Ct.
 
Touby Pike
 
5679


Tribal St.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Tribal St.
 
Wea Dr.
 
6710


Tulip Ln.
 
Alameda Blvd.
 
6710


Tumbleweed
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5545


Tumbleweed
 
Branded Blvd.
 
4820


Tumbleweed
 
Branded Blvd.
 
5545


Twyckingham Ln.
 
Westminster Ln.
 
5545


Union St.
 
Fisher
 
4509


Unio St.
 
Gano
 
4509


Union St.
 
North
 
4509


Union St.
 
North
 
4509


Union St.
 
Broadway
 
4509


Union St.
 
Richmond
 
4509


Union St.
 
Monroe
 
4509


Union St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Union St.
 
Hoffer
 
4509


Union St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Union St. (Northbound)
 
Home Ave.
 
6635


Vaile Ave.
 
Goyer
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Plate
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Union
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Main
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Vaile Ave.
 
Goyer Rd. (Rd. 150 East)
 
6710


Valerie Ct.
 
Dee Ann Dr.
 
5545


Valley View Dr.
 
Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
6710


Versailles Ct.
 
Versailles Dr.
 
6710


Versailles Dr.
 
Baton Rouge
 
6710


Versailles Dr.
 
Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Versailles Dr.

North Junction
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Versailles Dr.

South Junction
 
Elva Dr.
 
6710


Victor Ct.
 
Southlea Dr.
 
5467


Village Dr.
 
Rainbow Dr.
 
4820


Villas Dr. North
 
Carter St. South
 
6052


Villas Dr. South
 
Carter St. South
 
5822


Villas Dr. South
 
Mirage Dr.
 
5792


Virginia
 
Leeds
 
4509


Virginia
 
Courtland
 
4509


Virginia
 
Webster
 
4509


Virginia
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Virginia
 
Washington
 
4509


Virginia
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Virginia
 
Main
 
4509


Virginia
 
Union
 
4509


Virginia
 
Apperson Way
 
4509


Virginia
 
Purdum
 
4509


Virginia
 
Jay
 
4509


Virginia
 
Locke
 
4509


Virginia
 
Waugh
 
4509


Virginia
 
Delphos
 
4509


Virginia
 
Ohio
 
4509


Virginia
 
Plate
 
4509


Wabash
 
Morgan
 
4509


Wabash
 
North St.
 
4509


Wabash
 
Broadway
 
4509


Wabash
 
Havens
 
4509


Wabash
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Wabash
 
Monroe
 
4509


Wabash
 
Taylor
 
4509


Wabash
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Wabash
 
Walnut
 
4509


Wabash
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Wabash
 
Harrison
 
4509


Wabash
 
Markland
 
4509


Wabash
 
Foster
 
4509


Wabash St.
 
Virginia
 
4509


Wabash St.
 
State
 
4509


Wabash St.
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Wabash St.
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Wabash St.
 
Spraker St.
 
4509


Walker Dr.
 
Wickersham Dr. East
 
4509


Walker Dr.
 
Wickersham Dr. West
 
4509


Walker Dr.
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Walker Dr.
 
Dixon
 
4509


Walnut St.
 
Apperson Way
 
6707


Walnut St.
 
Ohio
 
4509


Walnut St.
 
Delphos
 
4509


Wampum Dr.
 
Wigwam Dr.
 
6710


War Admiral Trail
 
Bluegrass Trail
 
6396


War Admiral Trail
 
Silver Charm Dr.
 
6396


Water St.
 
Mill St.
 
6710


Water St.
 
Rd. 250 South (Alto Rd.)
 
6710


Waterfront Dr.
 
Co. Rd. 100 East
 
6367


Waterfront Dr.
 
Springmill Dr.
 
6367


Waterview Way
 
Artisan Dr.
 
6138


Waubesa Way West
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Waubesa Way Ct.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Waubesa Way East
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Waugh
 
Gano
 
4509


Waugh
 
Morgan
 
4509


Waugh
 
Spraker
 
4509


Waugh
 
Lordeman
 
4509


Waugh
 
North
 
4509


Waugh
 
Fenley St.
 
5545


Waugh
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Waugh
 
Monroe
 
4509


Waugh
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Waugh
 
State
 
4509


Waugh
 
Markland
 
4509


Waugh Ct.
 
Hoffer St.
 
6075


Waugh (Northbound)
 
Elmhurst Dr.
 
5545


Waverly Blvd.
 
Goyer Rd.
 
5953


Waverly Blvd.
 
Providence Ln.
 
5768


Wea Dr.
 
Miami Blvd.
 
6710


Wea Dr.
 
Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Webster St.
 
Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.)
 
6710


Webster
 
Center
 
6395


Webster
 
Morgan
 
4509


Webster
 
Davis Rd.
 
4509


Webster
 
Elm
 
4509


Webster
 
Monroe
 
4509


Webster
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Webster
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Webster
 
Taylor
 
4509


Webster
 
Walnut
 
4509


Webster
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Webster
 
Park Ave.
 
4509


Webster
 
King
 
4509


Webster
 
Deffenbaugh
 
4509


Webster (northbound)
 
Boulevard
 
4509


Webster
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Webster
 
Center Rd.
 
6206


Webster Ct.
 
South Webster St.
 
5467


Wellesley Ln.
 
Providence Ln.
 
5768


Wellesley Ln.
 
Winthrop Ln.
 
5768


Wesmar Ct.
 
Weston Dr.
 
6285


West St. Louis Dr.
 
Boulevard
 
6710


Westbrook Ct.
 
Westbrook Dr.
 
4509


Westbrook Dr.
 
Park Rd.
 
4509


Westbrook Dr.
 
Bagley Dr.
 
4509


Western
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Western
 
Mulberry
 
4509


Western
 
Walnut
 
4509


Western
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Western
 
Carter
 
4509


Western
 
Kingston Rd.
 
4509


Western
 
Madison St.
 
5545


Western
 
Richmond St.
 
5545


Westminster Ln.
 
Madison St.
 
5545


Westminster Ln.
 
Witherspoon Dr.
 
5545


Westmoor Dr.
 
Dellwood Dr.
 
6710


Westmoor Dr.
 
Rainbow Dr.
 
6710


Westmoor Dr.
 
Terrace Dr.
 
6710


Westmoreland Dr.
 
Bennett Dr.
 
5545


Westmoreland Dr. East
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Weston Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6285


Westover Ct.
 
Versailles Dr.
 
6710


Wheeler St.
 
Alley west of Indiana St.
 
5545


Wheeler St.
 
Cooper
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Plate
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Harris Rd.
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Delphos
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Home Ave.
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Union
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Main
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Washington
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Webster
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Courtland
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Indiana
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Locke
 
4509


Wheeler St.
 
Seventeenth St.
 
5787


Whitehouse Dr.
 
Lincoln Rd.
 
4820


Whitehouse Dr.
 
Zartman Rd.
 
6079


Wickersham Ct.
 
Wickersham Dr.
 
5545


Wickersham Dr. East
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Wickersham Dr. East
 
Wickersham Dr. North
 
4509


Wickersham Dr. North
 
Dixon
 
4509


Wigwam Ct.
 
Wigwam Dr.
 
6710


Wigwam Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd.
 
6710


Wigwam Dr.
 
Lance Dr.
 
6710


Wildridge
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Wildwood
 
Sycamore
 
4509


Wildwood
 
Walnut
 
4509


Wildwood
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
4509


Wildwood
 
Madison St.
 
4509


Wildwood
 
Mulberry St.
 
5545


Williams Dr.
 
Southway Blvd.
 
6710


Williamsburg Dr.
 
Webster St.
 
5545


Williamsburg Dr.
 
Independence Dr.
 
4820


Willow Ct.
 
Berkley Rd.
 
4509


Willowridge Dr.
 
Santa Fe Blvd.
 
5792


Windsor Dr.
 
Havens St.
 
5545


Wingra Ct.
 
Monona Dr.
 
6710


Wingtip Ct.
 
Waterview Way
 
6138


Winthrop Ln.
 
Sibley Dr.
 
5768


Winthrop Ln.
 
Waverly Blvd.
 
5953


Witherspoon Ct.
 
Witherspoon Dr.
 
5545


Witherspoon
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
5545


Witherspoon
 
Jefferson
 
4509


Woodhaven Dr.
 
Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.)
 
6710


Woodhaven Dr.
 
Woodhaven Trail
 
6710


Woodland
 
Leeds
 
4509


Woodland
 
Wabash
 
4509


Woodland
 
Courtland
 
4509


Woodland
 
Webster
 
4509


Woodland
 
Armstrong
 
4509


Woodland
 
Buckeye
 
4509


Woodland
 
Main
 
4509


Woodland
 
Union
 
4509


Woodland
 
Washington
 
4509


Woodland Ave.
 
Belmont Ave.
 
6150


Woodland Ave.
 
Darby Ave.
 
6150


Williams Ct.
 
Williams Dr.
 
4509


Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
Columbus Blvd.
 
6185; 6203


Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
Jefferson St.
 
5953


Wynterpointe Dr.
 
Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
5953


Yale Blvd.
 
S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Yale Blvd.
 
Webster St.
 
6710


Yale Ct.
 
Yale Blvd.
 
6710


Zartman Rd.
 
Park Rd.
 
4820




 



      (B)   Four-way stops (multi-way stops).



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.




Albright Rd. (Rd. 150 East) and Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Alto Rd. and Albright Rd.
 
5905


Apperson Way and Havens St.
 
6697


Apperson Way and Vaile Ave.
 
6722


Arrowhead Blvd. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
6710


Bell St. and Elm St.
 
4509


Bell St. and Gano St.
 
4509


Bell St. and Gerhart St.
 
4509


Bell St. and Monroe St.
 
4509


Bell St. and Harrison St.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and La Fountain St.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and Webster St.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and Dixon St.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and Park Rd.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and Wabash
 
4509


Buckeye St. and Mulberry St.
 
6596


Buckeye St. and Spraker St.
 
4509


Buckeye St. and Sycamore St.
 
6601


Buckeye St. and Walnut St.
 
6601


Cadillac Dr. West and Saratoga
 
4509


Cadillac Dr. West and Mohr
 
4509


Carter St. and Branded Blvd.
 
6403


Carter St. and Santa Fe Blvd.
 
6403


Colter Dr. and Kyle Ln.
 
6323


Conradt Ave. and Superior
 
4534


Courtland and Deffenbaugh
 
4565


Courtland St. and Spraker
 
4509


Carter St. and Magnolia St.
 
4509


Carter St. and Ohio St.
 
4509


Courtland St. and Monroe St.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh St. and Dixon
 
4509


Deffenbaugh St. and Main St.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh St. and Park Dr.
 
4509


Deffenbaugh St. and Webster St.
 
6022


Elm St. and Morrison
 
4509


Firmin St. and Harris Rd.
 
6423


Fisher St. and Purdum
 
4509


Foster St. and Jay St.
 
4509


Gano St. and Jay St.
 
4509


Gano St. and Apperson Way
 
4509


Havens St. and McCann St.
 
4509


Harrison St. and Jay St.
 
4509


Harrison St. and Market
 
4509


Hoffer St. and Lafountain St.
 
6697


Indiana St. and Jefferson
 
4509


Jefferson and Ohio St.
 
4509


Jefferson and Dixon
 
4509


Jefferson St. and Main St.
 
6697


Jefferson St. and Union St.
 
6697


La Fountain St. and Boulevard St.
 
5737


La Fountain St. and Lincoln Rd.
 
4509


Lincoln Rd. and Park Rd.
 
4509


Locke St. and Virginia
 
4509


Main St. and Monroe St.
 
6697


Main St. and Mulberry St.
 
6596


Main St. and Sycamore St.
 
6601


Main St. and Taylor St.
 
6596


Main St. and Walnut St.
 
6601


Markland St. and Park Ave.
 
4509


McCann St. and Superior St.
 
4509


North St. and Ohio St.
 
4509


North St. and Webster St.
 
6722


Ohio St. and Gana
 
4509


Ohio St. and Sycamore St.
 
6722


Rd. 50 East (Ohio St.) and Rd. 300 North Smith Rd.)
 
6710


Rd. 100 West (Park Rd.) and Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Rd. 200 West (Dixon Rd.) and Rd. 300 South (Center Rd.)
 
6710


Rd. 200 East and Rd. 200 South (Southway Blvd.)
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) and Rd. 100 South (Boulevard)
 
6710


Rd. 300 West (Malfalfa Rd.) and Rd. 50 South (Defenbaugh St.)
 
6710


Rollingstone Rd. and Bridgestone Circle
 
6710


Santa Fe Blvd. and Branded Blvd.
 
6245


Superior St. and Main St.
 
6697


Superior St. and Union St.
 
6697


Taylor St. and Calumet St.
 
6245


Touby Pike and Rd. 200 North (Morgan St.)
 
6710


Union St. and Mulberry St.
 
6596


Union St. and Sycamore St.
 
6601


Union St. and Taylor St.
 
6596


Union St. and Walnut St.
 
6601




 



   (C)   Three-way stops.



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.




Armstrong Street and Broadway Street
 
6654


Virginia Ave. and l7th St.
 
4692


Washington St. and Smith Rd.
 
6205


Webster St. and Monroe St.
 
4509


Wickersham Dr. North and Wickersham Dr. East
 
6403


Barkdol St. and Market St.
 
4509


Boulevard St. and Webster St. (South Junction)
 
6091


Deffenbaugh St. and Park Rd.
 
4509


Elk Dr. and Gulfshore Blvd.
 
6277


Highland Dr. and Country Park Rd.
 
4509


Park Ave. and Defenbaugh St.
 
6196


Vaile Ave. and Ohio
 
4509


Vaile Ave. and Plate
 
4509




 



   (D)   Four-way stop alleys.



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.




First and Second alley intersection between Main and Union and between
Harrison and Vaile
 
4509


First and Second alley intersections north of Elm Street between Webster St.
and Armstrong St.
 
6679


First and Second alley intersection south of Park Ave. and between Armstrong
and Webster
 
4554


First alley intersection south of Park Ave. between Courtland Ave. and
Webster St.
 
4850


First alley intersection south of Park Ave. between Indiana St. and Wabash St.
 
5885


First alley intersection south of Park Ave. between Wabash St. and McCann St.
 
5885


First alley intersection west of Washington St. south of Markland Ave.
 
6196


First alley intersection west of Washington St. north of Markland Ave.
 
6203


First alley intersection north of Morgan St. between Delphos St. and Waugh St.
 
6244


First alley intersection south of Mulberry St. and west of Washington St.
 
6261




 



   (E)   Two-way stop alleys.



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.




First alley west of Washington, northbound stops for east and west alley
north of North St.
 
4509


First alley west of Main, southbound stops for east-west alley north of
Harrison
 
4509


First alley south of Markland stops for Armstrong, Webster, and Courtland
 
4509


First alley north of Markland stops for Webster St.
 
5468


First alley south of Park Ave. stops for Courtland, Indiana, and Wabash
 
4509


First alley south of Park Ave. east and westbound stops for the first alley
north of Harrison east and westbound
 
4509


First alley north of Boulevard east and westbound stops for first alley west
of Washington southbound
 
4509


First alley west of Washington, southbound for first alley north of Boulevard
 
4509


First alley north of Walnut, eastbound, stops for first alley east of
Washington
 
4509


First alley north of Walnut, east and westbound, stops for one alley east of
Webster
 
4509


First alley north of Walnut, east and westbound,

stops for first alley west of Webster
 
4509


First alley west of Webster, northbound, stops for first alley north of Walnut
 
4509


First alley north of Markland St., east and westbound, stops for first alley
west of Plate
 
4509


First alley south of Superior, eastbound, stops for the first alley east of
Union
 
4509


First alley east of Apperson Way, southbound, stops for Foster St.
 
4509


First alley intersection east of Jay St., northbound-southbound stops for
eastbound-westbound King St.
 
5545


First alley intersection between Main St. and Union St.,
northbound-southbound stops for eastbound-westbound King St.
 
5545


First alley intersection north of King St., eastbound stops for
northbound-southbound Courtland Ave.
 
5545


First alley intersection north of Foster St., westbound stops for
northbound-southbound Courtland Ave.
 
5545


First alley intersection north of Monroe St., eastbound-westbound stops for
northbound-southbound Delphos St.
 
5545


First alley north of Mulberry St. between Webster St. and Armstrong St. stops
for north-south alley
 
5823


First alley intersection east of North Indiana St. between West Mulberry St.
and West Walnut St. northbound and southbound stops for eastbound and
westbound
 
5935


First alley intersection east of Washington St. south of Markland Ave. stops
northbound and southbound for eastbound and westbound alley
 
6101


First alley intersection north of Morgan St. between Bell St. and Purdum St.
 
6323


First alley intersection located west of Courtland Ave. and south of Havens
St. North and south approaches shall stop for east and west approaches
 
6429




 



1('75 Code, § 15-96)  (Am. Ord. 6596, passed 10-26-09)



SCHEDULE VIII:  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Streets.



 

STREET
 
AT INTERSECTION WITH
 
ORD. NO.




Alton Dr.
 
Lody Ln.
 
4967


Arrowhead Blvd. northbound
 
Council Ring Blvd. westbound
 
6710


Bittersweet Ln.
 
Willow Spring Rd.
 
6710


Bradford
 
Maplewood
 
5458


Briarwood Ct.
 
Willow Spring Rd.
 
6710


Buick
 
Cadillac Dr. East
 
4509


Canyon Dr.
 
Melody Ln.
 
6710


Carson Ct.
 
Melody Ln.
 
6710


Carter St.
 
Apperson Way
 
5545


Center Rd.
 
Webster St.
 
6396


Council Ring Blvd. southbound
 
Arrowhead Blvd. eastbound
 
6710


County Club Rd.
 
Center Park Dr.
 
4509


Courtland
 
Aldridge
 
5458


Cranbrook Dr.
 
Meadowbrook Dr.
 
5545


Danbury
 
Ohio
 
4509


Dogwood Ct.
 
Appletree Ln.
 
5679


Douglas
 
Maplewood
 
5458


Douglas
 
James Dr.
 
5458


Duke Ct.
 
Duke Dr.
 
6710


Eastbrook
 
Grey Twig Dr.
 
6710


Finley St.
 
Waugh St.
 
5008; 5963


Forest Dr.
 
Walnut
 
4509


Forest Dr.
 
Taylor
 
4509


Gleneagles
 
Country Club Ln.
 
4509


Harvard Ct.
 
Harvard Dr.
 
6710


Hawthorne Ln.
 
Eastbrook Dr.
 
6710


Hawthorne Ln.
 
Grey Twig Dr.
 
6710


Imperial
 
Savoy
 
4509


Indiana
 
Aldridge
 
5458


Katherine Ave.
 
Holly Ln.
 
5458


Katherine Ave.
 
Somerset
 
5458


Kent
 
James Dr.
 
5458


Kent
 
Maplewood
 
5458


Kingston
 
Superior
 
6396


La Fountain
 
Fischer St.
 
5881


La Fountain
 
Washington St. Crossover
 
4509


Leeds St.
 
North Park Dr.
 
4509


Linda Dr.
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Linda Dr.
 
Tulip Ln.
 
6710


Mackinaw Circle
 
Golden Gate Way
 
6413


Maplewood Dr.
 
Country Club Ln.
 
4509


Melody Ct.
 
Melody Ln. East
 
6710


Melody Ln. East
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Melody Ln. West
 
Melody Ln. South
 
6710


Mulberry St.
 
Forest Dr.
 
5545


Ohio St.
 
Danbury eastbound
 
4509


Orleans Ct.
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Pamela Ct.
 
Marsha Dr.
 
6710


Princeton Ct.
 
Princeton Dr.
 
6710


Rainbow Dr.
 
Westmoor Dr.
 
6710


Rank Parkway
 
Havens St.
 
5l02


Red Bud Ln.
 
Linda Dr.
 
6710


Ricketts St.
 
Shady Blvd.
 
4509


Savoy
 
Belverdere
 
4509


Stoneview Dr.
 
Covey Ln.
 
6710


Superior
 
Kingston
 
6396


Tam-O-Shanter
 
Pebble Beach Dr.
 
4509


Taylor St.
 
Ruddell Dr.
 
5545


Terrace Ct.
 
Orleans Dr.
 
6710


Waugh
 
Gerhart
 
4509


Webster St.
 
Center Rd.
 
6396


Webster St. (right turn lane)
 
South junction of Boulevard St.
 
6091




 



('75 Code, § 15-97)



   (B)   Alleys.



 

ALLEY
 
AT INTERSECTION WITH
 
ORD. NO.


Alley whose direction is east-west between McCann St. and Kingston St.
 
Alley whose direction is north-south between Sycamore and Superior
 
5468



 



(Ord. 5468, passed 8-12-85; Am. Ord. 55l5, passed 12-16-85; Am. Ord. 5823,
passed 5-18-92; Am. Ord. 6091, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord. 6101, passed 10-19-98;
Am. Ord. 6396, passed 9-26-05)



SCHEDULE IX:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   (A)   Automatic traffic-control signals shall be installed at the
following intersections or places.



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.




Alto Rd. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Alto Rd. and Lafountain St.
 
5579


Alto Rd. and Webster St./Southway Blvd.
 
6188


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South) and Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West)
 
6710


Alto Rd. (Rd. 250 South) and Park Rd. (Rd. 100 West)
 
6710


Apperson Way and Home Ave.
 



Apperson Way and Jefferson St.
 



Apperson Way and Markland Ave.
 
4637


Apperson Way and Morgan St.
 



Apperson Way and North St.
 



Apperson Way and Superior St.
 



Apperson Way and Sycamore St.
 



Boulevard and Berkley Rd.
 
4637


Boulevard and Dixon Rd.
 
6191


Boulevard and Goyer Rd.
 
4637


Boulevard and Home Ave.
 
4637


Boulevard and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Boulevard and Washington St.
 



Carter St. and U.S. 31
 
6188


Center Rd. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Cooper St. and Markland Ave.
 



Deffenbaugh St. and Dixon Rd.
 
6191


Deffenbaugh St. and Home Ave.
 



Deffenbaugh St. and Washington St.
 



Dixon Rd. and Jefferson St.
 
5339


Dixon Rd. and Sycamore St.
 
4637


Dixon Rd. and Zartman Rd.
 
6289


Dixon Rd. (Rd. 200 West) and S.R. 26 (Rd. 400 South)
 
6710


Firmin St. and Home Ave.
 



Hoffer St. and Home Ave.
 



Hoffer St. and Plate St.
 



Hoffer St. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Home Ave. and Firmin St.
 
6202


Jefferson St. west at intersection with Berkley Rd. and Lody Ln.
 



Jefferson St. and Korby St.
 
5242


Jefferson St. and Phillips St.
 
4637


La Fountain St. and Rainbow Dr.
 



La Fountain St. and Southway Boulevard
 
4637


La Fountain St. and Washington St.
 



Lincoln Rd. and Albright Rd.
 
6188


Lincoln Rd. and Berkley Rd.
 
5579


Lincoln Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
6191


Lincoln Rd. and Goyer Rd.
 
4637


Lincoln Rd. and Home Ave.
 
6188


Lincoln Rd. and La Fountain St.
 
6188


Lincoln Rd. and Park Rd.
 
6188


Lincoln Rd. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Lincoln Rd. and Washington St.
 



Lincoln Rd. and Webster St.
 
4487


Main St. and Markland Ave.
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Dixon Rd.
 
6710


Markland Ave. and Goyer Rd.
 
6188


Markland Ave. and Home Ave.
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Jay St.
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Meijer entrance
 
6188


Markland Ave. and Plate St.
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Union
 
4637


Markland Ave. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Wal-Mart entrance
 
6188


Markland Ave. and Washington St.
 
4637


Markland Ave. and Webster St.
 



Morgan St. and Davis Rd.
 
5669


Morgan St. and U.S. 31
 
6188


North St. and U.S. 31
 
6188


Phillip St. and Sycamore St.
 
4637


Phillip St. and Walnut St.
 



Plate St. and Boulevard St.
 
4601


Savoy and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Seventeenth St. and Hoffer St.
 
5786


Smith Rd. and U.S. 31
 
6188


South La Fountain St. at Howard Community Hospital entrance
 



Southway Boulevard and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
4637


Sycamore St. and Berkley Rd./Walnut St.
 
6188


Washington St. and Boulevard St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Jefferson St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Monroe St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Morgan St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Mulberry St.
 
4637


Washington St. and North St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Park Ave.
 
4637


Washington St. and Superior St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Sycamore St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Taylor St.
 
4637


Washington St. and Walnut St.
 
4637


Webster St. and Alto Rd.
 
5339




 



   (B)   It shall be unlawful at the following intersections for
vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal to proceed straight ahead
through the intersection after having first come to a complete stop as
provided in IC 9-4-1-38(c)(2).



 

DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.


South Home Avenue at its intersection with Defenbaugh Street
 
5232


South Home Avenue at its intersection with Apperson Way south
 
5232



 



('75 Code, § l5-94)  (Am. Ord. 6596, passed 10-26-09)



SCHEDULE X:  BIKE ROUTES



   The route numbers and route classifications of the bikeways as set
forth in this Schedule X shall be as adopted by the Common Council of the
city in §§ 74.l5 through 74.l9.  The city assumes no jurisdiction or
control over those portions of the hereinafter created bike routes which are
located outside of the city limits.  The inclusion is to be construed only
as an effort to create continuous and complete route descriptions.



 

ROUTE NO.
 
STREET DESCRIPTION
 
CLASS




14
 
East on Smith Rd. from Phillips to Webster St.
 
III


16
 
East on Gano St. from Webster St. to Ohio St.
 
III


18
 
East on Spraker St. from Phillips St. to Webster, north on Webster to Butler,
east on Butler to Main, south on Main St. to Spraker St. and east on Spraker
St. to Ohio St.
 
III


20
 
East on Columbus Blvd. from Witherspoon to Phillips St.
 
III


24
 
East on Carter St. from Dixon Rd. to Westmoreland Dr. West
 
III



 
Over railroad tracks
 
I



 
East on Carter St. from Kingston Rd. to Phillips St., east-bound from
Phillips to Kingston St., and north on Kingston St. to Maple, west-bound on
Maple from Kingston to Phillips, and,
 
III



 
South on the east sidewalk along Phillips to Carter,
 
IV



 
East on Maple from Kingston St. to McCann
 
III



 
East on service road in Foster Park from McCann to near Washington,
 
II



 
East from end of service road to Washington,
 
I



 
North on the west sidewalk of Washington St. from the point where Class I
route meets Washington to Superior,
 
IV



 
East on Superior St. from Washington St. to Waugh
 
III



 
South on Waugh St. from Superior St. to Carter St. and east on Carter from
Waugh to Ohio St.
 
II


28
 
East on Defenbaugh Rd. from Dixon Rd. to Old Park Ave.,
 
II



 
North on Old Park Ave. to unnamed road, east on unnamed road to Park,
 
I



 
North on Park Rd. in Highland Park to Defenbaugh, east on Defenbaugh through
Highland Park to Highland Park Rd.,
 
III



 
South on Highland Park Rd. to point directly west of western end of Hoffer,
 
II



 
East through Highland Park from Highland Park Rd. to western end of Hoffer,
 
I



 
East on Hoffer to Armstrong St.
 
III


SE
 
East on Virginia from Plate St. to Seventeenth St., south on Seventeenth St.
to next entrance of the Markland Mall Shopping Center, continuing at the main
entrance of the Shopping Center on U.S. 3l east to Imperial Dr., south on
Imperial Dr. to Saratoga Ave., southeast on Saratoga Ave. to Goyer.
 
III


32
 
East on Gleneagles Dr. from Berkley to Park Ave., north on Park Ave., to
Maplewood, east on Maplewood to Sherman, south on Sherman to James Dr., east
on James Dr. to Webster.
 
III


36
 
East on Alto Rd. (250S) from West Middleton to Webster St.
 
II


23
 
South on Berkley Rd. from Defenbaugh to Zartman Rd.
 
III


25
 
South on Phillips St. from Smith Rd. to Spraker,
 
II



 
South on Phillips St. to Tate, west on Tate to Schuler, south and west on
Schuler to Korby, south on Korby to Jefferson Rd.
 
III



 
East on north sidewalk of Jefferson Rd. to Western,
 
IV



 
South on Western Ave. to Carter east on Carter to Phillips St., east-bound on
Carter from Phillips to Kingston to Maple, west-bound on Maple from Kingston
to Phillips,
 
III



 
South on east sidewalk of Phillips to Carter St.,
 
IV



 
East on Maple from Kingston to McCann, south on McCann to Park Ave. to
Brandon, south on Brandon to Markland Ave., west on Markland Ave. to Leeds
St., south on Leeds St. to Highland Park Rd.,
 
III



 
South on Highland Park Rd. to bridge which goes over Kokomo Creek near dam,
 
II



 
On bridge,
 
III



 
Southeast in Highland Park to West Blvd. across from Grove Ave.,
 
I



 
Southeast on Grove Ave., from West Blvd. to Wabash Ave., south on Wabash to
James Dr.
 
III


27
 
South on Webster from Smith Rd. to Havens, west on Havens to Indiana, south
on Indiana to Superior,
 
III



 
South on road in Foster Park extending from Indiana at Superior to service
road, east on service road to east end near Washington,
 
II



 
East to Washington,
 
I



 
South on sidewalk on west side of Washington to Park Ave.,
 
IV



 
West on Park Ave. to Armstrong, south on Armstrong to Hoffer, west on Hoffer
to west end of Hoffer,
 
III



 
West in Highland Park from west end of Hoffer to Highland Park Rd.,
 
I



 
South on Highland Park Rd., to bridge which goes over Kokomo Creek near dam,
 
II



 
On bridge,
 
III



 
Southeast through parking lot to Class I path,
 
II



 
Southeast in Highland Park to West Blvd. across from Grove Ave.,
 
I



 
Southwest on Grove Ave., from West Blvd. to Wabash Ave., south on Wabash
Ave., to James Dr., east on James Dr. to Webster,
 
III



 
South on Webster to Vinton Woods Subdivision,
 
II



 
South on Webster in Vinton Woods Subdivision to Alto Rd.,
 
III



 
South on Webster St. from Alto Rd. to Center Rd. (Both sides of street).
 
III


3l
 
South on Ohio St. from Gano St. to Vaile Ave., east on Vaile Ave., to Plate
St., south on Plate St. to East Blvd.
 
III




 



(Ord. 5277, passed 4-25-83; Am. Ord. 6206, passed 11-26-01)



SCHEDULE XI:  NO RIGHT TURN ON RED.



 

INTERSECTION
 
DIRECTION
 
ORD. NO.


Alto Rd./Southway and Webster St.
 
Northbound, Southbound, and Westbound
 
6181


Jefferson St. and Berkley Rd.
 
Eastbound
 
5520


Lincoln Rd. and Park Rd.
 
Southbound
 
5520


Washington St. and North St.
 
All
 
5520



 



(Ord. 5520, passed 2-10-86; Am. Ord. 5744, passed 5-21-90; Am. Ord. 6035,
passed 2-24-97; Am. Ord. 6102, passed 10-19-98; Am. Ord. 6181, passed
2-12-01; Am. Ord. 6703, passed 11-19-12)



SCHEDULE XII:  PEDESTRIAN WAYS.



   Operation of motorized vehicles, except emergency and maintenance
vehicles, shall be prohibited on all public ways within the city, designated
by ordinance as “Pedestrian Ways,” it being the specific intent of the
Council that use of such public ways be restricted to pedestrian use only. In
order to promote such limited use, the city is authorized to erect such
barriers or traffic control structures, or employ such signage, as may be
required to preserve and promote the restricted public use nature of such
designated ways.



 

TYPE OF PUBLIC WAY
 
DESCRIPTION
 
ORD. NO.


Alley
 
The alley between Sycamore St. and Walnut St., running thence East to its
intersection with the north to south alley that parallels Main St.
 
6162


Alley
 
The alley between Sycamore St. and Superior St., running south from Sycamore
St. parallel with Union St. to it's intersection with the east to west alley.
 
6429


Alley
 
The first alley west of Union St. between Sycamore St. and Walnut St.
 
6446


Alley
 
The alley between Sycamore St. and Superior St., running south from Sycamore
St. West and parallel with main St. to its intersection with the east to west
alley.
 
6620



 


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 79:  PARKING SCHEDULES



   Schedule



   I.   Limited parking



   II.   No parking Generally



   III.   No parking - specified times



   IV.   Loading zones



   V.   Off-street parking lots



   VI.   No parking - bike lane



SCHEDULE I:  LIMITED PARKING.



   No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets for longer than
the times indicated, during the hours indicated:



   (A)   Two hours at any time



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Jefferson St.
 
Washington St. and Buckeye St.
 
south
 
4520


Monroe St.
 
Main St. and the first alley east of Washington St.
 
north
 
4520


Union St.
 
Fisher St. and a point 30 feet south
 
west
 
4520



 



   (B)   Two hours between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Main St.
 
Foster St. and a point 228 feet south of Foster St.
 
west
 
4915


Webster St.
 
North side of alley which is adjacent to the north side of 1412 North Webster
and continuing north approx. 80 feet
 
east
 
5754



 



   (C)   Two hours, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Delphos St.
 
State St. and Deffenbaugh St.
 
east
 
4520


Firmin St.
 
Locke St. and Home Ave.
 
south
 
4520


Firmin St.
 
Delphos St. and east property line of Delco Radio
 
north
 
4520


Harrison St.
 
Lindsay St. and Brandon St.
 
north
 
4520


Laguna St.
 
The Delco Plant and Harris Rd.
 
both
 
5483


Locke St.
 
Firmin St. and Hoffer St.
 
east
 
4520


Main St.
 
Harrison St. and Markland Ave.
 
both
 
4555


Main St.
 
Markland Ave. and Foster St.
 
west
 
4555


Main St.
 
Markland Ave. and a point 200 feet south
 
east
 
4555


Main St.
 
Virginia Ave. to a point 314 feet north of Virginia Ave.
 
east
 
4599


Main St.
 
Foster St. south to the west entrance to Continental Steel Company parking lot
 
west
 
4520


North St.
 
First alley east of Washington St. and North St’s intersection at Buckeye
St.
 
south
 
4599


Park Ave.
 
Lindsay St. and Brandon St.
 
south
 
4520


Superior St.
 
Washington St. and a point 812 feet west
 
south
 
4520


Superior St.
 
514 West Superior St. and 602 West Superior St.
 
north
 
4520


Wabash St.
 
Speaker St. and Morgan St.
 
both
 
4520


Waugh St.
 
State St. and Deffenbaugh St.
 
both
 
4520


Wheeler St.
 
Home Ave. and Locke St.
 
south
 
4520




 



   (D)   One hour, at all times:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Home Ave.
 
Two parking spaces in front of 1000 South Home Ave.
 
east
 
4520


Markland Ave.
 
In front of Continental Tavern
 
north
 
4521


North St.
 
One parking space in front of 118 West North St.
 
north
 
4520


Union St.
 
Two parking spaces in front of 1046 South Union St.
 
east
 
4520


Union St.
 
Norfolk and Western Railroad north to first alley
 
west
 
4520



 



   (E)   One hour, between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Walnut
 
First parking space west of Phillips
 
north
 
4959



 



   (F)   One hour, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


North St.
 
A point 336 feet east of Webster St. and a point 376 feet east on Webster St.
 
north
 
4599


Superior St.
 
First parking space east of the alley, east of Union St.
 
south
 
6051



 



   (G)   One-half hour, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays
and holidays:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Union St.
 
First two parking spaces north of Jefferson St.
 
west
 
4520


Union St.
 
One parking space in front of 310 South Union St.
 
east
 
4520


Union St.
 
One parking space in front of 1037 South Union St.
 
west
 
5891


Vaile Ave.
 
First parking space west of Apperson Way
 
north
 
4520



 



   (H)   One-half hour, between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Sundays
and holidays:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Phillips St.
 
First parking space south of Broadway
 
east
 
5157



 



   (I)   Fifteen minutes, at all times:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Armstrong St.
 
First parking space south of Jefferson St.
 
east
 
4627


Buckeye St.
 
First parking space south of Jackson St.
 
west
 
5980


Buckeye St.
 
First alley intersection south of Markland Ave. south 60 feet
 
west
 
5995


Delphos St.
 
Beginning at the first alley north of Hoffer St. south 40 feet
 
east
 
6708


Hoffer St.
 
First two parking spaces east of the alley between Purdum and Bell Sts.
 
south
 
4969


Main St.
 
First parking space north of the alley between Sycamore St. and Superior St.
 
East
 
6484


Main St.
 
First parking space south of entrance to Municipal Lot B
 
East
 
6484


Superior St.
 
First two parking spaces east of Buckeye St.
 
north
 
6051


Webster St.
 
Beginning 20 feet south of the first alley south of Davis Rd., thence south
65 feet
 
west
 
6105




 



   (J)   Fifteen minutes, between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except
Sundays and holidays:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Buckeye St.
 
First parking space north of Sycamore St.
 
west
 
4520


Buckeye St.
 
First, sixth and thirteenth parking space north of Jackson St.
 
west
 
6033


Main St.
 
Six parking spaces in front of 305 South Main St.
 
east
 
4520


Main St.
 
One parking space in front of 909 South Main St.
 
west
 
4520


Main St.
 
One parking space in front of 924 South Main St.
 
west
 
4520


Main St.
 
One parking space north of Virginia St.
 
west
 
4520


North St.
 
Three parking spaces west of Webster St.
 
north
 
4520


North St.
 
Two parking spaces west of Apperson Way
 
south
 
4520


Park Ave.
 
Two parking spaces in front of 316 West Park Ave.
 
north
 
4520


Superior St.
 
From Washington St. to 510 West Superior St.
 
north
 
4520


Sycamore St.
 
Two parking spaces in front of 316 East Sycamore St.
 
north
 
4520




 



   (K)   By permit only:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Sycamore St.
 
First parking space west of Market St.
 
north
 
4520


Sycamore St.
 
Union St. to Market St.
 
south
 
6534


Union St.
 
Two parking spaces in front of 208 South Union St.
 
east
 
5520


Union St.
 
Three parking spaces in front of 928 South Union St.
 
east
 
4520


Union St.
 
First two parking spaces south of Monroe St.
 
west
 
4520


Market St.
 
Superior St. to a point 158 feet north of Superior St.
 
west
 
5293


Superior St.
 
Market St. to Union St. except from a point on the east curbface on Union St.
thence east to a point l75 feet east of the intersection of Superior St. and
Union St.
 
north
 
5293


Sycamore St.
 
Union St. to l62 feet east of Union St. except from a point on the east
curbface on Union St. thence 26 feet east on Sycamore St.
 
south
 
5293


Sycamore St.
 
1st and 2nd parking space east of Buckeye St.
 
north
 
6414


Union St.
 
Superior St. to Sycamore St. except from the north side of the Superior St.
curbface to a point 110 feet north of the curbface.
 
east
 
5293


Union St.
 
From a point 190 feet north of the north side of the Superior St. curbface to
the intersection of Union and Sycamore St. containing 115 feet more or less.
 
east
 
5293


Union St.
 
First parking space north of Mulberry St.
 
west
 
5340


Union St.
 
Second parking space north of Mulberry St.
 
west
 
6106


Union St.
 
First parking space south of Taylor St.
 
west
 
5340


Union St.
 
First two spaces, beginning 20 feet south from the southeast corner of 209
South Union St.
 
west
 
5652


Walnut
 
7th, 8th, 9th and 10th parking space east of Buckeye St.
 
south
 
6414




 



   (L)   One hour, between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays:



 

STREET
 
DESCRIPTION
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Webster St.
 
First Parking Space South of the Alley at 507 N. Webster St.
 
west
 
6634



 



SCHEDULE II:  NO PARKING GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any of the
following described streets or places:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Albany Dr.
 
Cartwright Dr. to U.S. 31
 
both
 
6048


Albany Dr.
 
Southeast corner of Albany and cartwright Dr. west 45 feet
 
south
 
5650


Albany Dr.
 
200 feet west of the west curbline of Cartwright Drive
 
both
 
5686


Albright Rd.
 
Beginning 150 feet north of Dee Ann Ct. thence south to 150 feet south of
Colter Dr.
 
both
 
6322


Algonquin Tr.
 
Wea Dr. and Canoe St.
 
north
 
6711


Algonquin Tr.
 
Canoe St. and Papoose St.
 
east
 
6711


Algonquin Tr.
 
Papoose St. and Mohawk Dr.
 
south
 
6711


Alto Rd.
 
Cartwright Dr. west to corporate limits
 
both
 
6181


Alto Rd.
 
40 feet west and 160 feet east of the curb line of Southland Ave.
 
north
 
5540


Apperson Way
 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Superior St. north
 
east
 
6069


Apperson Way
 
Beginning 75 feet north of Superior St. thence north to Mulberry St.
 
east
 
6697


Apperson Way
 
Morgan St. and a point 135 feet north of Morgan St.
 
both
 
5644


Apperson Way
 
Markland Ave. and Home Ave.
 
both
 
4521


Apperson Way
 
Morgan St. and a point 30 feet south of southern edge of the driveway into
No. 3 Fire Station
 
east
 
4521


Apperson Way
 
Jackson St. and Markland Ave.
 
west
 
4521


Apperson Way
 
Jefferson St. and Madison St.
 
west
 
6717


Apperson Way
 
Vaile Ave. and 200 feet south
 
east
 
4521


Apperson Way
 
Superior St. and south side of bridge
 
east
 
4521


Apperson Way
 
Mulberry St. and Jefferson St.
 
east
 
4521


Arrow St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. 90 feet
 
south
 
6711


Arrow St.
 
City limits west to U.S. 31
 
both
 
6048


Arrowhead Blvd.
 
Center Rd. and S.R. 26
 
west
 
6711


Bell St.
 
Markland Ave. and Virginia Ave.
 
east
 
4521


Belvidere Dr.
 
Vaile Ave. and Essex Dr.
 
both
 
5022


Berkley Rd.
 
Columbus Boulevard north to city limits
 
both
 
6069


Berkley Rd.
 
Sycamore St. south and south property line of the St. Joseph School of Nursing
 
west
 
4521


Berkley Rd.
 
Deffenbaugh St. and Boulevard St.
 
both
 
4521


Berkley Rd.
 
Boulevard and Cherry Hill Lane
 
east
 
5595


Berkley Rd.
 
Beginning at Jefferson St. 150 feet South
 
east
 
6634


Berkley Rd.
 
Jefferson St. to Sycamore St.
 
west
 
6634


Birch Ct.
 
 
north and  cul-de-sac
 
6711


Boulevard St.
 
Berkley Rd. and Dixon Rd.
 
both
 
6078


Boulevard St.
 
U.S. 31 Bypass and Goyer Rd.
 
both
 
4511


Boulevard St.
 
Home Ave. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
both
 
4521


Boulevard St.
 
Webster St. west and Wabash Ave.
 
north
 
4521


Boulevard St.
 
Webster St. and Home Ave., within ten feet of center line
 
both
 
4521


Brave Ct.
 
 
south and

cul-de-sac
 
6711


Briarwick Dr.
 
North 204 feet and south 147 feet from the center line of Southlea Dr.
 
both
 
5780


Bridgewater Blvd.
 
South property line of 306 Bridgewater Blvd. north to the north property line
of 310 Bridgewater Blvd.
 
both
 
6413


Bridgewater Blvd.
 
Beginning at Center Rd. south 200 feet
 
both
 
6413


Bridle Way
 
Jefferson St. and Bluegrass Trail
 
both
 
6396


Brooke Rd.
 
Beginning at Albright Rd. north 200 feet
 
both
 
6322


Brooks St.
 
Beginning 135 feet south of the end of radius on the southwest corner of
Brooks St. and Carter St. thence southeast 45 feet along the east curb line
of Brooks St.
 
east
 
6243


Buckeye St.
 
Beginning on the north line of the alley located between Walnut St. and
Mulberry St. on the east side of Buckeye St.; thence north 60 feet
 
east
 
5770


Buckeye St.
 
Markland Ave. and Deffenbaugh St.
 
east
 
4521


Buckeye St.
 
Walnut St. and first alley north, four parking spaces reserved for taxicab
use only
 
west
 
4521


Buckskin Ct.
 
 
north and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Buckskin Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
east
 
6711


Buckworth Dr.
 
Outer curb
 
west
 
4521


Calumet St.
 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Jefferson St. and Calumet S., south 50
feet
 
west
 
6112


Calumet St.
 
At the north end of Calumet St. in front of 106 S. Calumet St.
 
north
 
6203


Calumet St.
 
Carter St. north to dead end of median
 
all

sides
 
6362


Canoe St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Algonquin Trail
 
both
 
6711


Carter Ramp
 
Apperson Way north and Apperson Way south
 
west
 
4521


Carter St.
 
Union St. and Carter Ramp
 
south
 
4521


Carter St.
 
Ohio St. and Waugh St.
 
north
 
4521


Carter St.
 
Phillips St. and Kingston Rd.
 
south
 
4521


Cartwright Dr.
 
South of Alto Rd.
 
both
 
6048


Cartwright Dr.
 
200 feet north of the south curbline of Albany Dr.
 
both
 
5686


Center Rd. Entrance
 
Center Rd. and Council Ring Blvd.
 
both
 
6711


Chevy St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius located at the southwest corner of Chevy Ct.
and Cadillac Dr., east, thence west 200 feet
 
south
 
6439


Chippawa Ln.
 
Moccasin Trail and Council Ring Blvd.
 
east
 
6711


Chippawa Ln.
 
Wea Dr. to Moccasin Trail
 
south-east
 
6711


Clinton Dr.
 
South of Albany Dr.
 
both
 
6048


Columbus Blvd.
 
Beginning 750 feet east of Dixon Rd. thence east 990 feet
 
both
 
6203


Congress Dr.
 
Along the curb radius located at the northeast corner of Justice Ln. and
Congress Dr.
 
east
 
6291


Cooper St.
 
Barkdol St. to Morgan St.
 
both
 
6284


Cooper St.
 
Vaile Ave. south to the north property line of Elwood Haynes School
 
east
 
5904


Co. R. 50 East
 
Smith Rd. north to city limits
 
both
 
6216


Council Ct.
 
 
south-east and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Miami Blvd. and Kickapoo Dr. (north)
 
east
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Ring Ct. and Council Ct.
 
east
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Waubesa Way and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
east
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
From Council Ct.
 
north
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Council Ct. and Miami Blvd.
 
north
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Kickapoo Dr. (north) and Center Rd. Entrance
 
north
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
Tomahawk Blvd. and Ring Ct.
 
south
 
6711


Council Ring Blvd.
 
S.R. 26 and Waubesa Way
 
south
 
6711


Courtland Ave.
 
100 feet north and 100 feet south of King St.
 
east
 
6202


Courtland St.
 
Davis Rd. and Spraker St.
 
west
 
4521


Courtland St.
 
Markland Ave. and first alley north
 
east
 
4521


Courtland St.
 
Spraker St. and North St.
 
east
 
4521


Courtland St.
 
Park Ave. and Ricketts S.
 
west
 
4521


Davis Rd.
 
Morgan St. and a point 180 feet north of Morgan St.
 
east
 
5064


Davis Rd.
 
Morgan St. to Rd. 300 North (Smith Rd.) within 10 feet of pavement edge
 
both
 
6711


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Beginning 140 feet west of Indiana St. east to Courtland Ave.
 
north
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Beginning at the northeast corner fo Courtland Ave., east 75 feet
 
north
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Beginning 50 feet east of Buckeye St. west to 200 feet west of Washington St.
 
north
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Washington Street west 100 feet
 
south
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Delphos St. and Jay St.
 
both
 
4521


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Home Ave. west to 50 feet west of the Deffenbaugh St. railroad spur
 
south
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Main St. east to first alley
 
north
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
50 feet east and 50 feet west of Market St.
 
south
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Norfolk and Western Railroad west to 150 feet west of Market St.
 
south
 
5824


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Stadium Dr. to Wabash Ave.
 
north
 
6069


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Wabash Ave. west and Park Dr.
 
north
 
4521


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Washington St. and Armstrong St.
 
south
 
6396


Delphos St.
 
Deffenbaugh St. and Firmin St.
 
both
 
4521


Delphos St.
 
Jefferson St. south 400 feet
 
west
 
6008


Delphos St.
 
State St. and Hoffer St.
 
west
 
4521


Diamond St.
 
Vaile Ave. and 150 feet south
 
both
 
4521


Diamond St.
 
Vaile Ave. south 360 feet
 
west
 
5841


Diamond St.
 
Markland Ave. north 260 feet
 
west
 
5841


Dixon Rd.
 
Wickersham Dr. north - north to city limits
 
both
 
5432


Dixon Rd.
 
Zartman Rd. north to the north city limits
 
both
 
6289


Edgewater Dr.
 
North and south junctions beginning at Washington St. west 100 feet
 
both
 
6470


Elizabeth St.
 
Hoffer St. and Boulevard
 
both
 
5571


Elizabeth St.
 
Sycamore St. and Carter St.
 
west
 
4521


Elm St.
 
Purdum St. and Locke St.
 
south
 
6670


Essex Dr.
 
 
both
 
5022


Firmin St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius on the southwest corner of Firmin St. and La
Fountain St. west 30 feet
 
south
 
5882


Firmin St.
 
Home Ave. and east Delco property line
 
north
 
4521


Fisher St.
 
Main St. and Union St.
 
north
 
4521


Flint Ct.
 
 
south and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Flint Way
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Fire Station
 
both
 
6711


Flint Way
 
City limits west to U.S. 31
 
both
 
6048


Foster St.
 
Main St. and first alley west
 
both
 
4521


Gerhart St.
 
Jay St. and Waugh St.
 
south
 
4521


Golden Gate Way
 
Northeast corner lot 11 on curve
 
south-west
 
6413


Goyer Rd.
 
North city limits and south city limits
 
both
 
4553


Gulf Shore Blvd.
 
Beginning at Park Rd. east 150 feet
 
both
 
6203


Harrison St.
 
Brandon St. and Lindsay St.
 
south
 
4521


Havens St.
 
Washington St. and Webster St.
 
north
 
4521


Havens St.
 
U.S. 31 West to Dead End
 
south
 
6170


Havens St.
 
150 feet west of U.S. 31
 
north
 
6170


Hoffer St.
 
Plate St. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
both
 
4553


Hoffer St.
 
Washington St. and Home Ave.
 
north
 
4521


Hoffer St.
 
Locke St. and Delphos St.
 
north
 
4521


Hoffer St.
 
La Fountain St. and Bell St.
 
south
 
4521


Hoffer St.
 
Washington St. and Home Ave., except the first two parking spaces east of the
alley between Purdum and Bell Streets, which will be 15-minute parking zones
 
south
 
4969


Home Ave.
 
Apperson Way and Home Ave.
 
both
 
4521


Home Ave.
 
Hoffer and Lincoln Rd.
 
both
 
5457


Home Ave.
 
Markland Ave. and two parking spaces south of the National Guard Armory
 
east
 
4521


Home Ave.
 
Markland Ave. and Apperson Way
 
west
 
5712


Home Lawn
 
Washington St. and Buckeye St.
 
south
 
4521


Indiana Ave.
 
Jefferson St. and Sycamore St.
 
west
 
4521


Indiana Ave.
 
Park Ave. and Harrison St.
 
west
 
4521


Indiana Ave.
 
Morgan St. and Butler St.
 
west
 
4521


Jackson St.
 
Phillips St. and Armstrong St.
 
south
 
4521


Jackson St.
 
Beginning 85 feet west of the west curbline of Main St.; thence west 70 feet
 
south
 
5826


Jay St.
 
Madison and Havens
 
east
 
5296


Jay St.
 
Markland Ave. and Deffenbaugh St.
 
west
 
4521


Jefferson St.
 
Webster St. and Korby St.
 
north
 
4521


Jefferson St.
 
Buckeye St. and Washington St.
 
north
 
4521


Jefferson St.
 
Main St. and first alley east
 
north
 
4521


Jefferson St.
 
Norfolk and Western Railroad east and Calumet St.
 
south
 
4521


Jefferson St.
 
Berkley Rd. and Forest Dr.
 
south
 
5064


Jefferson St.
 
Apperson Way and the Conrail Railroad tracks
 
north
 
5202


Jefferson St.
 
Berkley Rd. west to west property line of 1904 West Jefferson
 
both
 
5432


Jefferson St.
 
East property line of 1936 West Jefferson St. west to city limits.
 
north
 
6260


Jefferson St.
 
East property line 2121 West Jefferson St. west to city limits.
 
south
 
6260


Jefferson St.
 
East property line of Colonial Plaza to west property line of Union Bank and
Trust
 
south
 
5432


Jefferson St.
 
East property line of Wallace School west to city limits
 
north
 
5432


Jefferson St.
 
Witherspoon Dr. westward to the west property line of 2405 West Jefferson St.
 
south
 
6284


Judson Rd.
 
Phillips Street west to city limits
 
both
 
6065


Justice Lane
 
Along the curb radius located at the northwest corner of 2133 Justice Ln.
 
east
 
6291


Katanna Dr.
 
Arrow St. to Flint Way
 
both
 
6048


Kentucky St.
 
U.S. 31 and Cartwright Dr.
 
both
 
6110


Kickapoo Dr.
 
North intersection with Council Ring Blvd. and south intersection with
Council Ring Blvd.
 
south and west
 
6711


Kickapoo Dr.
 
South intersection with Council Ring Blvd. and Kickapoo Ct.
 
west
 
6711


Kimberly Dr.
 
Center Rd. to Arrow St.
 
both
 
6048


Kiowa St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Seneca Trail
 
east
 
6711


La Fountain
 
Boulevard south to Washington St.
 
both
 
5457


La Fountain St.
 
Washington St. and U.S. 31 Bypass south
 
both
 
4521


La Fountain St.
 
Beginning 146 feet north of the north curb line of Wheeler St.; thence north
30 feet
 
east
 
5775


La Fountain St.
 
Beginning 313 feet north of the north club line of Wheeler St.; thence north
90 feet
 
east
 
5775


La Fountain St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius on the southwest corner of La Fountain St. and
Firmin St. south 30 feet
 
west
 
5882


Lamplighter Ct.
 
Along the curb radius located at the northwest corner of 2991 Lamplighter Ct.
 
east
 
6259


Lance Dr.
 
Council Ring Blvd. and Wea Dr.
 
west
 
6711


Leeds St.
 
Markland Ave. and Highland Park entrance
 
west
 
5484


Lincoln Rd.
 
Goyer Rd. west to 360 feet west of center line of Webster St.
 
both
 
5457


Lincoln Rd.
 
James Dr. west to Dixon Rd.
 
both
 
5457


Lincoln Rd.
 
La Fountain St. to Webster St.
 
both
 
5457


Lincoln Rd.
 
Markland Ave. north and a point 300 feet
 
both
 
4521


Lincoln Rd.
 
Park Rd. to Dixon Rd.
 
both
 
5457


Lindsay St.
 
At Jackson St. south 80 feet
 
west
 
6017


Locke St.
 
Gerhart St. and Gano St.
 
east
 
4521


Locke St.
 
Gano St. and Morgan St.
 
west
 
4521


Locke St.
 
Firmin St. and Hoffer St.
 
west
 
4521


Long Bow Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
east
 
6711


Mackinaw Way- Golden Gate Way
 
South side of Lot 62 on curve
 
north
 
6413


Madison St.
 
Korby St. and Wildwood Dr.
 
south
 
4521


Madison St.
 
Wildwood Dr. and a point 594 feet west of Korby St.
 
north
 
5203


Main St.
 
Jackson St. and Taylor St.
 
west
 
5826


Main St.
 
250 feet south of Jefferson St. then south 20 feet, being the 1st parking
space south of the south drive approach for 502 North Main St.
 
east
 
5996


Main St.
 
45 feet north of the alley between Sycamore St. and Superior St.
 
west
 
6172


Maple St.
 
Waugh St. and Locke St.
 
south
 
4521


Market St.
 
Monroe St. to first alley intersection north of Sycamore St.
 
west
 
5983


Market St.
 
North St. and Morgan St.
 
west
 
6032


Market St.
 
Taylor St. and a point 155 feet north
 
west
 
5457


Market St.
 
Monroe St. to Sycamore St.
 
west
 
6170


Markland Ave.
 
Leeds St. and a point 60 feet east
 
south
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Park Ave. and Leeds St.
 
south
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Park Ave. and Lindsay St.
 
north
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Washington St. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
both
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Washington St. and a point 215 feet west
 
north
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Courtland Ave. and Brandon St.
 
north
 
4521


Markland Ave.
 
Courtland Ave. west to first alley intersection
 
south
 
6008


Maumee Dr.
 
Mendota Dr. and Monona Dr.
 
east
 
6711


Maumee Dr.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Mendota Dr.
 
north
 
6711


Maumee Dr.
 
Monona Dr. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
north
 
6711


Mayor Dr.
 
Along curb radius located at the northwest corner of 2914 Mayor Dr.
 
east
 
6259


McCann St.
 
Havens St. and Park Ave.
 
east
 
4521


McCann St.
 
North St. and Lordeman St.
 
east
 
4521


McCann St.
 
Park Ave. and Harrison St.
 
west
 
4521


McCann St.
 
Park Ave. and Maple St.
 
west
 
4521


Mendota Ct.
 
 
north and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Mendota Ct.
 
Maumee Dr. and Seneca Trail
 
east south and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Menomonee Ct.
 
 
 
6711


Menomonee Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
west
 
6711


Miami Blvd.
 
Council Ring Blvd. and Wea Dr.
 
east
 
6711


Miami Blvd.
 
Buckskin Dr. and Long Bow Dr.
 
south
 
6711


Miami Blvd.
 
Wea Dr. and Buckskin Dr.
 
south-east
 
6711


Miami Blvd.
 
Long Bow Dr. and Arrowhead Blvd.
 
south-west
 
6711


Miami Ct.
 
 
north-west and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Millbrook Ln.
 
 
east
 
4521


Moccasin Trail
 
Chippawa Ln. and Peace Pipe Dr.
 
south
 
6711


Mohawk Dr.
 
Algonquin Trail and Wea Dr.
 
south
 
6711


Mohr Dr.
 
Goyer Rd. and Stafford Dr.
 
both
 
6423


Monona Dr.
 
Mendota Dr. to Maumee Dr.
 
east
 
6711


Monroe St.
 
Washington St. and Union St.
 
south
 
4521


Monroe St.
 
Washington St. and Webster St.
 
south
 
4521


Monroe St.
 
Main St. and a point 50 feet west of Market St.
 
north
 
4521


Morgan St.
 
Apperson Way and Phillips St.
 
both
 
5433


Morgan St.
 
Apperson Way and Bell St.
 
south
 
5595


Morgan St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the southwest corner; thence west 65 feet
 
south
 
6300


Morgan St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the southeast corner; thence east 70 feet
 
south
 
6300


Morgan St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the northeast corner; thence east 60 feet
 
north
 
6300


Morgan St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the northwest corner; thence west 30 feet
 
north
 
6300


Morrison St.
 
Jefferson St. and Monroe St.
 
east
 
4521


Morrison St.
 
North St. to a point 40 feet north
 
west
 
5514


Morrison St.
 
North St. to a point 80 feet north
 
east
 
5514


Mulberry St.
 
Apperson Way and Union St.
 
north
 
4521


Mulberry St.
 
60 feet west of the north-south alley between Main St. and Union St.
 
north
 
5826


Murden St.
 
Apperson Way and a point 350 feet west
 
north
 
5291


Murden St.
 
Ohio St. and Elizabeth St.
 
north
 
4521


North St.
 
Main St. and Market St.
 
north
 
4553


North St.
 
Buckeye St. west and first alley west of Washington St.
 
north
 
4521


North St.
 
Phillips St. and Courtland Ave.
 
south
 
4521


North St.
 
Washington St. and first alley west of Armstrong St.
 
south
 
4521


North St.
 
Washington St. and Buckeye St.
 
south
 
5682


Objibway Dr.
 
South intersection with Mohawk Dr. to its north intersection with Mohawk Dr.
 
east
 
6711


Ohio St.
 
Jefferson St. and Sycamore St.
 
both
 
4521


Ohio St.
 
Vaile Ave. and a point 80 feet north
 
west
 
4521


Oswego St.
 
 
south
 
6711


Papoose St.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Algonquin Trail
 
both
 
6711


Park Ave.
 
The entrance to Police Radio Tower and Markland Ave.
 
north
 
4521


Park Ave.
 
Washington St. and Armstrong St.
 
south
 
4521


Park Ave.
 
Lindsay St. and Markland Ave.
 
south
 
4521


Park Ave.
 
Markland Ave. and Deffenbaugh St.
 
both
 
4521


Park Rd.
 
300 feet north and 300 feet south from center line of Lincoln Rd.
 
both
 
5457


Peace Pipe Dr.
 
Tepee Dr. and Moccasin Trail
 
west
 
6711


Peace Pipe Dr.
 
Moccasin Trail and Council Ring Blvd.
 
west and south-west
 
6711


Peshewa Ct.
 
(Specifically excludes the south and west sides from a point 30 feet west of
the intersection with Arrowhead Blvd. to the intersection with the west side
of the cul-de-sac at the end of Peshewa Ct.)
 
north and east and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Phillips St.
 
Park Ave. and Kingston Rd.
 
both
 
4521


Phillips St.
 
Kingston Rd. and Jefferson St.
 
east
 
4521


Phillips St.
 
Jefferson St. and Monroe St.
 
east
 
5595


Phillips St.
 
Jefferson St. and North St.
 
west
 
4521


Phillips St.
 
Mulberry St. and Taylor St.
 
west
 
4521


Phillips St.
 
Jackson St. and Morgan St.
 
west
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
Park Ave. and Monroe St.
 
east
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
Park Ave. and Kingston Rd.
 
west
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
Superior St. and Taylor St.
 
west
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
100 feet south and 200 feet north of Havens St.
 
east
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
150 ft. south of Morgan St.
 
east
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
200 feet south and 200 feet north of North St.
 
east
 
6065


Phillips St.
 
Morgan St. and Judson Rd.
 
west
 
4521


Phillips St.
 
A point 250 feet south of Sycamore St. north and a point 50 feet north of
Walnut St.
 
west
 
4521


Pine Ridge Dr.
 
Center Road South 940 feet
 
both
 
6138


Plate St.
 
Markland Ave. and a point l50 feet north
 
west
 
4521


Plate St.
 
Vaile Ave. and Murden St.
 
east
 
4521


Plate St.
 
Vaile Ave. and the first alley south of Markland Ave.
 
east
 
4521


Plate St.
 
Deffenbaugh St. and Boulevard St.
 
both
 
4521


Purdum St.
 
Beginning 150 feet south of Elm St. thence south to Madison St.
 
east
 
6322


Purdum St.
 
Beginning at Elm St. thence south 120 ft.
 
west
 
6322


Quail Run Blvd.
 
Goyer Rd. east 150 ft.
 
both
 
5985


Quail Run Dr.
 
Goyer Dr. east 90 ft.
 
both
 
6216


Rainbow Dr.
 
La Fountain St. west to Easy St.
 
both
 
6202


Rainbow Dr.
 
Easy St. west to Rainbow Cir. (Fontenelle Apartments West Drive)
 
north
 
6202


Rainbow Dr.
 
Rainbow Cir. (Fontenelle Apartments West Drive) west to Webster St.
 
both
 
6202


Rd. 200 West (Dixon St.)
 
295 feet south of Alto Rd.
 
both
 
6711


Ring Ct.
 
 
south-west and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Scout St.
 
Council Ring Blvd. to end
 
west
 
6711


Seneca Trail
 
Mendota Dr. and Kiowa St.
 
south
 
6711


Seneca Trail
 
Kiowa St. and Maumee Dr.
 
west
 
6711


Seventeenth St.
 
Dodge St. to south property line of 1333 S. Seventeenth
 
west
 
5787


Seventeenth St.
 
Hoffer to Wheeler St.
 
both
 
5787


Seventeenth St.
 
Markland Av. and Dodge St.
 
east
 
5787


Seventeenth St.
 
State St. and Markland Ave.
 
east
 
4521


Smith Rd.
 
Washington St. and Co. Rd. 50 East
 
both
 
6216


Smith Rd.
 
Webster St. and Washington St.
 
both
 
6216


Southlea Dr.
 
Beginning at the north property line of 3510 Southlea Dr. to the north curb
line of Redwood Dr.
 
north
 
5755


Southlea Dr.
 
Beginning 140 feet west of the west curb line of Webster St., thence west to
Briarwick Dr.
 
both
 
5780


Southway Blvd.
 
La Fountain St. and U.S. 31 Bypass
 
both
 
4521


Southway Blvd.
 
La Fountain and Southlea Dr.
 
both
 
5701


Southway Blvd.
 
400 feet west and 300 feet east of Goyer
 
both
 
5862


Spraker St.
 
Washington St. and Davis Rd.
 
north
 
4521


S.R. 26 Entrance
 
S.R. 26 and Arrowhead Blvd.
 
both
 
6711


Superior St.
 
Beginning 40 feet east of Buckeye St. to Union St.
 
north
 
6048


Superior St.
 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Apperson way east 270 feet
 
north
 
6069


Superior St.
 
Beginning at the east back of curb line on McCann Street thence east 375 feet
along the north curb line of Superior St.
 
north
 
6297


Superior St.
 
Washington St. and first alley east
 
north
 
4521


Superior St.
 
First alley west of Purdum St. and a point 200 feet west
 
south
 
4521


Superior St.
 
From a point on the east curbface on Union St. thence east to a point 175
feet east to the intersection of Sycamore St.
 
west
 
5296


Superior St.
 
From Main St. west to the north-south alley, approx. 132 feet
 
north
 
5757


Superior St.
 
Washington St. to Buckeye St.
 
north
 
6048


Superior St.
 
Washington St. to Union St.
 
south
 
6048


Sycamore St.
 
Apperson Way and a point 300 feet east of Calumet St.
 
south
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Berkley Rd. and Washington St.
 
south
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Washington St. and a point 150 feet west of Webster St.
 
north
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Phillips St. and a point 232 feet east
 
north
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Phillips St. and a point 258 feet west
 
north
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at a point 52 feet west of the west property line of Main St. and
running thence west a distance of 16 feet
 
south
 
4521


Sycamore St.
 
Forest Dr. and Dixon Rd.
 
north
 
5231


Sycamore St.
 
From a point on the east curbface on Union St. thence 26 feet east.
 
south
 
5296


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Washington St. east 145 feet
 
both
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Market St. west 60 feet
 
north
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Market St. west 50 feet
 
south
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Market St. to Apperson Way
 
south
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Market St. east 78 feet
 
north
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Apperson Way west 155 feet
 
north
 
6604


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at Apperson Way east 160 feet
 
north
 
6604


Taylor St.
 
Union and Market St.
 
north
 
5457


Tepee Dr.
 
Chippawa Ln. and Council Ring Blvd.
 
north
 
6711


Tomahawk Blvd.
 
U.S. 31 and Arrowhead Blvd.
 
south
 
6711


Tomahawk Blvd.
 
Arrowhead Blvd. and Wea Dr.
 
south
 
6711


Tomahawk Blvd.
 
Wea Dr. and Council Ring Blvd.
 
west
 
6711


Treaty Ln.
 
Council Ring Blvd. and Wigwam Dr.
 
east
 
6711


Tribal St.
 
Wea Dr. and Council Ring Blvd.
 
both
 
6711


Union St.
 
From the north side of the Superior St. curbface to a point 110 feet north
 
east
 
5296


Union St.
 
From a point 190 feet north of the north side of the Superior St. curbface to
the intersection of Union and Sycamore Streets, containing 115 feet more or
less
 
 
5296


Union St.
 
Fisher St. and a point 150 feet south
 
east
 
4521


Union St.
 
Norfolk and Western Railroad and Virginia St.
 
west
 
4521


Union St.
 
Taylor St. and a point 155 feet north
 
east
 
5457


Vaile Ave.
 
Locke St. and a point 155 feet north
 
east
 
5457


Vaile Ave.
 
Locke St. to Cooper St.
 
south
 
6364


Vaile Ave.
 
Locke St. and Plate St.
 
south
 
4521


Vaile Ave.
 
Calumet St. and Cooper St.
 
south
 
4521


Vaile Ave.
 
Ohio St. and a point 75 feet east
 
north
 
4521


Vaile Ave.
 
Ohio St. and a point 80 feet west
 
north
 
4521


Vaile Ave.
 
Beginning at a point 50 feet east of Bell St., thence west to Appersonway
 
south
 
5942


Virginia Ave.
 
Beginning at 17th St. west to first alley intersection
 
both
 
6078


Virginia Ave.
 
Beginning at Plate St. east to first alley intersection
 
both
 
6078


Virginia St.
 
Leeds St. and Courtland Ave.
 
north
 
4521


Virginia St.
 
Union St. and first alley west of Main St.
 
north
 
4521


Virginia St.
 
Buckeye St. and Armstrong St.
 
north
 
4521


Virginia St.
 
Union St. and Buckeye St.
 
south
 
4521


Virginia St.
 
Apperson Way and a point 30 feet east of Bell St.
 
north
 
4521


Wabash St.
 
Park Ave. and Harrison St.
 
west
 
4521


Wabash St.
 
Deffenbaugh St. and Virginia St.
 
west
 
4521


Walnut St.
 
Washington St. and Phillips St.
 
north
 
4521


Walnut St.
 
Philips St. and second driveway west
 
south
 
5483


Walnut St.
 
80 feet east and 80 feet west of intersection with Indiana St.
 
south
 
5514


Walnut St.
 
Market St. and a point 40 feet west of the west curb line of Market St.
 
both
 
5564


Walnut St.
 
80 feet east and 80 feet west of intersection with McCann St.
 
south
 
5950


Walnut St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the northwest corner; thence west 45 feet
 
north
 
6300


Walnut St.
 
Beginning at the end of radius at the southwest corner; thence west 50 feet
 
south
 
6300


Walnut St.
 
Beginning at Market St. east 50 feet
 
both
 
6604


Wampum Dr.
 
Treaty Ln. and Wigwam Dr.
 
north and west
 
6711


Washington St.
 
City limits north and La Fountain St. south
 
both
 
4521


Waubesa Ct.
 
 
south-west and cul-de-sac
 
6711


Waubesa Way
 
North intersection with Council Ring Blvd. and Waubesa Ct.
 
north-east
 
6711


Waubesa Way
 
Waubesa Ct. to its south intersection with Council Ring Blvd.
 
south- south-east
 
6711


Waugh St.
 
Carter St. and Superior St.
 
east
 
4521


Waugh St.
 
Markland Ave. south to first alley intersection
 
west
 
6278


Wea Dr.
 
Miami Blvd. and Tomahawk Blvd.
 
east
 
6711


Wea Dr.
 
Mohawk Dr. to Miami Blvd.
 
west
 
6711


Webster St.
 
North St. to north curb of Preble St. (348.5 feet)
 
east
 
5754


Webster St.
 
Kirk St. (south right-of-way) north to Davis Rd. (810 feet)
 
east
 
5754


Webster St.
 
Kirk St. (north right-of-way) to a point 36 feet north
 
west
 
5754


Webster St.
 
James Dr. to north line of Vinton Woods Subdivision
 
both
 
5457


Webster St.
 
Park Ave. and Boulevard St.
 
west
 
4521


Webster St.
 
North St. and a point 130 feet north
 
west
 
4521


Webster St.
 
Jefferson St. and Madison St.
 
east
 
5267


Webster St.
 
Jefferson St. and Sycamore St.
 
east
 
4521


Webster St.
 
Park Ave. and Boulevard St.
 
west
 
4521


Webster St.
 
Southway Blvd. south to city limits
 
both
 
5457


Webster St.
 
Alto Rd. and Webster Ct.
 
both
 
6181


Webster St.
 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Webster St. and Fischer St. south 100
feet
 
east
 
6192


Weston Dr.
 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Zartman Rd. and Weston Dr. south 50 feet.
 
east
 
6285


Wheeler St.
 
Home Ave. and Locke St.
 
north
 
4521


Wickersham Dr. North
 
Wickersham Dr. east and Dixon Rd.
 
north
 
6315


Wigwam Ct.
 
 
west and cul-de- sac
 
6711


Wigwam Dr.
 
Lance Dr. to Council Ring Blvd.
 
south
 
6711


Wingra Ct.
 
 
north and cul-de- sac
 
6711


Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
Jefferson St. and Wynterpointe Dr.
 
both
 
5952


Wynterbrooke Dr.
 
100 feet north of Wynterpointe Dr.
 
west
 
6220




 



   (B)  Ord. 5433 will become effective when the reconstruction of Morgan
Street (Street Improvement Project M-K450) is complete and appropriate
signing of Morgan Street is completed.



('75 Code, § 15-112)



SCHEDULE III:  NO PARKING - SPECIFIED TIMES.



    No person shall park on the following streets at the time indicated:



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
TIME
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Cooper St.
 
Beginning on curb line of Markland Ave. north 340 feet
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
 
west
 
5775


Courtland Ave.
 
Park Ave. and Wildcat Creek
 
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. Tuesdays
 
west
 
4996


Frances Lane
 
Rainbow Dr. and the south property line of 231 Rainbow Dr.
 
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays
 
west
 
6270


Firmin St.
 
Beginning 30 feet west of the end of radius on the southwest corner of Firmin
St. and La Fountain St. west 40 feet
 
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays
 
south
 
5883


Havens St.
 
Beginning at Korby St. west 105 feet
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
 
both
 
5906


Jefferson St.
 
First alley east of Main St. and a point 60 feet east
 
3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
north
 
4521


La Fountain  St.
 
Beginning 30 feet south of the end of radius on the southwest corner of La
Fountain St. and Firmin St. south 40 feet
 
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays
 
west
 
5883


Locke St.
 
Elm St. and Madison St.
 
11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
 
west
 
5292


Madison St.
 
Korby and west property line of Lafayette Park School
 
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
north
 
4521


Market St.
 
 
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., except Saturdays and Sundays
 
both
 
4672


Markland Ave.
 
Webster St. and Courtland St.
 
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
north
 
4521


Superior St.
 
Apperson Way and Market St.
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays
 
north
 
4521


Superior St.
 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Union St. and Superior St. east 40 feet
(first and second parking spaces)
 
7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except Saturday, Sunday and holidays
 
south
 
6047


1138 South Courtland St.
 
 
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
 
 
4521




 



('75 Code, § 15-114)  (Ord. 5484, passed 11-18-85; Am. Ord. 5685, passed
4-24-89; Am. Ord. 5712, passed 11-13-89; Am. Ord. 5906, passed 2-14-94; Am.
Ord. 6379, passed 6-13-05)



SCHEDULE IV:  LOADING ZONES.



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.




Armstrong St.
 
Beginning at a point 30 feet south of North St.; thence running south 260 feet
 
east
 
5564


Bell St.
 
Beginning north of the north right-of-way line of the alley between Jefferson
st. and Monroe St. north 60 feet
 
east
 
6395


Broadway St.
 
Beginning at a point 130 feet east of Union St.; thence running east 20 feet
 
south
 
5564


Buckeye St.
 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Buckeye St. and Superior St. north 20
ft. (1st parking space)
 
east
 
6049


Buckeye St.
 
Beginning at a point 82 feet north of Taylor St.; thence running north 20 feet
 
west
 
5588


Buckeye St.
 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Buckeye St. and Sycamore St.; thence
running south 20 feet
 
west
 
6084; 6198


Buckeye St.
 
Sixth parking space south of Walnut st.
 
west
 
6505


Cooper St.
 
Beginning at a point 154 feet north of Markland Ave.; thence running north a
distance of 336 feet
 
east
 
5510


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Beginning at a point 184 feet east of Washington St.; thence running east a
distance of 50 feet
 
south
 
5510


Deffenbaugh St.
 
Washington St. to Buckeye St.
 
south
 
6068


Delphos St.
 
Beginning at the first alley north of Hoffer St. south 20 feet
 
east
 
6708


Havens St.
 
Beginning at a point 100 feet east of McCann St.; thence running east to the
intersection of Wabash St.
 
south
 
5510


Jackson St.
 
Second parking space east of Washington St.
 
south
 
6031


Jay St.
 
Beginning at a point 135 feet south of the southwest corner of Harrison St.
and Jay St.; thence running south a distance of 140 feet
 
west
 
5510


Main St.
 
Beginning at first parking space on the west side of Main St. just south of
the alley between Walnut St. and Mulberry St. Described further as metered
parking space #471 located at 209 North Main St.
 
west
 
5936


Main St.
 
Beginning at the southwest corner of Main St. and Mulberry St. south 20 ft.
 
west
 
6074


Main St.
 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Main St. and Harrison St. north 20 feet
 
east
 
6186


Main St.
 
2nd parking space north of the alley between Sycamore St. and Walnut St.
 
east
 
6624


Mulberry St.
 
Beginning at a point 203 feet east of Armstrong St.; thence running east a
distance of 30 feet
 
north
 
5510


Mulberry St.
 
Beginning at a point 112 feet west of the southwest corner of Mulberry St.
and Main St.; thence west 20 feet
 
south
 
5692


Mulberry St.
 
Beginning at the west side of the first alley west of Washington St., thence
west 20 feet
 
south
 
6534


North Apperson Way
 
Beginning at a point 65 feet south of Richmond St.; thence running south a
distance of 20 feet
 
west
 
5536


Purdum St.
 
Beginning at a point 50 feet south of the southeast corner of Purdum St. and
Harrison St.; thence running a distance of 60 feet
 
east
 
5510


Superior St.
 
Beginning at a point 50 feet west of Apperson Way; thence running west a
distance of 280 feet
 
south
 
5510


Sycamore St.
 
Beginning at the northeast corner of Sycamore St. and Apperson Way; thence
running east a distance of 125 feet
 
north
 
5510


Union St.
 
Beginning at a point 14 feet north of Walnut St.; thence running north a
distance of 50 feet
 
east
 
5510


Union St.
 
Beginning at the alley between Walnut St. and Mulberry St. south 60 feet
(three spaces)
 
east
 
5806


Walnut St.
 
Beginning at the southeast corner of Main and Walnut; thence running east a
distance of 124 feet
 
south
 
5510


Walnut St.
 
Beginning at a point 20 feet east of east curbline of Union St.; thence
running east a distance of 20 feet (one parking space)
 
south
 
5546


Webster St.
 
Beginning at a point 120 feet south of the southwest corner of Mulberry and
Webster; thence running south 20 feet
 
west
 
5510


Webster St.
 
Beginning 30 feet south of Deffenbaugh St. curbline (one space)
 
east
 
5523




 



(Ord. 5510, passed 12-2-85; Am. Ord. 5523, passed 2-24-86; Am. Ord. 5536,
passed 5-19-86; Am. Ord. 5546, passed 8-25-86; Am. Ord. 5806, passed
11-18-91; Am. Ord. 5936, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 6379, passed 6-13-05; Am.
Ord. 6395, passed 9-26-05; Am. Ord. 6708, passed 12-10-12)



SCHEDULE V:  OFF-STREET PARKING



   (A)   Municipal parking lots.



      (1)   Lot A.



         (a)   Located on the northwest corner of Buckeye and
Superior Streets.



         (b)   Sixteen parking stalls shall be established as
two-hour metered parking stalls.  The remaining 54 parking stalls shall be
established as non-metered unlimited free parking stalls.



      (2)   Lot B.



         (a)   Located between Union and Main Streets at Markland
Avenue.



         (b)   All parking stalls shall be established as
non-metered unlimited free parking stalls.



      (3)   Lot C.



         (a)   Located at the northeast corner of Mulberry and
Washington Streets.



         (b)   All parking stalls shall be established as
non-metered unlimited free parking stalls.



      (4)   Lot D.



         (a)   Located at the northwest corner of Union and
Superior Streets.



         (b)   All parking stalls shall be established as
non-metered unlimited free parking stalls.



      (5)   Lot G.



         (a)   Located on the northwest corner of Union and
Sycamore Streets.



         (b)   Twenty-four parking stalls shall be established as
two-hour metered parking stalls.  The remaining 84 parking stalls shall be
established as non-metered unlimited free parking stalls.



      (6)   Lot H.



         (a)   Located at the southwest corner of Union and
Sycamore Streets.



         (b)   All parking stalls shall be established as "City
Hall Visitors Parking Only."



         (c)   All parking stalls shall be limited to two hours
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.



   (B)   On those off-street lots for which division (A) above provides
for both metered and non-metered parking, the City Traffic Commission shall
have responsibility for designating and metering the parking stalls on those
lots to be set aside as two-hour metered parking.



(Ord. 5785, passed 4-8-91; Am. Ord. 6113, passed 4-12-99)



SCHEDULE VI:  NO PARKING - BIKE LANE.



 

STREET
 
BETWEEN
 
SIDE
 
ORD. NO.


Webster St.
 
Alto Rd. and Center Rd.
 
both
 
6207


Webster St.
 
Beginning 162 feet north of Redwood Dr., thence south to Alto Rd.
 
east
 
6664



 



(Ord. 6207, passed 11-26-01; Am. Ord. 6664, passed 2-27-12)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



         90.   ANIMALS



         91.   RESERVED



         92.   CEMETERIES



         93.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



         94.   FIRE PREVENTION



         95.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



         96.   PARKS AND RECREATION



         97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         98.   RECYCLING PROGRAM



         99.   NUISANCES



         100.   BURNING



         101.   GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS TELEVISION STATION



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Prohibitions



   90.03   Restraint by tethering



   90.04   Authority of authorized agents



   90.05   Apprehension and impounding of animals



   90.06   Notice to owner



   90.07   Redemption and disposition of impounded animals



   90.08   Disposition of monies collected



 



   90.98   Enforcement



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Health and sanitation, see § 95.58



   Shod animals in public parks, see § 96.30



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate, license, and prohibit animals, see IC
36-8-2-6



   Prohibition against livestock or poultry running at large, see IC
15-17-18-8



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ANIMAL.” Any live, non-human vertebrate creature, domestic or wild.



   “ANIMAL SHELTER.” Any facility operated by the Department of Animal
Services or a municipal agency, or its authorized agents, for the purpose of
impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or
state law.



   “AT LARGE.”  Elsewhere than on the owner’s premises, and:



      (1)   Not restrained by a leash; or



      (2)   Not under the immediate and complete control of a person
capable of controlling such animal.



   “AUTHORIZED AGENT.” Law enforcement officer or authorized employees
of the Department of Animal Services.



   “CAT.” All domestic members of the feline family of animals.



   “DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL SERVICES.” The animal care and control
department of the Kokomo Humane Society.



   “DOG.”  All domestic members of the canine family of animals.



   “HARBOR.” The actions of any person who permits any animal to
habitually remain or lodge or to be fed within his or her home, store,
enclosure, yard, or place of business, or any premises on which such person
resides or controls.  An animal shall be presumed harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three days.



   “HEALTH DEPARTMENT.” Howard County Health Department.



   “LESS SEVERE INJURY.” Any injury caused that results in a minor
puncture, piercing or breaking of the skin made with teeth, fangs or claws of
any animal that does not require extensive medical treatment.



   “OWNER.” Any person or persons owning or having the care, custody,
or control of any animal.



   “PERSON.” Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation.



   “POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.” Any of the following:



      (1)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, engages in any behavior
that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when
the person and the dog are off the dog owner’s property.



      (2)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a
less severe injury as defined above.



      (3)   Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously
bitten, inflicted injury or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic
animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog.



      (4)   Chases or menaces a person.



      (5)   Runs at large.



   “PUBLIC NUISANCE.”  Any animal or animals that:



      (1)   Attack passers-by or passing vehicles.



      (2)   Damage public or private property.



      (3)   Are not confined while in estrus (“heat”).



      (4)   Bark, whine, or howl in an excessive or continuous
fashion, unreasonable under the circumstances, as to violate the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood.



   “RABIES VACCINATION.”  All dogs, cats and ferrets three months of
age and older must be vaccinated against rabies.



   “RESTRAINT.”  The securing of an animal by leash or confining it
within the real property limits by its owner.



   “STRAY.” Any animal that does not appear, upon reasonable inquiry,
to have an owner.



   “VICIOUS DOG.” Any dog that according to the records of the
Department of Animal Services:



      (1)   Has aggressively bitten, attacked, or endangered or has
inflicted severe injury or death on a human being on public or private
property; or



      (2)   Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting.



      (3)   Has been listed as a potentially dangerous dog by the
Department of Animal Services, and exhibits behavior warranting listing as a
vicious dog.



   “WILD ANIMALS.”  Any non-domesticated animal, with the exception
of small non-poisonous aquatic or amphibious animals and small caged birds.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14)



§ 90.02  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   The following prohibitions shall apply, and be enforceable in,
the City of Kokomo, Indiana.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow, suffer, or permit
an animal to be at large within the city; except that it shall be permissible
during hunting season prescribed by state law for hunting dogs to be allowed
to hunt with their owners on private property when permission has been
obtained from the owner of the real estate and to hunt on state lands where
allowed.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, molest, or
interfere with any authorized official in the performance of any duty
described in this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to permit the
animal to be a public nuisance within the city.  Furthermore, it shall be
unlawful for any owner of any animal to recklessly or carelessly fail to
exercise care and control over the animal in such a way that the animal is a
public nuisance.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor a
vicious dog or wild animal within the city; provided, that this division (E)
shall not apply to animals under the control of a law enforcement or military
agency. For the purpose of this chapter, an animal may be declared dangerous
by the Department of Animal Services.



   (F)   Confinement of dangerous animals. No person owning, harboring
or having the care of a dangerous animal shall permit such animal to go
unconfined on the premises of such person. A dangerous animal is
“UNCONFINED” as the term is used in this division (F) if such animal is
not:



      (1)   Confined indoors without access to exterior entrances
and windows; or



      (2)   (a)   Confined outdoors in an enclosed and locked pen
or structure upon the premises of the person described above; provided the
existence of such pen or structure is permitted by zoning regulations.
Maintenance of a dangerous animal is not permitted in areas where such
structures or pens are not authorized by zoning regulations. If permitted,
such pen or structure shall be:



 

SIZE OF ANIMAL
 

SQUARE FEET OF PEN



Extra large (over 26 inches at withers or over 75 lbs.)
 

48



Large (over 20 inches and up to 26 inches at withers or not over 75 lbs.)
 

40



Medium (over 12 inches and up to 20 inches at withers or not over 50 lbs.)
 

32



Small (12 inches or less at withers or not over 20 lbs.)
 

24




 



         (b)   The pen must be constructed with chain link
fencing for all four sides and the top. If the pen or structure has no bottom
secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded in the ground no less than
one foot, or have a concrete pad for the bottom. The pen or structure shall
be set back at least ten feet from the nearest property line.



      (3)   No potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered
or otherwise tied to an inanimate object, such as a tree or post of a
building that is outside its proper enclosure while unattended by the owner
or competent custodian.



      (4)   The owner of a potentially dangerous animal shall
consent to periodic inspections by the Department of Animal Services.



      (5)   The owner of any potentially dangerous dog shall have
such dog permanently identified by means of a microchip at the owner’s
expense, and the owner of any potentially dangerous dog shall provide the
Department of Animal Services with a color photograph of the dog taken within
the last 12 months, suitable for use in identifying the dog.



      (6)   Any potentially dangerous dog, which has escaped from
its fenced enclosure, may be impounded by the Department of Animal Services,
whether or not it has been returned to its enclosure at the time of
impoundment. If impoundment pursuant to this division (F)(6) occurs, the
animal shall not be returned to a person responsible for it.



      (7)   The owner of a potentially dangerous dog must have
posted on the premises a clearly visible warning sign, reading in letters not
less than two inches high “Beware of Dog” at each entry point that
informs both children and adults of the presence of a potentially dangerous
dog.



      (8)   A potentially dangerous dog must not be outside a proper
enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and securely restrained by a leash of not
more than six feet in length and under the control of the owner or competent
custodian 18 years of age or older. The muzzle must be made in a manner that
will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration,
but will prevent it from biting any human or animal. The owner may exercise
the dog outside of its primary enclosure without a muzzle or leash if the dog
remains on the owner’s property with the secured perimeter fence and only
if the dog remains within the owner’s sight and control at all times and
only members of the owner’s immediate household or persons 18 years of age
or older are allowed within the perimeter fence while the dog is present.
When being transported, such dog must be safely and securely restrained
within the vehicle.



      (9)   A potentially dangerous dog must be spayed or neutered
within 30 days of determination that the dog is potentially dangerous.



      (10)   Any potentially dangerous dog found at large or not
confined as required by this section may be captured and impounded, and it
shall be returned to its owner only if the enforcement authority in its
discretion determines that such return will not result in further or ongoing
violations of this section. If such determination cannot be made or if the
dog’s actions have caused severe injury, the enforcement officer shall
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order to dispose of the
animal.



   (G)   It is unlawful to deprive any animal of necessary food, drink,
or shelter or expose to the elements of the weather and to the extremes of
heat or cold, or refuse to obtain veterinary care for illness, injury,
disease or infirmity, or willingly instigate, engage in, or in any way
further an act of cruelty to any animal, or any act to produce such cruelty.
All animals, where kept inside, or in a pen, tied, fastened, hitched, leashed
or enclosed by a fence shall be kept in a sanitary manner.



   (H)   A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a
civil fine of not less than the amount designated in § 90.99. Additionally,
upon the third violation of this section, the animal shall be seized and
impounded. If such violation results in the dog causing serious injury to any
person, the court may, upon request after a hearing, order the animal
forfeited and/or destroyed.



   (I)   Any potentially dangerous dog found at large or not confined
as required by this chapter may be captured, impounded and it shall be
returned to its owner only if the enforcement authority in its discretion
determines that such return will not result in further or ongoing violations
of this chapter. If such determination cannot be made or if the dog’s
actions have caused serious injury the enforcement officer shall apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an order to dispose of the animal.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  RESTRAINT BY TETHERING.



   Restraint by tethering may be used provided the following conditions
are met:



   (A)   The tether shall not weigh more than one-eighth of the
animal’s body weight. When a violation of this provision occurs, the
Department of Animal Services is authorized to take reasonable measures to
remove the animal from the tether and take the tether and animal to the
shelter;



   (B)   The tether shall be at least ten feet in length with operative
swivels on both ends;



   (C)   The tether shall be attached to a properly fitted collar or
harness worn by the animal; the tether may not be attached to a slip or prong
collar; and



   (D)   The animal, while restrained by tether, is able to access
proper shelter with sufficient floor, at least three walls, and roof to
protect the animal from the weather, extreme temperatures and direct
sunlight; and is able to access sufficient potable water and sufficient
wholesome food.



   (E)   In the interest of public safety, animal control officers are
authorized to remove aggressive and vicious dogs from tethers and impound
such animals where the animal is accessible by children or the public without
a secured fence or enclosure.



   (F)   A violation of this section shall subject the violator to a 
civil fine of not less than the amount designated in § 90.99.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14)



§ 90.04  AUTHORITY OF AUTHORIZED AGENTS.



   Any authorized agent of the city is given authority to:



   (A)   Kill any vicious or potentially dangerous dog found at large
within the city which cannot be safely captured and impounded by ordinary
means; except that every reasonable effort shall be made to avoid killing an
animal which has bitten or is suspected of having bitten a person or which
appears to have rabies. If the killing of the animal cannot reasonably be
avoided, the authorized agent shall attempt to kill the animal in such a
manner so as to preserve the head thereof intact.



   (B)   Enter upon the private and public land in the city when in
pursuit of any animal which the agent has reasonable cause to believe is in
violation of this chapter, except that such agent is not authorized to enter
any building without the consent of the occupant.



   (C)   Issue citations for any alleged violation of this chapter even
if not personally observed by the agent.



   (D)   Do all things necessary to effectuate the enforcement of this
chapter.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS.



   It is the duty of persons and agencies so authorized by the city to
apprehend and impound:



   (A)   Any dog or cat at large, or any dog or cat deemed a public
nuisance.



   (B)   Any animal which has bitten or is suspected of having bitten a
person or which appears to have rabies.



   (C)   Any vicious dog.



   (D)   Any potentially dangerous dog outside of its secure structure.



   (E)   Any animal at large without proper rabies tag to confirm
updated vaccination.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14)



§ 90.06  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   Not later than three days after impounding of a dog which was wearing
an identification at the time of its impoundment, the Department of Animal
Services shall notify the owner advising of the impounding of the dog. If the
owner fails to redeem the dog within five days after notice by mail, phone or
electronic mail, the owner loses ownership of the dog and it may be destroyed
or possession given to the Department of Animal Services.  This notice
provision shall apply to any animal impounded under this chapter.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12)



§ 90.07  REDEMPTION AND DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any healthy dog or cat apprehended or impounded may be
redeemed by the owner or other persons as authorized in § 90.06 within five
days of such apprehension, upon showing that the dog or cat has current
rabies vaccination tag or certificate, and the payment of the following fees:



      (1)   If the dog or cat has been apprehended by an agent of
the city, the sum or fee set forth annually by the Department of Animal
Services; and



      (2)   A reasonable fee for room and board for each day, or
fraction thereof, during which the dog or cat was impounded.



      (3)   After five days, the dog or cat may be destroyed or
possession given to the Department of Animal Services.



      (4)   Divisions (A)(1), (2), and (3) above shall apply to any
animal impounded under this chapter.



   (B)   Any animal impounded, for any reason, which appears to any
duly licensed veterinarian to have any infectious or contagious disease,
other than rabies, may be destroyed forthwith.



   (C)   Any person bitten by an animal must report the incident to the
Howard County Health Department and the Department of Animal Services.



   (D)   Any dog or cat apprehended and impounded for having bitten a
person, being suspected of having bitten a person, or appearing to have
rabies, shall be assessed by the Department of Animal Services to determine
whether the bite constitutes the dog or cat being vicious or potentially
dangerous. If so assessed, the provisions of this chapter related to those
dogs or cats shall supersede this provision. Otherwise, the dog or cat shall
be kept under observation at the Department of Animal Services for a minimum
of ten days unless such dog or cat shall sooner die. At the expiration of the
ten-day period, the animal may be redeemed by the owner or other person as
provided in § 90.06, upon showing that the animal has a rabies vaccination
tag and by payment of the fees as set forth in division (A) hereinabove;
provided, however, home quarantine of an owned animal may be allowed by the
Howard County Health Department.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14)



§ 90.08  DISPOSITION OF MONIES COLLECTED.



   All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the City
Controller and deposited in the city’s general fund. Payment shall be to
the appropriate office in City Hall.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12)



§ 90.98  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Department of Animal Services shall be primarily responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter. Additional enforcement shall be through
proceedings brought by the Kokomo City Attorney pursuant to IC 36-1-6-3 and
the related Indiana statutes referred to therein.



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Fine Schedule: Persons found to have violated this chapter shall pay a
fine in the amount listed below:



 

REFERENCE
 
FIRST OFFENSE
 
SECOND OFFENSE
 
THIRD OFFENSE




Prohibitions (§ 90.02)


   Animal at large
 
$250
 
$400
 
$500


   Interference with authorized official’s duties
 
$500
 
$1,000
 
$1,500


   Public nuisance
 
$250
 
$400
 
$500


   Ownership of vicious dog or wild animal
 
$500
 
$1,000
 
$1,500


   Violation of potentially dangerous dog
 
$350
 
$500
 
$750


   Violation of food, drink and shelter
 
$350
 
$500
 
$750


Tethering (§ 90.03)


   Violation of tethering requirements
 
$250
 
$500
 
$750




 



(Ord. 6656, passed 4-23-12; Am. Ord. 6769, As Amended, passed 9-8-14)



CHAPTER 91:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 92:  CEMETERIES



Section



   92.01   Board of Cemetery Trustees



§ 92.01  BOARD OF CEMETERY TRUSTEES.



   (A)   Composition.  The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall consist of
three members.  ('75 Code, § 6-17)



   (B)   Appointment of members.  The members of the Board of Cemetery
Trustees shall be appointed by the Mayor.  ('75 Code, § 6-18)



   (C)   Qualifications of members.  The members of the Board of
Cemetery Trustees shall be appointed from the lot owners of such cemetery who
are residents of the county.  ('75 Code, § 6-19)



   (D)   Terms of members.  The terms of office of the members of the
Board of Cemetery Trustees shall be for three years.  ('75 Code, § 6-20)



   (E)   Filling vacancies.  If any vacancy should occur on the Board
of Cemetery Trustees by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the
unexpired term shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor. ('75 Code, §
6-21)



   (F)   Compensation of members.  The members of the Board of
Cemetery Trustees shall serve without compensation.  ('75 Code, § 6-22)



   (G)   Election of president and secretary.  The members of the
Board of Cemetery Trustees shall elect a president and a secretary. ('75
Code, § 6-23)



   (H)   Time of meetings.  The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall hold
meetings at such times as they shall prescribe.  ('75 Code, § 6-24)



   (I)   Record of proceedings required.  The Board of Cemetery
Trustees shall keep a record of all of its proceedings.  ('75 Code, § 6-25)



   (J)   Powers and duties.  The Board of Cemetery Trustees shall have
charge,  control, and management of all city cemeteries and shall have such
other powers and duties as may be provided by state law.  ('75 Code, § 6-26)



Statutory reference:



   Board to have charge of cemeteries, see IC 23-14-65-15



   Power of city to transfer control and management to Board of Cemetery
Trustees, see IC 23-14-65-10



   Power of Board, see IC 23-14-65-15



CHAPTER 93:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Authority of Mayor to proclaim civil emergency



   93.03   Power of Mayor to declare curfew



   93.04   Other powers of Mayor



   93.05   Length of curfew or other orders of Mayor



   93.06   Notice of proclamation



   93.07   Obedience to orders



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Powers and duties of Mayor, see § 31.13



Statutory reference:



   Civil Defense Act of l951, see IC 10-4-1-1 et seq.



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CIVIL EMERGENCY."  A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the
use of actual force or violence, or any threat to use force if accompanied by
immediate power to execute it by three or more persons acting together
without authority of law.



   "CURFEW."  A prohibition against any person walking, running,
loitering, standing, or motoring on any alley, street, highway, sidewalk,
public property, or vacant premises except officers or persons designated as
not subject to such curfew.



('75 Code, § 7-16)  (Ord. 399l, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.02  AUTHORITY OF MAYOR TO PROCLAIM CIVIL EMERGENCY.



   When, in the judgment of the Mayor, or acting Mayor, a civil emergency
is deemed to exist, he shall forthwith proclaim, in writing, its existence.



('75 Code, § 7-17)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.03  POWER OF MAYOR TO DECLARE CURFEW.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, or acting Mayor,
he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas deemed
advisable and applicable during such hours of the day or night as deemed
necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.



('75 Code, § 7-18)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.04  OTHER POWERS OF MAYOR.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor, or acting Mayor,
may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare:



   (A)   Order the closing of all liquor stores.



   (B)   Order the closing of all beer taverns.



   (C)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof
wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor or beer is permitted.



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.



   (E)   Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution, or giving
away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.



   (F)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other
establishments, the chief activity of which is to the sale, distribution, or
dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products.



   (G)   Order the discontinuance of the sale, distribution, and
dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever.



   (H)   Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions
thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing,
or giving away of firearms or ammunition.



   (I)   Issue such other orders as are eminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



('75 Code, § 7-19)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.05  LENGTH OF CURFEW OR OTHER ORDERS OF MAYOR.



   The curfew or the orders authorized in § 93.03 shall remain in effect
until rescinded by the Mayor, or acting Mayor, but for a period not to exceed
72 hours from the time they became effective unless approved by the Common
Council.



('75 Code, § 7-20)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.06  NOTICE OF PROCLAMATION.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor or acting Mayor
shall forthwith provide for notice thereof to be given to members of the
Common Council, and to the public by the best available means, provided, that
the proclamation shall still be effective immediately.



('75 Code, § 7-21)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)



§ 93.07  OBEDIENCE TO ORDERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any curfew
proclaimed by the Mayor or acting Mayor or any other order promulgated
pursuant to this chapter.



('75 Code, § 7-22)  (Ord. 3991, passed 6-27-69)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $1,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 94:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   94.01   Adoption of Indiana Fire Code



   94.02   Severability



   94.03   Applicability



   94.04   Conflicting provisions



   94.05   Incorporation of Indiana Administrative Code



   94.06   Definitions



   94.07   Fire prevention division



   94.08   Enforcement authority



   94.09   Legal assistance



   94.10   Law enforcement assistance



   94.11   Determination of violation



   94.12   Notice of violation



   94.13   Imminent danger



   94.14   Duty to correct violations



   94.15   Appeal from orders



   94.16   Variances



   94.17   Liability for damage



   94.18   Right to enter buildings



   94.19   Inspections



   94.20   Records and reports



   94.21   Authority at fires and emergencies



   94.22   Emergency lines and limits



   94.23   Fire Department access



   94.24   Fire Department access roads for Class 1 and Class 2
structures



   94.25   Addressing requirements



   94.26   Use and placement of key boxes



   94.27   Required water supply for fire protection



   94.28   Fire hydrants



   94.29   Hydrant locations



   94.30   Hydrant specifications



   94.31   Testing of private hydrants



   94.32   Dead end water mains



   94.33   New and replacement hydrants



   94.34   Hydrant clearance



   94.35   Water supply



   94.36   Access roads for Class 1 and Class 2 structures



Fire Protection Systems



   94.50   Construction documents



   94.51   Fire Department connections



   94.52   Security caps



   94.53   Supervision of alarm systems



   94.54   Fire alarm control panel



   94.55   Silence instructions



   94.56   Marking of fire protection equipment, fire hydrants, and
access roads



   94.57   Requirements for commercial kitchen exhaust equipment and
fire protection equipment



   94.58   Fire watch



   94.59   Fire lane



   94.60   Fire protection in motor vehicle sale and storage lots and
portable storage lots



   94.61   Liability for combustible material



   94.62   Pyrotechnics and indoor fireworks prohibited



   94.63   Hazardous materials information



   94.64   Material safety data sheets (MSDS)



   94.65   Underground storage tanks; notification



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see § 30.18(C)



   Burning, see Ch. 100



   Buildings and building regulations, see Ch. 150



   Fires in public parks, see § 96.15



   Housing, see Ch. 152



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to establish and operate a firefighting and prevention
system, see IC 36-8-2-3



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  ADOPTION OF INDIANA FIRE CODE.



   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of the city and will be referred
to herein as the "Fire Code". This code shall be supplemental in nature to
any Indiana Statutes governing fire prevention and building safety as well as
any and all provisions pertaining to fire prevention and building safety
adopted and incorporated in the Indiana Administrative Code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.02  SEVERABILITY.



   If for any reason any article, division, section, subsection, sentence
or phrase of this Fire Code or application thereof to any person or
circumstance is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or conflicts with
Indiana Statute or the Indiana Administrative Code, such conflict shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.03  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing conditions as
well as to the conditions arising after the adoption thereof. Buildings,
systems, uses, processes, and equipment legally in existence on the effective
date of this section shall be permitted to continue so long as they are
maintained in a condition that is equivalent to the quality and fire
resistive characteristics that existed when the building was constructed,
altered, added to or repaired. Any alterations made to a structure after this
chapter is adopted shall comply with current Fire Codes and Building Codes as
they apply to all aspects of the structure that is affected by alterations.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.04  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   When any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
building, zoning, safety, health or other applicable law or ordinance of the
city or the Indiana Fire Code existing on the effective date of this code or
hereafter adopted, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the public shall
prevail.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.05  INCORPORATION OF INDIANA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE.



   All fire safety rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in Article 22, Title 675 of the Indiana
Administrative Code are hereby incorporated in this chapter, and shall
include later amendments to that article as the same are published in the
Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as
fixed therein.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as
follows:



   "AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION."  When used throughout this chapter
shall mean the Fire Department.



   "BUILDING OFFICIAL."  The officer or other designated authority of the
jurisdiction charged with the administration and enforcement of the Indiana
Building Code and city Building Code.



   "CIVIL VIOLATION."  The erection, alteration, enlargement, maintenance
or use of any building, structure or land in violation of any provision of
the zoning ordinance, the subdivision control ordinance, the sign ordinance,
the weed ordinance, and the building codes of the city applicable to such
building, structure or land in the zone in which it is located,



   "CLASS 1 STRUCTURE."  Buildings and structures as defined in IC
22-12-1-4.



   "CLASS 2 STRUCTURE."  Buildings and structures as defined in IC
22-12-1-5.



   "COMBUSTIBLE."  Materials such as paper, fiber liquids, vegetable
matter or any other material, which is readily ignitable and free burning.



   "DECORATIVE MATERIALS."  Materials such as curtains, draperies,
streamers and surface covering applied over building interior finishes for
decorative, acoustical or other effect, and also cloth, cotton batting,
straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss used for decorative effect.  They do
not include floor coverings, ordinary window shades or materials one
twenty-eighth inches or less in thickness applied directly to a
noncombustible backing.



   "EXTENSION CORD AND PORTABLE FLEXIBLE CORD."  Flexible cord of any
length, which is one male connector on one end, and one or more female
connectors on the other, and no built-in over current protection.



   "FIRE."  The combustion of material other than deliberate combustion
for cooking, heating, recreation, incineration or purposes incidental to
normal operation of a property.



   "FIRE APPARATUS."  Vehicles such as fire pumpers, aerial ladder
trucks, elevated platforms, rescue squad cars or other firefighting or rescue
equipment.



   "FIRE APPLIANCE."  Equipment provided or installed for use in the
event of an emergency.



   "FIRE DEPARTMENT."  The Kokomo Fire Department.



   "FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD."  A road that provides fire apparatus
access from a fire station to a facility, building or portion thereof. This
is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire lane, public
street, private street, parking lot lane and access roadway.



   "FIRE DEPARTMENT INLET CONNECTION (FDC)."  A connection through which
the Fire Department can pump water into a standpipe and/or sprinkler system.



   "FIRE HAZARD."  Any act or commission which increases or may increase
the possibility of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized
as normal by the Fire Department; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder or
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or the egress of
occupants in the event of fire.



   "FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION."  The Fire Prevention Division and its
inspectors established by this chapter for the Fire Department.



   "FPBSC."  The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the
State of Indiana, as established by IC 22-12-2-1 et seq.



   "GAR."  General Administrative Rules (675 IAC 12) of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building and Safety Commission.



   "GRACE PERIOD EXTENSION."  Time granted for correction, termination or
cessation of a civil violation of this chapter. An extension of time, as
defined herein, shall be granted by the Fire Chief or his designee.



   "HAZARDOUS CONDITION."  The presence of a structural condition,
equipment, utility connection, or materials that constitutes or poses a
recognized threat of fire or other injury to persons or property.



   "INSPECTION."  A visual inspection of a building, system, design, or
installation, to verify that it meets the standards of the Fire Code, and/or
is in acceptable operating condition and free of defects.



   "NFPA."  The National Fire Protection Association, which publishes the
volumes of the National Fire Codes.



   "NOTICE OF VIOLATION."  Notice issued by the Department.



   "PERMITTED FIRES."  Fires used for recreation or cooking, such as
bonfires, campfires or barbecues.



   "PERSON."  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association and
bodies politic and corporate.



   "PUBLIC NUISANCE."  The existence of dry or drying weeds, rubbish and
waste material on property and or premises which is dangerous and injurious
to that or neighboring property, land or premises and which is detrimental to
the welfare of occupants or residents of the vicinity.



   "REPAIR."  The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
building for the purpose of its maintenance.



   "REPEATED CIVIL VIOLATION."  A recurring violation at the same
location or a similar violation at a different location by the same
responsible party.



   "RESPONSIBLE PARTY."  Any owner, lessee, person, firm, corporation or
responsible party who uses property in violation of this chapter or knowingly
permits another person, firm or corporation to do so.



   "TESTING."  An examination of all components to verify proper
operation of the system, design, installation or use.



   "WATER COMPANY."  The entity that supplies water service to the City
of Kokomo.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.07  FIRE PREVENTION DIVISION.



   A fire prevention division is hereby established within the Fire
Department under the direction of the Fire Chief. The function of this
division shall be to assist the Fire Chief in the administration of the city
Fire Code and the Indiana Fire Code.  The Chief may assign personnel to the
division to administer and enforce the provisions of this Code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.08  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Fire Department
under the command of the Fire Chief or his authorized representative to
enforce the provisions of the Fire Code.



   (B)   Such enforcement shall include, but is not limited to:



      (1)   The prevention of fires;



      (2)   The handling, storage, sale and use of flammable
liquids, explosives, and combustible and hazardous materials;



      (3)   The adequacy of means of egress from all places in which
numbers of people live, work or congregate from time to time for any purpose;



      (4)   The location, installation and maintenance of smoke
alarms, fire alarm systems and fire suppression systems; and



      (5)   The existence of recognized hazardous conditions that
present a clear and immediate hazard to life and property.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.09  LEGAL ASSISTANCE.



   The Fire Department may obtain the services of the City Attorney,
Howard County Prosecutor or the Office of the Department of Homeland
Security, Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission for legal assistance
in connection with the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.10  LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE.



   At the request of the Fire Chief, the Chief of Police shall assign such
available police officers as in his discretion may be necessary to assist the
Fire Department in enforcing the provisions of this code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.11  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever a duly authorized member of the Fire Department determines by
inspection that a violation of this chapter or a hazardous condition exists
upon any premises within the city, the person making such determination shall
issue such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of fire safety laws
and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life, environment
and property from fire and explosion.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.12  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Pursuant to IC 36-8-17-9, the enforcement of certain Indiana
Administrative Code provisions, and the city Fire Code, is within the
jurisdiction of the Fire Department. The Fire Department may seek the
correction of any violation or the elimination of any hazardous condition, by
the methods specified in the code or by any other appropriate remedy or
procedure provided by law. The failure of the Fire Department to inspect or
to issue an order in accordance with this chapter shall not constitute
approval of any violation or noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter.  Any order issued pursuant to this section shall be conveyed upon
the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the building or
property. Conveyance of such order shall be by personal service, or by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance of said
building or premises or by mailing a copy thereof to such responsible person
by first class mail to his or her last known address pursuant to IC 4-21.5-3.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.13  IMMINENT DANGER.



   The Chief of the Fire Department or his designee may order an operation
stopped, order the evacuation of any premises, building or vehicle or portion
thereof under IC 36-8-17-9 or issue a citation for civil violations in
accordance with the civil penalty provisions of § 94.12 when it is
determined that conduct or conditions of the property:



   (A)   Present a clear and immediate hazard of death or serious
bodily injury to any person other than a trespasser;



   (B)   Is prohibited without a permit, registration, certification,
release authorization, variance, exemption, or other license required under
IC 22-14-3 et seq. or any other statute relating to fire prevention and
safety;



   (C)   Will conceal a violation of law; or



   (D)   Will interfere with the Fire Chief or his authorized
representative to carry out his duties and responsibilities under § 94.08.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.14  DUTY TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   The owner or person in control of any premises or building upon which a
violation or hazard exists shall:



   (A)   Cease and correct the violation;



   (B)   Protect persons and property from the hazards of the violation
and correct the violation;



   (C)   Require persons to leave the area that is affected by a
violation and prohibit person's from entering the area until the violation is
corrected.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.15  APPEAL FROM ORDERS.



   An owner or occupant who remains aggrieved by the decision issued
pursuant to this chapter and the matter involves a rule of the Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, may appeal to such Commission as
set forth by IC 36-8-17.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.16  VARIANCES.



   (A)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from state adopted
fire and building laws as set forth by IC 22-13-2-11 shall apply for such
with the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission in accordance
with Title 675, Article 12 of the Indiana Administrative Code.



   (B)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from the provisions
of this chapter that are not part of the state adopted fire and building laws
as set forth by IC 22-13-2-11 shall apply in writing to the Fire Chief. The
granting of a variance shall be considered only upon the written application
of the owner of the property, stating that:



      (1)   Practical difficulties have been encountered in the
implementation of specific requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Compliance with specific requirements of this chapter
will cause unnecessary hardship to the owner; and



      (3)   The owner desires to take advantage of new methods or
equipment, which are recognized as adequate for the purpose for which they
are to be substituted.



   (C)   A variance may be granted only if the Fire Chief determines in
writing that:



      (1)   The requested use or modification will conform with
fundamental requirements for safety; and



      (2)   The granting of the variance does not increase the risk
of fire or danger to the public. A copy of any variance granted shall be
retained by the division.



   (D)   A variance shall be enforced in the same manner as any order
issued this chapter.



   (E)   Whenever the Fire Department learns that an owner is in
violation of the terms of a variance issued pursuant to this section, the
Fire Chief or his designee may order compliance with the variance or with
this Code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.17  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE.



   The city, the Fire Department, employees of either the city or the Fire
Department, and any lawful agents of the city or the Fire Department retain
limited liability for actions performed under this chapter as prescribed in
Indiana Statute.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.18  RIGHT TO ENTER BUILDINGS.



   Authorized personnel of the Fire Department may, at all reasonable
hours, enter any structure (except one- and two-family dwellings) within the
city for the purpose of conducting inspections or investigations pursuant to
this chapter. The right to enter shall extend to new structures under
construction as well as to existing structures being renovated or
remodeled.  An inspector or investigator may be required by the owner or
occupant to produce satisfactory proof of authority or identity.  If an
inspector or investigator is denied access, the Fire Inspector may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an order allowing inspection.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.19  INSPECTIONS.



   The Fire Department shall perform inspections and investigations under
the administrative supervision of the Fire Chief pursuant to IC 36-8-17 et
seq. The Fire Department may as often as may be reasonably necessary:



   (A)   Inspect every place and public way, except the interiors of
one- and two-family dwellings;



   (B)   Inspect, upon receipt of a complaint, any building or
premises; and



   (C)   Investigate the origin, cause, and circumstances of
unauthorized releases of hazardous materials.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.20  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   The Fire Department shall keep a record of all incidents and the facts
concerning them. Such reports shall be prepared into an annual summary and
submitted to the Fire Chief. The Fire Department shall maintain files
containing reports of all properties that have been inspected, all orders
issued, of all complaints and fires investigated, and the location of all
buildings containing hazardous occupancies.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.21  AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND EMERGENCIES.



   The Fire Chief or his designated representative at any fire, explosion
or other emergency which poses imminent threat to life, environment or
property shall have the authority to direct operations as may be necessary to
control, extinguish, perform special operations, and investigate the
existence of hazardous conditions in connection with such fire, explosion, or
other emergency, or to take other action reasonably necessary to contain,
mitigate or eliminate the emergency.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.22  EMERGENCY LINES AND LIMITS.



   The Fire Chief or his designee, or any law enforcement officer may
establish emergency lines and limits and barricade or guard from the general
public such emergency lines and limits. The Fire Chief or his designee or any
law enforcement officer may create an area in which only firefighters, law
enforcement and those having a direct interest in any property threatened by
the fire, explosion, or other emergency, or other people or agencies at the
discretion of the incident commander shall be admitted.  It shall be
unlawful for any unauthorized person to cross such emergency lines or limits.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.23  FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS.



   A minimum of two means of access shall be provided for:



   (A)   Any residential subdivision with 50 or more one- or two-family
residential lots;



   (B)   Any development having one or more commercial, multi-family,
or industrial structure, three stories or greater in height; or



   (C)   Any development having three or more commercial, multi-
family, or industrial structures of any height.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.24  FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS ROADS FOR CLASS 1 AND CLASS 2 STRUCTURES.



   Fire Department or emergency access roads shall be subject to the
approval of the Fire Chief or his designee and be constructed to the
following standards and specifications:



   (A)   Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width
of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) and an unobstructed vertical clearance of
not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm).



   (B)   Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and constructed
to support the imposed live loads of the heaviest piece of fire apparatus
available to the Fire Department and shall be provided with an all-weather
surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities.



   (C)   The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be at
least equal to the minimum required radius for the fire apparatus. Such roads
shall be designed and constructed to permit turning of the longest piece of
fire apparatus available to the Fire Department.



   (D)   Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in
length shall be designed and constructed so as to allow the turning around of
the longest piece of fire apparatus available to the Fire Department.



   (E)   When a bridge is required to be used as part of a fire
apparatus access road, it shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with nationally recognized standards. The bridge shall be designed,
constructed and maintained for a live load sufficient to carry the imposed
loads of fire apparatus. Vehicle load limits shall be posted at both
entrances to bridges.



   (F)   The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed
the maximum that the apparatus available to the Fire Department can
accommodate.



   (G)   The required width of a fire apparatus access road shall not
be obstructed in any manner, including parking of vehicles. Entrances to
roads, trails or other access ways which have been closed with gates and
barriers in accordance with division (H) of this section shall not be
obstructed by parked vehicles.



   (H)   When a property is accessed through a gate or cross arm by
means of a key or swipe card, it shall be equipped with a key switch
manufactured by the Knox Company or a key switch approved by the Fire Chief
or his designee. The switch will be keyed to the Fire Department Knox key or
an approved key. The location to be installed will be determined by the Fire
Chief or his designee.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.25  ADDRESSING REQUIREMENTS.



   Approved numbers or addresses on a contrasting background shall be
placed above the doorway or in such a position as to be plainly visible and
legible from either direction of approach from the street or road fronting
the property. Where a building or buildings are set back from the street or
road fronting the property and where addresses may not be clearly
identifiable due to distance from the street or roadway or to visual
obstructions such as landscaping or architectural features, address or number
posting shall be required both at the street driveway serving such buildings
and on the buildings. Individual condominiums, commercial suites and
apartments shall have numbers or letters installed. All numbers and or
letters shall be a minimum of three inches in height with a contrasting
background. Maximum height will be dictated by building's architecture.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.26  USE AND PLACEMENT OF KEY BOXES.



   (A)   Any commercial building that is protected by an automatic
alarm system and/or sprinkler system, or access to, or within a structure, or
an area on that property is unduly difficult because of secured openings, and
where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes,
the fire official may require a key box to be installed in an approved
location.  The same applies to automatic gate access.  The box type shall
be approved by the Fire Chief or his designee.  The current approved lock
box is the Knox Rapid Entry System Box 3200 or 4400 hinged door boxes, tamper
switch is optional but not required. Reference: IFC code 506.1



   (B)   The key box shall contain:



      (1)   Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior
or exterior of such buildings;



      (2)   Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms;



      (3)   Keys to locked electrical rooms;



      (4)   Keys to elevator controls;



      (5)   Keys to other areas as directed by the fire official;



      (6)   Keys to post indicator valves controlling the water
supply for fire sprinkler systems;



      (7)   Fire alarm control panels; and



      (8)   A map indicating location of alarm panels.



   (C)   The owner, operator, lessee, or responsible party shall
immediately notify the Fire Inspector and provide the new key when a lock is
changed or re-keyed.  The key to such lock shall be secured in the key box.



   (D)   Alert decals, supplied by the Knox Co., to alert fire
companies to the presence of security features covered by this chapter, shall
be displayed on the upper right corner of outside doors or windows nearest
the Knox Box as designated by the fire official.



   (E)   This section is intended to apply to any new or existing
commercial structures within the city. All existing buildings shall comply
with this section and, the Fire Inspector is instructed to meet with all
existing commercial structure owners or occupants for the purpose of
informing them of the public health, safety and welfare benefits of the
establishment of a key box on their premises. This will be done at the time
the inspections are performed.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.27  REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION.



   All Class 1 structures or portions of Class 1 structures hereafter
constructed shall be provided with a water supply capable of providing the
required fire flow for firefighting purposes for a minimum period of two
hours.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.28  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   All private hydrants and water mains shall be installed and maintained
as set forth in the 2002 edition of NFPA Standard #24. The Fire Chief in
determining location and spacing of hydrants shall use the 2006 IFC (675 IAC
22) Appendix C as a guide.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.29  HYDRANT LOCATIONS.



   The proposed location of private fire hydrants to supply the required
fire flow shall be approved by the Fire Department prior to construction of
any Class 1 structures or any addition to a Class I structure.  One fire
hydrant shall be installed within 150 feet of any Fire Department connection
that serves a standpipe and/or sprinkler system or as required by the Fire
Chief or his designee.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.30  HYDRANT SPECIFICATIONS.



   Whenever the provisions of this chapter require the installation of a
fire hydrant, whether on public or private property, such hydrant shall meet
the following specifications:



   (A)   All fire hydrants shall be placed on an eight inch or larger
diameter mains.



   (B)   It shall be constructed with two two and one-half inch
outlets, with fire thread as specified by the Fire Deptartment.



   (C)   It shall be equipped with one four and one-half inch steamer
outlet with approved Fire Department thread.



   (D)   It shall be constructed to be opened by turning
counterclockwise with a national standard pentagon-operating nut.



   (E)   The source of the water supply shall be buried four to five
feet below the ground level at the hydrant.



   (F)   The hydrant shall be constructed with a break-off feature to
prevent the hydrant from leaking when damaged by collision.



   (G)   All privately owned hydrants shall be painted red.



   (H)   All public hydrants shall be painted safety yellow.



   (I)   All hydrants shall be installed with outlets 18 inches above
finish grade.



   (J)   All hydrants shall be installed with their direction to be
determined by the fire official.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.31  TESTING OF PRIVATE HYDRANTS.



   Private hydrants shall be inspected and tested on an annual basis by a
testing company to verify the flow and proper operation. The owner will
maintain a copy of the test certification on the premises and send copies to
the Fire Department.  All hydrants shall be maintained in proper working
order.  Maintenance to be performed by the testing company should consist of
greasing outlets, greasing the stem, and flow testing the hydrant.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.32  DEAD END WATER MAINS.



   Six inch or smaller dead end mains are prohibited.  All other dead end
mains shall be capable of supplying the required fire flow, and shall meet
IAWC and/or NFPA 24 requirements and be approved. Buildings having a required
fire flow of 3500 gpm or more shall have hydrants served by a main that loops
the building or complex of buildings and reconnects back into a distribution
supply main in a separate location.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.33  NEW AND REPLACEMENT HYDRANTS.



   Any hydrants installed on existing or new mains shall be flushed to
insure that no debris will be discharged into fire apparatus.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.34  HYDRANT CLEARANCE.



   All hydrants shall have a minimum clearance of six feet from debris,
trees, shrubs, etc. around said hydrant.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.35  WATER SUPPLY.



   A water source approved by the Fire Chief or his designee that is
capable of supplying the required fire flow shall be made available prior to
allowing combustible material to accumulate at the job site. Fire hydrants
shall be located within 500 feet of the structure under construction.  Fire
hydrants shall be maintained clear and accessible for fire protection during
all phases of construction.  Water for construction purposes taken from
hydrants shall in no way impede the Fire Department's use of the hydrants in
emergencies.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.36  ACCESS ROADS FOR CLASS 1 AND CLASS 2 STRUCTURES.



   Access for use of heavy fire fighting apparatus shall be provided to
the immediate job site at the start of construction or the accumulation of
combustibles, whichever occurs first. All temporary Fire Department access,
where required, shall be maintained until all construction is completed.
Arrangements shall be made to assure immediate and unimpeded Fire Department
access to the site when called.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS



§ 94.50  CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   In the event a set of plans and specifications for fire
protection systems, including fire alarm systems, automatic sprinkler
systems, standpipe systems, and other special types of fire extinguishing or
detecting systems and appurtenances thereto is created, then such documents
shall be submitted to the Fire Department for information purposes.



   (B)   In the event of occupancy change occupancy plans shall be sent
to the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission for plan
review. After issuance of a construction design release by the state, the
builder or developer may apply for city building permits.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.51  FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS.



   The location of Fire Department connections shall be approved by the
Fire Chief or his designee. Fire Department connections shall be installed
where required by and in accordance with NFPA 13, Installation of Sprinkler
Systems, 1999 Edition, 675 IAC 13-1-8 and NFPA 14, Installation of Standpipe
Hose Systems, 2000 Edition, 675 IAC 13-1-9.  In the event new standards are
adopted they shall apply. Additionally, Fire Department connection
specifications shall comply with the following:



   (A)   Fire Department hose connections shall be free standing and
remote from the building.



   (B)   The connection shall be a five inch Storz type connection with
a 30 degree down turn.



   (C)   The Fire Department connection shall be located at the curb
cut of the main entrance of the project site or building it serves. The
connection shall be arranged to face the street, driveway, or fire access
route. This location shall be placed in an area that will not interfere with
access to the building when hoses are laid from the closest fire hydrant to
the Fire Department connection.



   (D)   The Storz connection shall be arranged so that the connection
is 36 inches above the finished grade, sidewalk, or pit box top or lid at the
location of the connection.



   (E)   The Fire Department hose connection shall be located not more
than 150 feet from the nearest fire hydrant.



   (F)   Where the Fire Department connection is subject to vehicular
damage, the connection shall be protected as follows:



      (1)   Protective post(s) shall be three inches in diameter
schedule 40 or better steel post set in 36 inches of concrete. The inside of
the post shall also be filled with concrete.



      (2)   Post(s) shall be located no closer than 36 inches from
the Fire Department connection and shall not interfere with the operation of
the Storz connection.



      (3)   Post(s) shall extend above ground to a height at least
equal to the top of the Fire Department hose connection.



   (G)   The exposed exterior piping for the Fire Department connection
shall be painted red if it supplies a sprinkler system only, yellow if it
supplies a combination sprinkler/standpipe system and green if it supplies a
standpipe system only. The Storz connection shall not be painted.



   (H)   A locking five inch Storz cap manufactured by Knox Co. shall
be installed on the Fire Department connection.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.52  SECURITY CAPS.



   When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler and/or standpipe
system and the Fire Department connection is exposed to undue vandalism the
Fire Chief or his designee may require that a Knox Security Cap be
installed.  All new buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler and/or
standpipe system shall install a Knox Locking Cap on the Fire Department
connection.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.53  SUPERVISION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.



   Fire alarm systems required by 675 IAC 13, 675 IAC 22 or this chapter
shall be monitored as set forth in 675 IAC 13-2.3-96 and 675 IAC 22-2.2-17;
1996 edition of NFPA Standard No. 72, by an approved central, proprietary or
remote station service or a local alarm which gives audible and visual
signals at a constantly attended location.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



§ 94.54  FIRE ALARM CONTROL PANEL.



   The fire alarm control panel shall be installed near the main entrance
in the location required by the Fire Department and shall have a constantly
visible indicator showing the condition of the system. This position may be
changed with approval of the Fire Chief or his designee.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.55  SILENCE INSTRUCTIONS.



   A set of instructions on methods to silence the alarm after an alarm or
trouble condition signal has been given shall be posted adjacent to the
panel. The instructions shall be protected from moisture or other damage. The
Fire Department will not reset the alarm that is the occupants responsibility.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.56  MARKING OF FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT, FIRE HYDRANTS AND ACCESS
ROADS.



   Fire protection equipment and fire hydrants shall be clearly identified
in a manner approved by the Fire Department to prevent obstruction by parking
and other obstructions.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.57  REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL KITCHEN EXHAUST EQUIPMENT AND FIRE
PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.



   Any new installation of kitchen fire suppression equipment shall be
inspected by a Fire or Building Inspector of the city prior to the kitchen
cooking equipment being placed in service. The installing company shall:



   (A)   Use installers that are qualified individuals by the
manufacturer;



   (B)   Notify the Fire Department Fire Prevention Division at least
24 hours in advance of the system being completed for system testing; and



   (C)   Complete a hood letter stating that the hood and suppression
has been installed per current code signed by each installation company's
representative. This form is to be kept on file at the Fire Department.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.58  FIRE WATCH.



   Any time a fire watch is required for temporary fire protection, each
member of the fire watch must be an Indiana certified Firefighter I.  If the
firefighter is not a member of the Fire Department, the certification of the
firefighter must be provided to the Fire Department prior to the beginning of
the fire watch. Every fire watch shall have one firefighter for every 500
people of occupant load. Any variation to this shall be approved by the Fire
Chief or designee.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.59  FIRE LANE.



   Fire lane shall be 12 feet in depth from edge of pavement or curb
cut.  Letters to be three feet in height with minimum four inch stroke. All
markings to be safety yellow. Signage on the pavement to read: NO PARKING
FIRE LANE. Sign posts shall be placed every 30 feet stating: FIRE LANE NO
PARKING TOW AWAY ZONE. Sign post may be the portable type concrete base.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.60  FIRE PROTECTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE SALE AND STORAGE LOTS AND
PORTABLE STORAGE LOTS.



   Motor vehicle sales lots, storage lots and portable storage lots
hereafter constructed or added to, shall provide and maintain fire hydrants
and access roads in accordance with this code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.61  LIABILITY FOR COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.



   Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of combustible
material, which constitutes or contributes to a fire causing air pollution or
property damage, shall not be excused from responsibility thereof on the
basis that said fire was set by vandals, accidental or an act of God.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.62  PYROTECHNICS AND INDOOR FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to ignite or
otherwise use pyrotechnic special effects material or fireworks inside any
building or structure.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, occupant, or
manager of a premise to permit the igniting or other use of pyrotechnic
special effects material or fireworks inside any building or structure.



   (C)   An owner, lessee, occupant, or manager who has control of any
entertainment venue or other commercial premise shall include in any
agreement for use of the premises that igniting or otherwise using
pyrotechnics or fireworks inside any building or structure is prohibited by
this chapter.



   (D)   An owner, lessee, occupant, or manager who has control of the
premises that observes the igniting or other use of pyrotechnics or fireworks
inside any building or structure on the premises and fails to attempt to stop
the use is in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.63  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INFORMATION.



   All hazardous materials information shall be provided at all buildings
or areas that are subject to hazardous material regulations of the city Fire
Code or the Indiana Fire Prevention Code.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.64  MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS (MSDS).



   In the event that new hazardous materials are brought onto the site,
the Fire Department shall be notified.  The Fire Department shall also be
notified of any materials that are no longer on site.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.65  UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS; NOTIFICATION.



   Any person who supervises, manages, or directs the installation,
retrofitting, removal or closure of underground storage tanks shall notify
the Fire Department Fire Prevention Division 14 days prior to commencement of
work; however, this requirement shall not apply in emergency repair work
where 14 day notification is not possible.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter or shall commit any act prohibited herein, or
shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed
by the Fire Chief or his designee, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey
any lawful order given by the Fire Chief or his designee in connection with
the provisions of this chapter for each such violation, failure or refusal,
such person, firm or corporation may be fined up to the maximum penalty
prescribed by Indiana Statute for such offense.



   (B)   Each calendar day such unlawful activity is prohibited by this
chapter may constitute a separate offense for the purpose of imposing fines
pursuant to Indiana Statute.



   (C)   Fines assessed under this chapter do not preclude the violator
from responsibility of payment of costs incurred by the city or the Fire
Department if it is a necessity to enter onto a violator's property to
correct, terminate or cease a violation in accordance with procedures
outlined in this chapter.



   (D)   The Fire Chief or his duly authorized designees, upon
verification of a violation of this chapter, may issue a citation to any
responsible party who commits a violation of this chapter. The citation may
be served by personal service or by certified mail or by placement in a
conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurs. If personal
service of a violation is made by the Fire Chief or his designees, said
official will in a conspicuous manner, wear on his person identification from
the city or Fire Department. The citation shall serve as notice to the
responsible parties that said party has committed a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   Except for a citation issued pursuant to § 94.13, no citation
shall be issued unless the violator has been issued a notice of violation
with a minimum of one and a maximum of ten days before the issuance of the
citation in order to allow the violator the opportunity to correct the
violation and to come into compliance with the prescribed section of the
pertinent ordinance.



   (F)   The notice of violation shall include:



      (1)   The date of issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person charged;



      (3)   The section number of the pertinent ordinance which has
been violated;



      (4)   The nature of the civil violation;



      (5)   The place and time at which the civil violation occurred;



      (6)   The range of fines which could be assessed upon
continued noncompliance activity;



      (7)   The specific time allowed in which to bring the civil
violation into compliance;



      (8)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
official issuing the notice of violation; and



      (9)   The date and time of the notice and the number of days
given on the notice.



   (G)   The citation shall be on a form adopted by the Department and
shall include:



      (1)   The date of issuance;



      (2)   The name and address of the person charged;



      (3)   The section number of the pertinent ordinance which has
been violated;



      (4)   The nature of the civil violation;



      (5)   The place and time at which the civil violation occurred;



      (6)   The schedule of monetary fines to be assessed;



      (7)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
official issuing the citation; and



      (8)   The date and title of notice given and the number of
days given on notice.



   (H)   Trial for civil violation.  Upon the issuance of a citation,
the Fire Chief or his designee shall forward a copy of the citation to the
designated enforcement entity and the Howard County Court, Kokomo, Indiana
shall schedule the case for trial.



      (1)   The City Attorney, his designee or the Department is
responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



      (2)   All procedures will be in compliance with the Indiana
Rules for Civil Procedure.



(Ord. 6569, passed 12-8-08)



CHAPTER 95:  HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Cutting weeds



   95.02   Appeal



   95.03   Soot; Abatement



Garbage and Trash Collection



   95.05   Definitions



   95.06   Containers



   95.07   Extent, limitation of collection



   95.08   Additional collections; collection schedule



   95.09   Place of collection



   95.10   Noncompliance; corrective action



   95.11   Applicability of other laws



   95.12   Collection deficiencies and complaints



   95.13   Additional provisions for automated packer trash collection



Collection and Disposal Operations Generally



   95.15   Definitions



   95.16   Scavenging prohibited



   95.17   Salvage operations



   95.18   Right of entry by Health Officer



   95.19   Enforcement



   95.20   Duty of City Attorney



Collection and Disposal Permits and Inspections



   95.25   Removal permit required



   95.26   Landfill permit required



   95.27   Removal permit application; vehicular permit



   95.28   Permits to be signed by Controller



   95.29   Compliance required for permit



   95.30   Term of permits



   95.31   Separate landfill permits required



   95.32   Filing of plans and specifications for landfill permit



   95.33   Inspection and approval by Board of Public Works and Safety



   95.34   Persons not required to obtain landfill permit



   95.35   Vehicle inspections and condition



   95.36   Persons not required to obtain removal permit



   95.37   Contents of permits



   95.38   Inspections of landfill sites; revocation of permit



   95.39   Filing of copies of inspection report



   95.40   Suspension or revocation of permits generally



Collection and Disposal; Sanitary Landfill Regulations



   95.45   Application of rules to existing sites



   95.46   Other disposal methods



   95.47   Operator responsibility



   95.48   Equipment generally



   95.49   Road required



   95.50   Cleanliness



   95.51   Burning garbage



   95.52   Spreading of refuse



   95.53   Placement of final layer over refuse



   95.54   Maintenance of final cover



   95.55   Inspections after work completed; correction of defects



   95.56   Drainage



   95.57   Water pollution from sanitary landfills



   95.58   Uncooked garbage



   95.59   Infestations



   95.60   Dust and paper control



   95.61   Disposal of bulky items



   95.62   Disposal of hazardous materials



   96.63   Landfills for which permit not required



Disposal of Scavenger Waste



   95.70   Definitions



   95.71   Limitation on disposal of scavenger waste



   95.72   Charges



   95.73   Supervision



   95.74   Limitation on scavenger waste



   95.75   Enforcement



   95.76   Violation



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Cleaning of sidewalk, see § 97.06



   Sewers and sewage disposal, see Ch. 50



Statutory reference:



   Health power of cities, see IC §§ 36-8-2-4 et seq.



   Power of city to collect and process garbage and refuse, see IC §§
36-1-3-8, 36-9-2-15, and 36-9-2-16



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  CUTTING WEEDS.



   (A)   The Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services
of the city, acting through its Director, or the Director's designee, shall
be responsible for the administration of this section.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a "weed" shall be defined as
including any deleterious, unhealthful or noxious vegetative growth found
growing within the city; or any tree, grass, shrub, flower, or vine; which,
from an aesthetic or functional viewpoint, is incompatible with vegetation 
found in the  vicinity, or which  presents a danger to public health and
safety, or which create by their presence a nuisance to surrounding
properties.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section, "rank vegetation" shall
include any vegetative growth found growing profusely and unmanageably in
excess of the height restrictions herein provided.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, agricultural crops, including
hay and pasture, shall not be considered as weeds or other rank vegetation.



   (E)   For the purposes of this section, "owner" or "landowner" shall
mean that individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity, recorded in
the records of the Auditor of Howard County as the owner of record for the
purpose of being responsible for the payment of property taxes upon the real
estate where weeds or rank vegetation are found to exist.



   (F)   Violation of this section shall occur when weeds or rank
vegetation in a given location are found to exist in an average height in
excess of eight inches.



   (G)   Owners of real property within the city are required to cut
and remove weeds and other rank vegetation growing upon their property.  The
owner's responsibility shall not be extinguished by reason of real property
being occupied by tenants.



   (H)   (1)   Should the owner fail to cut and remove such weeds
and rank vegetation, or fail to cause such cutting and removal to be
accomplished, and should such weeds and rank vegetation exceed the height
restriction set out in division (E) above, the Department shall issue a
written notice to the owner ordering such cutting and removal. Such notices
shall be served upon the landowner by sending such notice to the landowner by
certified mail, first class mail or the equivalent service permitted under
I.C. 1-1-7-1 addressed to the owner's last known address by a sworn officer
of the city. The notice shall specify the vegetation to be removed and shall
establish time parameters for completion of the cutting and removal. In no
case shall the time allowed to bring the property into compliance be less
than five days from the date upon which the notice is mailed.



      (2)   If an initial notice of the violation of this section
was provided by certified mail, first class mail or equivalent service the
city may also include a continuous abatement notice posted at the property at
the time of abatement instead of requiring additional notice by certified
mail.  A continuous abatement notice serves as notice to the real property
owner that each subsequent violation during the same year for which the
initial notice of the violation was provided may be abated by the city or its
contractors.



   (I)   If the landowner fails to cut and remove the vegetation within
the time prescribed in the written notice, the city, or contractors under
contract to the city to provide cutting and removal services, may enter upon
real property to abate the violations of this section found to exist upon the
real property, as described in the notice letter previously issued.



   (J)   In cases where cutting and removal of weeds or other rank
vegetation is accomplished by the city, or by contractors under contract to
the city, the department in charge of administering this section shall make a
certified statement of the actual cost incurred by the city to abate the
violation.  Such costs may include charges for the removal and for
administrative costs related thereto.  The statement shall  be delivered to
the owner of the property by certified mail, addressed to the landowner's
last known address, and the owner shall pay the amount so charged to the
office of the City Controller.



   (K)   If the landowner fails to pay the amount within ten days after
receiving the statement of costs referenced in division (J) above, the
Department shall certify to the county auditor the amount of the bill, plus
any additional administrative costs incurred in the certification. The
auditor shall place the total amount certified on the tax duplicate for the
property affected, and the total amount, including accrued interest, shall be
collected as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be disbursed to the
general fund of the city. If the property being abated is located in a
Special Flood Hazard Area, as defined in § 159.03, then the department
shall, after unsuccessfully collecting two consecutive statements under
division (J) above, retain full discretion as to whether to certify to the
county auditor the costs incurred for abating the nuisance.



   (L)   Should any notice or statement required to be served upon a
landowner by certified mail under this section be returned as undeliverable
or refused, the city may cause the same to be served by a law enforcement
officer of the city, who shall make his/her return upon such service.  The
provisions for service of required notices and statements set out in this
division are supplemental to the provisions set out elsewhere in this
section, and are intended to authorize the use of personal service at the
city's option where reason exists to believe that personal service may be
achieved on the landowner after service by mail has proved to be
unsuccessful.  Nothing in this division shall be construed as requiring the
city to attempt such service as a precondition to abating the violation,
provided that the attempt to make service by certified mail has been made.



(Ord. 5825, passed 6-8-92; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6580,
passed 4-27-09; Am. Ord. 6751, As Amended, passed 4-28-14)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.02  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any landowner in receipt of a written notice issued pursuant
to § 95.01(H) or (J) shall have the right to appeal the notice of violation
or a bill issued pursuant to the provision of those divisions.  Such appeal
shall be made to the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   Within five days of receipt of a notice issued under §
95.01(H), or within ten days of a notice issued under § 95.01(J), the
aggrieved landowner shall serve upon the Kokomo Board of Public Works and
Safety a written statement setting forth the landowner’s objections to the
terms of such notices and the reasons for such objections.  Receipt of such
a written statement by the President shall stay further action on the notices
pending review by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety sitting as a
whole.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the landowner’s statement of objections, the
Board shall offer the landowner an opportunity for a hearing on the
objections at the Board’s earliest opportunity.  At such hearing, the
landowner, or the landowner’s representative, who may be an attorney, shall
be given the opportunity to offer evidence, examine and cross examine
witnesses, and present arguments to show why a notice of violation, or a
notice of an outstanding bill for cutting and removal should be rescinded or
modified.



   (D)   Upon conclusion of the landowner’s presentation, the Board
shall deliberate and may either confirm, modify and confirm, or rescind any
notices issued pursuant to this section.  The decision of the Board shall be
final.



(Ord. 5825, passed 6-8-92)



§ 95.03  SOOT; ABATEMENT.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow the escape or emission from any
stack into the open air of such quantities of soot, cinders, dust, dirt, fly
ash, lint, chaff, mists, vapors, obnoxious odors, noxious acids, fumes, or
gases, in such place or manner as to cause injury or detriment to persons, or
the public, or in such manner as to cause injury or damage to business or
property.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department is authorized to abate all
violations of division (A) above.



   (C)   All persons violating division (A) above, or participating in
any such violation, either as owners, proprietors, lessees, agents, tenants,
managers, superintendents, engineers, firemen, or janitors, or otherwise,
shall severally be liable therefor and subject to the penalty provided by
this chapter.



('75 Code, § 12-2)  Penalty, see § 95.99



GARBAGE AND TRASH COLLECTION



§ 95.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “APARTMENT BUILDING.”  Any building or structure built or adapted
for multi-family occupancy.  Each room or group of rooms within such
structure intended for individual or single-family occupancy shall constitute
a “unit”.  A structure originally built as a single-family residence and
subsequently modified for multi-family occupancy shall be considered to be an
“APARTMENT BUILDING” for the purposes of this chapter.



   “AUTOMATED PACKER REFUSE COLLECTION SYSTEM.”  A system whereby
garbage and rubbish is collected by city refuse crews utilizing automated
machinery to manipulate containers specifically designed and engineered for
use in conjunction with the automated machinery and provided to the property
owner by the city.



   “CONDOMINIUM UNIT.”  An enclosed space in a condominium (as that
term is defined at IC 32-1-6-2) consisting of one or more rooms occupying all
or part of a floor or floors in a structure of one or more floors or stories
designed and utilized as a residence with either a direct exit to a public
street or highway or an exit to a thoroughfare or to a given common space
leading to a thoroughfare, together with the undivided interest in the common
elements appertaining to that unit of space.



   “DOMESTIC USE.”  That “GARBAGE” or “RUBBISH”, as defined
herein, generated by each single-family residence or apartment buildings of
four units or less within the city limits.



   “GARBAGE.”  All and every refuse accumulation of animal, fish,
fowl, fruit, or vegetable matter that results from the preparation, use,
cooking, retail or wholesale dealing in, or storage of meat, fish, fowl,
fruit, or vegetable, and shall include such materials wrapped in paper or its
equivalent.  It shall also include and mean tin cans, glass, bottles, and
broken crockery, that have been used as food or beverage containers.



   “MANUFACTURED HOUSING.”  A dwelling unit, designed and built in a
factory, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with
the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of
1974.  The term shall specifically include those manufactured dwelling units
commonly known as “MOBILE HOMES” or “TRAILERS.”



   “MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK.” One or more parcels of land that are
subdivided and contain individual lots that are leased or otherwise
contracted; that are owned, operated, or under the control of one or more
persons; and on which manufactured homes are located for the purpose of being
occupied as principal residences.



   “PRIVATE STREET.”  The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way built and maintained for purposes of vehicular traffic but neither
dedicated to public use nor publicly maintained.



   “PUBLIC STREET.”  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part of the way is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.  The term shall include an
“ALLEY” as defined at IC 9-13-2-2.5.



   “RUBBISH.” Such materials as ashes, cans, metalware, broken boxes,
wood, leaves, grass, weeds, or litter of any kind, including specifically,
but not by way of limitation:  used building materials such as concrete,
bricks, plastering lathes, timbers, or refuse of all kinds; worn out or cast
off appliances, such as freezers, refrigerators, dehumidifiers, humidifiers,
radios, television sets, fans, air conditioners, record or tape players, or
other items of furniture or furnishings or appliances incidental to domestic
use.



   “SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE.” Shall include conventionally built
structures; manufactured housing; or condominium units; designed, built, and
intended for occupancy by an individual or a single-family unit, and being
utilized for residential purposes.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 5964, passed 5-22-95; Am. Ord. 6421,
passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 6674, passed 5-21-12)



§ 95.06  CONTAINERS.



   (A)   All garbage and rubbish to be collected by the city's refuse
collection crews shall be placed in containers, or placed in securely tied
heavy duty plastic bags.  Containers shall be of no more than 30- gallon
capacity.  If a container is used, the container shall be constructed of
heavy duty plastic or metal that shall have a lid sufficient to inhibit the
entry or water; and shall have handles of sufficient strength to bear the
content's weight while being lifted.



   (B)   On routes served by an automated packer refuse collection
system, bags must be placed in containers supplied by the city in conjunction
with automated refuse collection.  The 30-gallon containers will no longer
be acceptable with the automated packer refuse collection system.



   (C)   Plastic bags shall be filled no more than six inches from the
top and securely tied to facilitate handling.



   (D)   Garbage and rubbish not in the aforementioned types of
containers or bags, or garbage or rubbish whose containers have broken, and
the contents scattered on the ground, shall not be picked up.



   (E)   Garbage and rubbish will not be collected if the non-
automated route container and contents is more than 50 pounds in weight; if
the content of the container is not in unbroken and securely tied heavy duty
plastic bags, if the bags are frozen in the container, if the container is
frozen to the ground, or if there is evidence that animals have invaded the
container.



   (F)   Cardboard boxes within the size restrictions outlined above
can be used as containers provided they can be lifted by one man. These boxes
will not be collected if water-soaked by weather or wet garbage.



   (G)   No garbage or rubbish shall be placed for collection in what
are commonly know as 50-gallon drums or similar containers not originally
designed and constructed to be used as receptacles for garbage or rubbish. 
No such prohibited containers shall be located in city right-of-way.



   (H)   Trash or garbage containers left upon the sidewalk, the area
between a street and sidewalk or the front or side yard, or any public place,
except as permitted by this section, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.  Provided that, in those cases where it is demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the city that there is no physical possibility of locating
garbage and rubbish containers at a site other than in one of the locations
prohibited under this division, the Street Commissioner is authorized to
issue written variances as may be appropriate.  Such variances may not allow
permanent placement of such containers on a public place or a site visible
from the public street.



   (I)   Garbage or rubbish strewn upon the ground in the vicinity of
garbage containers unless enclosed in containers or bags as authorized by
this section on regular collection days shall constitute a violation of this
section.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 6421, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.07  EXTENT, LIMITATION OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Extent of collection.



      (1)   All garbage and rubbish placed in the types of container
outlined in § 95.06 shall be collected without regard to the number of
containers at a given pickup place, so long as the material is generated by
domestic use, subject to the limitations of division (B) below.



      (2)   All other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding,
the city is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements and other
contractual relationships with other governmental and quasi- governmental
agencies for the provisions of garbage and rubbish collection upon terms
acceptable to the entities and to provide such services according to such
terms.  Cooperative agreements in effect as of the time of adoption of this
chapter shall remain in full force and effect.



   (B)   Limitation of collection.



      (1)   Other provisions of this subchapter notwithstanding,
rubbish of exceptional size or weight will not be collected as a part of
regular refuse pickup, even if the same is set out in containers that meet
the requirements of § 95.06.  The excluded materials would include, but not
be limited to, construction or demolition debris, more than one large item of
furniture or large appliance per week, tree limbs or brush except as
hereinafter provided, cement blocks, bricks, or timbers.



      (2)   Division (A) above shall be interpreted in a reasonable
manner by the Street Department.  The term "LARGE" as used herein shall be
construed to mean as having a volume of more than one cubic yard.



      (3)   Tree branches, brush, plant stalks, and shrubs of not
more than four inches in diameter which are cut up into no more than
four-foot lengths and bound into bundles, with each bundle no more than 50
pounds, shall be picked up as part of the regular pickup schedule.



      (4)   Hazardous materials, or materials requiring special
handling under applicable state or federal laws, rules, or regulations, shall
not be collected. By way of example and not limitation, such materials would
include vehicle tires, propane tanks, helium tanks, butane tanks, gasoline
tanks, or cans containing liquid paint, herbicides, poisons, appliances with
Freon, or other materials found to be hazardous under state or federal laws,
rules, or regulations.



   (C)   State or federal regulation.



      (1)   In the event that state or federal law, or a rule or
regulation promulgated by a state or federal agency authorized to administer
state or federal law, imposes restrictions or prohibitions on materials that
may be collected for disposal in landfills or disposed of otherwise, which
restrictions or prohibitions are applicable to city trash collection, the
City Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized, by resolution, to
further limit city collection practices to ring those practices into
conformity with state or federal requirements.  Prior to the passage of such
a resolution, the Board shall hold a public hearing on any such additional
limitation on collection and shall, at the hearing, and in any subsequent
resolution, cite the federal or state law, rule, or regulation which requires
or mandates the additional restriction or prohibition.  Notice of the public
hearing shall be given pursuant to IC 5-3-1-1 et seq.  Public notice shall
be given of any such additional restrictions or prohibitions imposed by
publishing the same pursuant to IC 5-1-3-4, with the last notice being
published at least three days prior to the effective date of such additional
limitations.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 5964, passed 5-22-95; Am. Ord. 5975,
passed 9-25-95; Am. Ord. 6421, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.08  ADDITIONAL COLLECTIONS; COLLECTION SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Additional collections.  Rubbish which would not otherwise by
picked up because of size, weight, or amount, under the terms of this
subchapter, can be picked up for an additional charge, assuming suitable
pickup equipment and manpower is available.  An additional charge, in an
amount to be set by the Board of Public Works and Safety, shall be charged
for this extra disposal.  The fees so established shall be collected by the
office of the City Controller and shall be placed in the general fund of the
city.



   (B)   Collection schedule.



      (1)   Garbage and refuse will be picked up at least once each
seven days from each single-family residence, unit in apartment buildings of
four units or less, or manufactured home in manufactured housing parks with
four manufactured homes or less within the city limits.



      (2)   Collection schedules will be determined by the Street
Department.  Initial collection schedules and amendments thereto will be
publicly announced at least seven days in advance of implementation.  The
announcement will be made through the local media, but does not require legal
publication.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 6674, passed 5-21-12)



§ 95.09  PLACE OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Public Streets.  Collection of garbage and rubbish shall be
made at ground level within five feet adjoining the designated improved and
passable alley when available or at an easily accessible designated spot
within five feet of the front curb of a public street, or as otherwise
designated by the Street Commissioner.



   (B)   Private Streets.  Private streets shall not be utilized by
city collection crews to collect garbage and rubbish from single family
residences or eligible apartment buildings abutting the private streets in
the absence of a written agreement between the owner of the private street
license to the city to utilize the private street for the purpose of
effecting garbage and rubbish collection from the single family residences
and eligible apartment buildings abutting the private streets.  Such an
agreement shall be on terms and conditions acceptable to the Board.  It
shall be the obligation of the owner of the private street to obtain such a
written agreement with the city.  Before any such agreement is entered into,
the City Board of Public Works and Safety may require a report from the
Street Commissioner, which report shall set out the feasibility of utilizing
the private street for the collection of garbage and rubbish.  The city
shall not be required to enter into an agreement for the utilization of
private streets for collection purposes if, in the opinion of the Street
Commissioner, the street cannot safely be used by city collection equipment
because of width, weight limitations, turning radii, or other factors.  In
the absence of such an agreement, the Street Commissioner may designate a
collection point abutting a public street or alley to be utilized by those
residents whose domiciles abut the private street; are otherwise eligible for
garbage and rubbish collection; and who request collection service.  In any
such agreement, it shall be the owner's responsibility to maintain the
private street in a condition where the street can safely be utilized by city
trash collection equipment for collection purposes.  The maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, snow and ice removal; parking regulations
designed to allow free passage of collection equipment.  If, in the opinion
of the Street Commissioner, a private street cannot safely be utilized for
collection purposes, due to a correctable problem, the Street Commissioner
may suspend use of the street for collection purposes until the owner has
corrected the problem.  Where the owner disputes the opinion of the Street
Commissioner, the matter shall be referred to the City Board of Public Works
and Safety for a hearing.  The decision of the Board upon the matter shall
be final.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 5964, passed 5-22-95)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.10  NONCOMPLIANCE; CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   (A)   (1)   In all cases where there is found to be noncompliance
with the provisions of this subchapter, the owner of the property found to be
in noncompliance shall be notified by the Street Department by any of the
following means:



         (a)   By certified mail addressed to the owner;



         (b)   By personally delivering and serving a copy of
said notice upon the person to be notified;



         (c)   By leaving a copy of said notice at the dwelling
or usual place of abode of the person to be notified;



         (d)   Posting a copy of the notice in a prominent place
upon the premises where the violation has occurred;



         (e)   If, after a reasonable effort, service cannot be
obtained by any of the means outlined in subsections (1)(a) through (1)(d)
above, service may be made by publishing the notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the property subject to the notice is
located.



      (2)   Proof of service.  When service is made by any of the
means described in this section, except by mailing or by publication, the
person making service must make an affidavit stating that he or she has made
the service, the manner in which service was made, to whom the order or
statement was issued, the nature of the order or statement, and the date of
service.  The affidavit shall be placed on file with the Street
Department.  Where service is made by mailing, proof of service will be
evidenced by the postal service return receipt signed by the recipient. 
Where service is made by publication, service shall be evidenced by the
publisher's certificate.



      (3)   Effective date of notice.  The date when notice is
considered given as follows:



         (a)   If the notice is delivered personally or left at
the dwelling or usual place of abode, notice is considered given on the day
when the order or statement is delivered to the person or left at his or her
dwelling or usual place of abode.



         (b)   If the notice is mailed, notice is considered
given on the date shown on the return receipt, or, if no date is shown, on
the date when the return receipt is received by the Street Department.



         (c)   Notice by publication is considered given on the
date of publication.



   (B)   The notice shall briefly describe the nature of the
noncompliance and indicate what corrective action is required.



   (C)   The property owner so notified will have five days from
receipt of the notice to take the corrective action indicated.



   (D)   Should the corrective action not be taken within the time
specified herein, the city shall take such action at the expense of the
property owner involved.



   (E)   The charge assessed against the property owner described in
division (D) above will be based upon the actual cost to the city and may
include, but not be limited to, labor and equipment costs of city employees
and machinery and costs charged to the city by private individuals or firms
contracted by the city to perform the required corrective action.  In no
case shall the charge be less than $25.



   (F)   A billing statement outlining the charges incurred by the city
shall be sent to the property owner in noncompliance.  Should arrangements
not be made to pay these charges within ten days of the mailing of the
billing, the city may commence action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce collection of the charges incurred by the city.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 6421, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.11  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.



   Residents who fail to comply with this subchapter, or who, as a result,
allow garbage or rubbish to remain upon any alley, street, or public way, or
allow garbage or rubbish to remain in a visible and unsightly manner will be
subject, in addition to the charges set out herein, to such other penalties
as are otherwise provided by local ordinance or state law.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.12  COLLECTION DEFICIENCIES AND COMPLAINTS.



   All citizen complaints regarding refuse service will be directed to the
Street Commissioner of the city for necessary administrative or corrective
action.



(Ord. 5153, passed 2-8-82)



§ 95.13  ADDITIONAL PROVISION FOR AUTOMATED PACKER TRASH COLLECTION.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply whenever garbage or
rubbish collection is effected by the utilization of automated machinery with
garbage containers specifically designed and engineered for use in
conjunction the automated trash collection machinery provided to the property
owner by the city.



   (B)   Containers provided by the city shall remain the sole property
of the city.  One container shall be provided to each residence.  Should
more than one container be required, as in  the case of a household
generating more than one container's volume of disposable material per week
resulting from domestic use, additional containers may be provided. 
Containers requiring placement due to negligence shall be provided at the
cost of the replacement container to the city.



   (C)   On those collection routes served bu automated packers, the
following additional requirements will apply:



      (1)   Containers should be placed so that the arrow inscribed
on the container is pointed towards the alley or street for pick-up.



      (2)   All trash should be placed in heavy duty plastic bags
and all such bags should be placed in the provided container.



      (3)   No individual plastic bag, together with  its content,
shall exceed 50 pounds in weight.



      (4)   Only bags placed in the provided container will be
collected.



      (5)   Containers shall be placed at the pick-up site by 7:00
a.m. on the property owner's normal collection day.



      (6)   Containers will be removed from the curbside within 12
hours after trash pick-up.



      (7)   Container lids must be closed with no contents
protruding from the container.



      (8)   No provided container shall be placed within three feet
of an obstruction, such as a building, automobile, garage, fence, mailbox,
etc.



      (9)   All boxes must be broken down and placed inside the
provided container.



      (10)   No hot items, such as hot charcoal from a grill, may be
placed in any provided container.



      (11)   Only provided containers will be emptied.  No other
type of container should be set out for collection except during specific
periods announced by the city to accommodate seasonally related heavy
pick-ups (such as Christmas).



      (12)   The area surrounding the container shall be kept free
of any loose garbage or rubbish.



   (D)   The party responsible for assuring compliance with the
provision of this section shall be the property owner of record as shown in
the records of the Howard County Auditor.



   (E)   Where there is noncompliance with the provision of division
(C) above, a notice of violation will be affixed to the container advising
the property owner of the nature of the violation.  If the non-compliance
continues after notice is given, a citation  may be issued for the
violation, rendering the violator subject to the penalties set out in §
95.99(A).



   (F)   The provisions of this section pertaining to automated
collection routes shall be controlling should conflict be found to exist
between the general provisions of the city code pertaining to collection
services and those provisions contained herein referring specifically to
automated collection procedures.



(Ord. 6421, passed 4-24-06)



COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OPERATIONS GENERALLY



§ 95.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "GARBAGE."  Rejected food wastes, including every waste accumulation
of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that
attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit, or vegetables.



   "GROUNDWATER."  Water in the ground that is in the zone of saturation.



   "HAZARDOUS MATERIAL."  Explosives, pathological wastes, radio- active
materials and chemicals, and other similar materials.



   "HEALTH OFFICER."  The Kokomo-Howard County Health Officer, or his
authorized representative.



   "PUBLIC DISPOSAL."  The disposal of refuse which has been removed from
premises used, owned, or leased by one or more persons and transported to
other premises and disposed of either with or without the payment of a fee.



   "REFUSE."  Any combination of garbage and rubbish.



   "RUBBISH."  Such matter as ashes, cans, metalware, broken glass,
crockery, dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass, weeds, or litter of any kind,
including specifically, but not by way of limitation, used building materials
such as concrete, bricks, plastering lathes, timbers, or refuse of all kinds,
and worn out or cast off appliances such as freezers, refrigerators,
dehumidifiers, humidifiers, radios, television sets, fans, air conditioners,
record or tape players, or other items of furnishings or appliances
incidental to residential, business, professional, commercial, or industrial
use.



   "SALVAGING."  The controlled removal of reusable materials.



   "SANITARY LANDFILL."  A method of disposing of refuse on land without
creating nuisances or hazards to public health or safety, by utilizing
principles of engineering to confine the refuse to the smallest practical
area, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a
compacted layer of suitable cover material at the conclusion of each day and
at more frequent intervals as necessary, including public and private
operations.



   "SCAVENGING."  The uncontrolled picking of materials.



   "SURFACE WATERS."  A body of water whose top surface is exposed to the
atmosphere including a flowing body as well as a pond or a lake.



('75 Code, § 11-17)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)



§ 95.16  SCAVENGING PROHIBITED.



   No scavenging operation shall be permitted at any place.



('75 Code, § 11-18)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.17  SALVAGE OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The salvaging of refuse at any place, if permitted, shall be
organized so that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary disposal of
refuse or create unsightliness or health hazards.  However, this provision
in no way precludes the right of a landfill operator to prevent salvaging as
a part of his operational standards.



   (B)   All salvage material must be removed from the disposal area at
least once each week, except that any and all materials containing food for
rodents and insects, including tin cans, shall be disposed of daily in a
sanitary manner.



('75 Code, § 11-l9)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.18  RIGHT OF ENTRY BY HEALTH OFFICER.



   The person operating a sanitary landfill shall, on request of the
Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the grounds by the Health
Officer and shall permit him to copy any and all records pertaining to the
sources of refuse transported thereto for public disposal.



('75 Code, § 11-20)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)



§ 95.19  ENFORCEMENT.



   The enforcement of this subchapter shall be by the County Health
Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-21)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)



§ 95.20  DUTY OF CITY ATTORNEY.



   It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, to whom the Health Officer
shall report any violations of the provisions of this subchapter, to cause
proceedings to be commenced against the person violating its provisions, and
to prosecute that person to final termination.



('75 Code, § 11-22)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)



COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS



§ 95.25  REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a valid permit
from the Health Officer to engage in the removal of refuse from premises to a
location other than the place of origin of such refuse for disposal.



('75 Code, § 11-31)  (Ord. 3968, passed l-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.26  LANDFILL PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a valid permit
from the Health Officer to engage in the disposal of refuse by means of a
sanitary landfill on premises other than the place of origin of such refuse
or on premises at the place of origin in such quantities as to have public
health significance.



('75 Code, § 11-32)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.27  REMOVAL PERMIT APPLICATION; VEHICULAR PERMIT.



   The application for a permit for the collection and removal of refuse
from premises to a location other than the place of origin of the refuse
shall list the separate items of equipment to be used by the applicant
including all motor vehicles to be operated on the public streets of the
city.  In addition, the applicant shall immediately apply for a new permit
for each vehicle used in his operation.



('75 Code, § 11-33)  (Ord. 4111, passed 7-10-72)



§ 95.28  PERMITS TO BE SIGNED BY CONTROLLER.



   No permit required by this subchapter signed by the Health Officer
shall be valid until it has been countersigned by the City Controller.  The
City Controller shall countersign a properly signed permit upon payment to
him of a permit fee in the amount of $10 for each vehicle used in the
operation.  Such moneys or fees collected under the terms of this subchapter
shall revert to the general fund, provided, that the provisions of this
subchapter shall not apply if the permit has been countersigned by the County
Auditor.



('75 Code, § 11-34)  (Ord. 3698, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.29  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR PERMIT.



   Only those persons who comply with the provisions of this subchapter
shall be entitled to receive, retain, or renew any permit required by its
provisions, but no such permit or renewal thereof shall be denied on
arbitrary or capricious grounds.



('75 Code, § 11-35)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)



§ 95.30  TERM OF PERMITS.



   All permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
be issued for a period of one year between March l and April 30 of each year,
and shall be renewable annually.



('75 Code, § 11-36)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)



§ 95.31  SEPARATE LANDFILL PERMITS REQUIRED.



   A separate permit shall be required for each sanitary landfill site to
be operated by any person.



('75 Code, § 11-37)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)



§ 95.32  FILING OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR LANDFILL PERMIT.



   Before a sanitary landfill permit is issued by the Health Officer for
any new site, detailed plans and specifications and necessary reports must be
submitted to the Health Officer by a registered professional engineer.  The
services of a registered professional engineer for the preparation of plans
and specifications for an existing disposal site may be waived, when the
Health Officer, in his judgment, believes that technical problems will not be
encountered, however, the required plans and specifications must then be
prepared and submitted by the permit applicant.



('75 Code, § 11-38)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.33  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   The issuance of any permit to a person for the operation of a proposed
sanitary landfill shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Public
Works and Safety who shall inspect the proposed site prior to the issuance of
a permit by the Health Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-39)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.34  PERSONS NOT REQUIRED TO OBTAIN LANDFILL PERMIT.



   No person shall be required to obtain a disposal permit under the
provisions of this subchapter who is engaged in the filling of low ground
with earth, bricks, broken concrete or concrete blocks, lath, plaster,
pulverized glass, ceramic material, and disassembled wood crates and other
similar materials, provided none of the fill materials contain either
rejected food waste, paper, rags, plastics, and tin cans or hazardous
materials.



('75 Code, § 11-40)  (Ord. 4111, passed 7-10-72)



§ 95.35  VEHICLE INSPECTIONS AND CONDITION.



   Before a removal is issued by the Health Officer for the collection and
transportation of refuse, all equipment and vehicles to be used shall be
inspected by the Health Officer, and no permit is granted unless all the
equipment and vehicles used to transport refuse to a disposal site are
covered, watertight, and clean; such equipment and vehicles shall be subject
to any other regulations as adopted from time to time by the County Board of
Health, as may be necessary to prevent nuisances and health hazards.



('75 Code, § 11-41)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.36  PERSONS NOT REQUIRED TO OBTAIN REMOVAL PERMIT.



   All persons collecting and hauling garbage, refuse, or trash generated
on their own premises to a sanitary landfill which holds a permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter shall not be required to apply for and receive
any permit under the terms of this subchapter, provided, that all such
persons use equipment and vehicles to transport such garbage and refuse which
are covered and watertight, so as to prevent leakage of the load or a part
thereof, on the public thoroughfares.



('75 Code, § 11-42)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.37  CONTENTS OF PERMITS.



   Any permit issued by the Health Officer pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter shall contain the name of the person to whom it is issued,
the address of the premises for which it is to be used, and such other
information as may be required by the Health Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-43)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)



§ 95.38  INSPECTIONS OF LANDFILL SITES; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   At least once every 60 days the Health Officer shall inspect
each sanitary landfill.



   (B)   In case the Health Officer discovers a violation of this
subchapter he shall made a report of same and make a second inspection after
the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the defect to be remedied.



   (C)   Any violation of the same item of this subchapter on a second
inspection shall call for suspension or revocation of the permit for same.



('75 Code, § 11-44)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.39  FILING OF COPIES OF INSPECTION REPORT.



   One copy of the Health Officer's inspection report, on which violations
of any of the provisions of this subchapter are inscribed, shall be delivered
to the permittee by the Health Officer, and another copy of the inspection
report shall be filed by the Health Officer with the County Health Department.



('75 Code, § 11-45)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.40  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS GENERALLY.



   A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may be temporarily
suspended by the Health Officer on violation, by the holder, of any of the
terms of this subchapter, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by
the Health Officer on serious or repeated violations.



('75 Code, § 11-46)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)



COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; SANITARY LANDFILL REGULATIONS



§ 95.45  APPLICATION OF RULES TO EXISTING SITES.



   Modification of the rules on sanitary landfills as applicable to
existing disposal areas may be made by the Health Officer in writing.



('75 Code, § 11-54)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.46  OTHER DISPOSAL METHODS.



   Any other method of solid waste disposal not covered by this subchapter
shall be reviewed by the County Health Department for the purposes of
evaluating the design and operational methods with reference to the nuisance
factor, the safety of employees, and protection of the public health.  Such
disposal methods shall be subject to the evaluation and approval of the
Health Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-55)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.47  OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY.



   Any person operating a sanitary landfill or soliciting fill material
shall allow only authorized fill material to be deposited at it.



('75 Code, § 11-56)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69; Am. Ord. 4111, passed
7-10-72)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.48  EQUIPMENT GENERALLY.



   Any person engaged in refuse disposal by sanitary landfill shall have
available at all times earth-moving equipment of adequate size and capacity
to satisfactorily operate such sanitary landfill.



('75 Code, § 11-57)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.49  ROAD REQUIRED.



   An all-weather road shall be provided to the sanitary landfill site. 



('75 Code, § 11-58)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.50  CLEANLINESS.



   The entire area of a sanitary landfill shall be kept clean and
orderly. 



('75 Code, § 11-59)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.51  BURNING GARBAGE.



   No garbage, or rubbish containing garbage, shall be burned at a
sanitary landfill.



('75 Code, § 11-60)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



§ 95.52  SPREADING OF REFUSE.



   All refuse at a sanitary landfill shall be spread so that it can be
compacted daily in layers not exceeding a depth of two feet.



('75 Code, § 11-61)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.53  PLACEMENT OF FINAL LAYER OVER REFUSE.



   A final layer of suitable cover material compacted to a minimum
thickness of two feet shall be placed over the entire surface of each portion
of a sanitary landfill site not later than one week following the placement
of refuse within that portion.



('75 Code, § 11-62)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.54  MAINTENANCE OF FINAL COVER.



   All necessary arrangements shall be made at a sanitary landfill for the
repair of all cracked, eroded, and uneven areas in the final cover during the
first two years following completion of the landfill.



('75 Code, § 11-63)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.55  INSPECTIONS AFTER WORK COMPLETED; CORRECTION OF DEFECTS.



   An inspection of the entire sanitary landfill site shall be made by the
Health Officer in order to determine compliance with approved plans and
specifications before any earth-moving equipment is removed from the site and
any necessary corrective work shall be performed before the landfill project
is accepted as completed.



('75 Code, § 11-64)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.56  DRAINAGE.



   The entire sanitary landfill site, including the fill surface, shall be
graded and provided with drainage facilities to minimize runoff onto and into
the fill, to prevent erosion or washing of the fill, to drain off rainwater
falling on the fill, and to prevent the collection of standing water.



('75 Code, § 11-65)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.57  WATER POLLUTION FROM SANITARY LANDFILLS.



   All sanitary landfill operations shall be designed and executed so that
conditions of pollution will not be created and injury to ground and surface
waters avoided which might interfere with legitimate water uses. 
Water-filled areas not directly connected to natural lakes, rivers, or
streams shall be drained or may be filled with specific inert material not
detrimental to legitimate water uses which will not create a nuisance or
hazard to health, but special approval of the drainage method or of the inert
material to be used in such fill is required in writing from the Health
Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-66)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.58  UNCOOKED GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to make uncooked garbage available for animal
consumption at any sanitary landfill.



('75 Code, § 11-67)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.59  INFESTATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any sanitary landfill
to allow any infestations of rodents and insects on the premises.



('75 Code, § 11-68)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.60  DUST AND PAPER CONTROL.



   Measures shall be provided at a sanitary landfill to control dust and
blowing paper.



('75 Code, § 11-69)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.61  DISPOSAL OF BULKY ITEMS.



   Large and bulky items, when not excluded from a sanitary landfill,
shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Health Officer.



('75 Code, § 11-70)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)



§ 95.62  DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   Hazardous materials, including liquids and sewage, shall not be
disposed of in a sanitary landfill unless special provisions are made for
such disposal through the Health Officer, the State Board of Health, or the
Stream Pollution Control Board, provided, that this provision in no way
precludes the right of a landfill operator to exclude any materials as a part
of his operational standards.



('75 Code, § 11-71)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.63  LANDFILLS FOR WHICH PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of such low ground being filled, for which a permit
is not required, shall at all times keep and maintain the area of such
property adjacent to any public thoroughfare serving such property free and
clear of all such fill material for a distance of 30 feet back from the edge
of such public thoroughfare, such owner shall also take such steps as are
necessary to keep such public thoroughfare adjacent to his land free and
clear of any accumulation of the fill material being used in such operation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the filling of
low ground who is not required to obtain a permit under the terms of this
subchapter to permit or allow the burning of any of the materials used in the
filling of such ground.



('75 Code, § 11-72)  (Ord. 3968, passed 1-27-69)  Penalty, see § 95.99



DISPOSAL OF SCAVENGER WASTE



§ 95.70  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CESSPOOL."  A cavity in the ground which receives human excrement and
domestic wastes to be partially absorbed directly by the surrounding soil.



   "SCAVENGER WASTES."  Waste materials removed from septic tanks and
cesspools as herein defined, including both waste water and suspended solids.



   "SEPTIC TANK."  A septic toilet, chemical closet and any other water
tight enclosure used for storage and decomposition of human excrement and/or
domestic wastes.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



§ 95.71  LIMITATION ON DISPOSAL OF SCAVENGER WASTE.



   (A)   No person, owning or operating a vacuum or cesspool pump
truck, or other liquid waste transport vehicle shall directly or indirectly
discharge scavenger wastes, as defined in § 95.70, into the municipal
sanitary sewer system except as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   The City Wastewater Treatment Plant is designated as a
scavenger waste disposal site.



   (C)   Scavenger wastes may be disposed of within the municipal sewer
system only at a designated scavenger waste disposal site.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.72  CHARGES.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to set fees
and charges for the disposal of scavenger wastes at designated scavenger
waste disposal sites on a per load or other reasonable basis.



   (B)   The fees and charges referred to in division (A) are subject
to periodic review and adjustment by the Board of Public Works and Safety,
subject to review and approval by the Common Council.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



§ 95.73  SUPERVISION.



   (A)   The Superintendent of the Municipal Sanitation Utility, or his
designate, shall have supervisory authority over the disposal of scavenger
wastes at scavenger disposal sites within the city.



   (B)   The Superintendent of the Municipal Sanitation Utility is
authorized to establish rules, regulations, and procedures for the operation
of scavenger waste disposal sites within the city.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



§ 95.74  LIMITATION ON SCAVENGER WASTE.



   (A)   Scavenger waste disposal sites within the city are required to
accept only scavenger wastes generated within the municipal limits of the
city or within the limits of Howard County, subject to the limitations set
out in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Scavenger waste will be accepted only from persons who are in
full compliance with the provisions of IC state law, as that act now exists,
and as it may from time to time be amended.



   (C)   The Superintendent of the Municipal Sanitation Utility, or his
designate, is authorized to establish such classes of scavenger waste that
will not be accepted for disposal at scavenger waste disposal sites within
the city as are necessary to prevent over-loading of the capacities of the
city sewage system.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Editor's note:



   Division (B) originally referred to IC 13-7-8.8-1 et seq., which was
part of a series of statutes repealed, and then replaced by IC 13-13 et seq.



§ 95.75  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Superintendent of the Municipal Sanitation Utility who is hereby designated
the enforcing officer.



   (B)   Other city departments and personnel will cooperate with the
Superintendent as required to promote the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



§ 95.76  VIOLATION.



   It shall be a violation of this subchapter to dispose of scavenger
wastes in the city at a site other than a designated scavenger waste disposal
site.



(Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $l,000.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.



   (B)   Any person who violates a provision of §§ 95.70 through
95.76 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense
is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500.  (Ord. 5188, passed 7-12-82)



CHAPTER 96:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Board of Park Commissioners



Rules and Regulations



   96.10   Definitions



   96.11   Construction and scope



   96.12   Defacement, destruction, or removal of property, plants, and
animals



   96.13   Waste



   96.14   Wildlife



   96.15   Fires



   96.16   Possession of firearms



   96.17   Camps and camping



   96.18   Indecent conduct and exposure



   96.19   Disorderly conduct



   96.20   Traffic



   96.21   Equestrians and mounts



   96.22   Snowmobiles, sledding, skiing, and skating



   96.23   Power models and toy engine unit permits



   96.24   Aviation



   96.25   Swimming, bathing, and wading



   96.26   Golfing



   96.27   Bows and arrows



   96.28   Use of firearms



   96.29   Required game safety



   96.30   Household pets and grazing



   96.31   Commercial enterprises prohibited



   96.32   Advertising and public meetings



   96.33   Watercraft



   96.34   Hours of closing



   96.35   Permits and reservations



   96.36   Fees and charges



   96.37   Entranceways



   96.38   Nonpublic telephones



 



   96.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to provide for public parks and recreational facilities,
see IC 36-10-2-2



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  BOARD OF PARK COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   Composition.  The Board of Park Commissioners shall be
composed of four members but not more than two members shall be of the same
political party.  ('75 Code, § 17-24)



   (B)   Appointment.  The members of the Board of Park Commissioners
shall be appointed by the Mayor.  ('75 Code, § 17-25)



   (C)   Term of office.  The members of the Board of Park
Commissioners shall serve for a term of four years and until their respective
successors in office are elected and qualified.  ('75 Code, § 17-26)



   (D)   Oath.  Each member of the Board of Park Commissioners before
entering on his duties shall take and subscribe the usual oath of office, to
be indorsed on the certificate of his appointment, and shall cause the same
to be filed with the City Clerk.  Any person who shall not file such oath
with the City Clerk within 30 days after the beginning of the term for which
he has been appointed, or at the date of his appointment, if appointed after
the beginning of such term, shall be deemed to have refused to serve and the
office shall become vacant.  ('75 Code, § 17-27)



   (E)   Removal of members.  The Mayor may remove any member of the
Board of Park Commissioners from office on filing in writing with the City
Clerk his reasons for such removal.  ('75 Code, § 17-28)



   (F)   Filling vacancies.  If any vacancy should occur on the Board
of Park Commissioners by resignation or otherwise, the Mayor shall appoint a
commissioner for the residue of that term.



('75 Code, § 17-29)



   (G)   Officers.  The Board of Park Commissioners shall choose,
annually, at its first regular meeting in January, one of its members
president, and another of its members vice-president, who shall perform the
duties of the president during the absence or disability of the president. 
('75 Code, § 17-30)



   (H)   Compensation.  Except as otherwise provided by state law, the
members of the Board of Park Commissioners shall serve without
compensation.  ('75 Code, § 17-31)



   (I)   Public meetings.  All meetings of the Board of Park
Commissioners shall be open to the public.  ('75 Code, § 17-32)



   (J)   Regular meetings.  The Board of Park Commissioners shall fix
a time for its regular meetings.  ('75 Code, § 17-33)



   (K)   Special meetings.  Special meetings of the Board of Park
Commissioners may be called at any time by its president, or by any two of
its members, on a written request to the secretary.  Whenever in the opinion
of the president, or of any two members, a special meeting is necessary or
advisable, he, or they shall cause the secretary to notify the members by
mailing written notice of the time of such meeting, at least one day before
such meeting.  Any member may waive such notice in writing and the presence
of any member at a special meeting shall be deemed a waiver of such notice. 
('75 Code, § 17-34)



   (L)   Quorum.  A majority of the members of the Board of Park
Commissioners shall constitute a quorum, but no action of the Board shall be
binding unless authorized by a majority of its members. ('75 Code, § 17-35)



   (M)   Voting by Mayor.  In the case of a tie vote by the members of
the Board of Park Commissioners on any issue, the Mayor shall cast the
deciding vote.  ('75 Code, § 17-36)



Cross-reference:



   Department of Parks and Recreation, see § 30.17



Statutory reference:



   Board of Park Commissioners, see IC 36-10-3-1 et seq.



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 96.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BOARD."  The Board of Park Commissioners.



   "CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES."  Has the meaning set forth in IC 35-48-1.



   "DEPARTMENT."  The Parks and Recreation Department, which is composed
of the Board of Park Commissioners, a Superintendent, and such other
personnel as the Board may determine.



   "MOTOR BOAT."  Any type of watercraft which has for its primary source
of power an internal combustion engine or electric motor whether inboard or
outboard.



   "PARK."  All developments, improvements, facilities, and any or all
land, minerals, waters, overhead air rights, easements, and other
reservations owned, leased, controlled, or used by the Department.



   "PERMIT AND RESERVATION."  Any authorization issued by the
Superintendent pursuant to the authority of the Board for a specified park
privilege, activity, or event or permitting the performance of a specified
act or acts in any park.



   "RANGER."  Any person, or agents, employees, patrolmen, police
officers, sheriff's posse, and other law enforcement officers appointed or
designated by the Board to enforce the rules and regulations adopted by the
Board.



   "RULES AND REGULATIONS."  Any regulation adopted by the Board.



   "SUPERINTENDENT."  The Superintendent of the Parks and Recreation
Department and he shall act for the Board, enforce the laws, maintain law
enforcement, and maintain good order with the Department.



   "VEHICLES."  Any device, conveyance, or combination of conveyances,
wheeled or without wheels (but excepting motor boats) propelled, towed, or
unpropelled, that in, around, or on which a person or thing is or may be
carried and shall include without limitation bicycles, scooters, minibikes,
motorcycles, and snowmobiles.



   "WATERCRAFT."  All flotation devices intended to carry a human
passenger on the water including boards of any type, rafts, canoes, motor
boards, and inflatable flotation devices.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)



Editor's note:



   Statutory reference previously contained herein pertaining to dangerous
drugs has been repealed.  The term "dangerous drugs" has been replaced with
"controlled substances" throughout this chapter.



§ 96.11  CONSTRUCTION AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Any requirement or provisions of this subchapter relating to
any act shall respectfully extend to and include the causing, procuring,
aiding, or abetting, directly or indirectly, of such act, or the permitting
or the allowing of any unemancipated minor the doing of any willful or
malicious act prohibited by the provisions hereof by the parent or legal
guardian of such minor.



   (B)   No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily
performed by any officers or employee of the  Department  in  line  of
duty or work as such, or by any person, his agents, or employees, in the
proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with any board.



   (C)   Any act otherwise prohibited by this subchapter, provided it
is not otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance, shall be lawful if
performed within custodial quarters within the park or if performed under, by
virtue of, and strictly in compliance with the provisions of a permit and to
the extent authorized thereby.  This ordinance is in addition to and
supplemental to all municipal, state, and federal laws and ordinances.



   (D)   Territorial scope.  This subchapter shall be effective within
and on all areas under the jurisdiction of the Board, and shall regulate the
use thereof by all persons.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)



§ 96.12  DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, OR REMOVAL OF PROPERTY, PLANTS, AND
ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall injure, deface, destroy, disturb, defile, or
remove any part of the park, or any building, sign, equipment, or other
property found therein, nor shall any person maliciously cut down, destroy,
or injure a standing or growing vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or flower
or other vegetation or fruit or seed growing on park property, or maliciously
injure, destroy, disturb, or sever from the park a product standing or
growing or other thing, such as rock minerals, attached thereto or a part
thereof.



   (B)   No person shall intentionally accelerate a motor vehicle
causing the rubber tires to spin, mark, and deface the park or roadway
surface.



   (C)   Unless authorized by the Superintendent, no person shall bring
into or on any park any tree, shrub, or plant or any newly plucked branch or
portion thereof.



   (D)   Unless authorized by the Superintendent, no person shall bring
into and leave in any park any animal, fish, or fowl.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.13  WASTE.



   (A)   No person without authorization of the Superintendent shall
bring into, leave behind, or dump any material of any kind, whether waste or
otherwise, in the park, except refuse, ashes, garbage, and other material
arising from the normal use and enjoyment of a picnic, camp, or other
permitted activity provided such material is deposited in receptacles or pits
provided for such purposes.  Nor shall any material of any kind be left or
deposited without or near the parks so as to pollute the land, waters, or air
coursing through or over the parks or otherwise to interfere with proper use
and enjoyment of the park.  No bottles, cans, refuse, or foreign material of
any description shall be deposited or thrown in any of the streams,
waterways, ponds, or lakes located in the park.



   (B)   No person shall, either within or outside of the park, place
or permit to be placed in any river, brook, stream, pond, ditch, or drain
that is maintained in or flows into or through the park, any noxious or
deleterious material which may render park waters harmful to the public
health, or to animal, vegetation, or aquatic life, or which may prevent,
limit, or interfere with the use of such waters for domestic, industrial, or
agricultural purposes, or which may lessen to an unreasonable degree the use
and enjoyment of such waters for park recreational or other park uses.  All
sanitary sewage shall receive adequate primary, secondary, and tertiary
process plant treatment prior to resultant clear effluent entering into,
through, or on the park.



   (C)   No person, occupant, owner, or person in charge, by himself,
his agent, or employee, shall cause, suffer, or allow the burning of garbage,
refuse, waste material, trash, motor vehicle or any part thereof, or other
combustibles within or adjacent to the park so as to cause smoke, haze, odor,
sparks, dust, dirt, or other type matter or gaseous substance to come on,
pass through, or over the park which would cause an air pollution nuisance or
damage to persons or property.



   (D)   Open fires for recreational purposes, such as campfires,
barbecues, and cook-outs in designated areas shall be permitted provided the
materials used were not taken live from the park and provided same or
maintained so that such burning may be accomplished without the emission of
dense smoke, sparks, odor, dust, or ash, which may cause an air pollution
nuisance or damage to persons or property.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Health and sanitation, see Ch. 95



§ 96.14  WILDLIFE.



   (A)   No person within the confines of the park shall hunt, pursue
with dogs, trap, use walkie-talkie radios, planes, or in any other way molest
any wild bird or animal found within the confines of the park, or rob or
molest any animal den or bird nest or take the eggs of any bird, except by
specific written limited permit as may be issued by the Superintendent
specifically for area management, overabundance, disease, or inbreeding of
wildlife species balance control.  The Superintendent may cause such park
waters as it deems advisable closed to fishing and shall so post them.  In
all other park waters fishing shall be permitted subject to the state
statutes and to the Parks and Recreation fishing rules and regulations.



   (B)   All fish size and catch limitations shall be enforced pursuant
to state statutes.



   (C)   It is unlawful to introduce any nongame fish species, such as
carp and dogfish, without permission from the Superintendent or naturalist. 
No minnows, suckers, shiners, chubs, or any other live bait fish will be
allowed for bait.



   (D)   A certified card is required for all persons wishing to fish
in the parks.  In order to receive a card, a person must show a valid
resident or nonresident state fishing license or proof of age if under 16 or
over 65.



   (E)   Any person in violation of the Parks and Recreation Department
fishing regulations is subject to being voided from fishing at designated
parks or being prosecuted by a certified government official.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.15  FIRES.



   (A)   Starting fires.  No person shall start a fire in the park
except small fires for culinary purposes in park grills, or privately owned
grills, or fires in a place or designated areas approved by a park ranger or
Park Director except that the Superintendent may, at his discretion, prohibit
fires for limited periods at any location or for any purpose when necessary
for the protection of park property. Any fire shall be continuously attended
under the care and direction of a competent person.  All fires shall be
extinguished by the person starting or using the same before leaving the
immediate vicinity of the fire.  No fires shall be built within ten feet of
any tree or building, or beneath the branches of any trees or in any
underbrush.



   (B)   Dumping of ashes.  The dumping of hot ashes or fire from
portable picnic grills onto the grass or plants is prohibited.  Hot ashes
shall be deposited only in specified areas or designated receptacles, but not
in picnic refuse receptacles.



   (C)   Fire fuels.  No person shall be allowed to use any timber,
wood, twigs, branches, leaves, or other forest material as fuel for fires. 
Only charcoal will be permitted to be used as fuel for fires within the
parks, except by special permit from the Superintendent.



   (D)   Portable stoves and grills.  No portable stoves or grills
shall be permitted in shelters or on combustible picnic tables.



   (E)   Lighted matches.  No person shall throw away or discard any
lighted match, cigars, or cigarettes within any park property.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



§ 96.16  WEAPONS, EXPLOSIVES, MISSILES AND THE LIKE.



   Other than in authorized permitted shooting areas, no person shall
carry, air or gas guns, slingshots, explosives, fireworks, or missile
throwing or propelling devices within the park without specific written
permit from the Superintendent, except park rangers or enforcement officers
of the Board, or others while in the line of duty.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79; Am. Ord. 6644, passed 8-8-11)  Penalty, see §
96.99



Cross-reference:



   Discharge of firearms, see § 130.01



   Use of firearms, see § 96.28



§ 96.17  CAMPS AND CAMPING.



   (A)   No person shall camp within any park except in camping areas
as may from time to time be designated by the Board or on written approval of
the Superintendent.



   (B)   Except in areas set aside for camping, no person shall sleep
in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.18  INDECENT CONDUCT OR EXPOSURE.



   (A)   No person shall commit, perform, or engage in deviate sexual
conduct or an act of public indecency.



   (B)   No person shall solicit or attempt to solicit another to
engage in deviate sexual conduct or solicit or ask anyone to commit, perform,
or engage in an act of public indecency.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.19  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall, either by word or act, indulge in any noise,
boisterous, disorderly, or indecent conduct, or in any manner disturb the
peace or good order of the community within the park by loud playing of
record players, televisions, radios, tape recorders, noisemakers, sound
equipment, musical instruments, fighting, quarreling, or wrangling with loud
voices or shouts, threatening violence to the person or property of others,
or engaging in riotous clamor or tumult.  No person shall disturb or intrude
on a picnic or gathering in any park without consent of those composing the
group except park employees in the proper pursuit of their duties.



   (B)   Unlawful assemblage.  No group shall collect or assemble
within the park to do an unlawful act or for the purpose of inflicting injury
to persons or property within the park.



   (C)   Sale of merchandise.  No person shall offer or exchange for
sale any article of merchandise or do any hawking, peddling, or solicitation,
or buy or offer to buy any article of merchandise or take up any collection
or solicit or receive contributions of money or articles of value except when
authorized by permit or under contract with the Department.



Cross-reference:



   Peddlers, solicitors, and itinerant merchants, see Ch. 117



   (D)   Assault or bodily injury.  No person shall without lawful
authority engage in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension
of receiving a battery nor shall any person intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means cause bodily harm to an
individual.



   (E)   (1)   Drinking, under influence of, possession of alcoholic
liquor or dangerous drugs. No person shall drink, sell, possess, make a gift,
or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor or dangerous drugs within the park,
except as permitted under division (E)(2) below. No person under the
influence of alcoholic liquor or dangerous drugs shall enter or remain within
the park, nor shall any person within the park use, administer, receive,
offer for sale, possess, or make available to himself or herself, or any
person, any alcoholic liquor or dangerous drugs except as permitted under
division (E)(2) below.



      (2)   Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in Foster
Park during certain events. The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
in Foster Park is permitted under the following conditions:



         (a)   Approval for the sale and consumption of alcohol
must be obtained from the Kokomo Board of Park Commissioners.



         (b)   The applicant must demonstrate a partnership with
a non-profit organization that serves Kokomo and Howard County and possesses
a permit from the City of Kokomo for an approved event at the Kokomo Arts
Pavilion in Foster Park.



         (c)   The applicant must possess a valid temporary
beer/wine permit from the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission.



         (d)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
must be limited to an enclosed area against the east fence on the north
tennis courts in Foster Park.



         (e)   The applicant acknowledges it is a criminal
offense to sell or furnish alcoholic beverages to an intoxicated person and
may assume civil liability from such actions.



         (f)   The applicant must designate one person to check
identification and one person to provide security for the designated area at
all times during the event.



   (F)   Concealed or unlawful weapons and harmful substances.  No
person, except park rangers or law enforcement officers of the Board, or
other law enforcement officers in the line of duty, shall have or carry any
switchblade, hunting knife, dagger, metal knuckles, chain, slingshot,
blowgun, any dangerous lethal instrument, harmful solid, liquid aqueous,
effervescent, gaseous substance, or other dangerous weapon concealed on or
about his person while within the park.



Cross-reference:



   Possession of firearms, see § 96.16



   (G)   Gambling.  No persons shall engage in any game of chance or
in the use of any gambling device nor shall any person tell fortunes for
pecuniary reward.



   (H)   Profanity and abusive language.  No person shall use obscene,
profane, or abusive language while within the park.



   (I)   Loitering and vagrancy.  No person or group of persons shall
loiter in or near any building, toilet, stable, swimming pool, community
center, or other park structure, or loiter in or near a vehicle or vehicles
within the park.



   (J)   Unlawful entry of toilets.  No persons, except park
maintenance employees on duty, or park rangers or law enforcement officers,
shall enter a toilet room set aside for the opposite sex.



   (K)   Persons acting unlawfully to be removed from park.  No person
shall remain within the park who does not abide by conditions adopted and
posted by the Board for the preservation of good order and the protection of
property within the park, and no person shall remain within the park who does
not abide by the instructions and directions of duly authorized park rangers,
employees, or agents of the Board, in the lawful performance of their
duties.  Any person directed by a park ranger, employee, or agent of the
Board to leave the parks, shall do so promptly and peaceably.



   (L)   Unlawful to resist, obstruct, or abuse enforcement officers.
No person shall resist or obstruct, or be abusive of or address in a profane
or obscene manner, any park ranger, law enforcement officers, agent of the
Board, or any employee engaged in work for the Department.



Cross-reference:



   Interference, see § 130.07



   (M)   Failure to comply with orders of park personnel or rangers. No
person shall fail or refuse to comply with any reasonable order relating to
the regulation, direction, or control of traffic, or to any other order
lawfully given by any park personnel or law enforcement officer acting under
the authority of the Board or willfully resist, obstruct, assault, or abuse
any park personnel or law enforcement officer or any other official in the
execution of his office, or in any manner give aid to any person to escape
from custody or to attempt to escape from impending arrest or custody.



   (N)   Assisting park rangers.  Any park ranger may at any time call
on any able-bodied male person above the age of 18 years to aid him in
arresting, retaking, or holding in custody any person who has violated laws
and ordinances of the Department, or for any unlawful act.



   (O)   Contributing to delinquency of a minor.  No person shall
contribute to the delinquency of any minor while within the park.



   (P)   Equal rights of others.  Every person shall conduct himself
with due regard to the equal rights of others to the use and enjoyment of the
park.



Cross-reference:



   Human Relations Commission, see § 33.17



   (Q)   Throwing stones or missiles.  No person shall throw or cast
any stones or other missiles in the park.



   (R)   Impersonation of officers.  No person shall falsely represent
or impersonate any police officer of the Department.



   (S)   Begging.  No person shall beg or solicit alms in any manner
in any park.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79; Am. Ord. 6644, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. 6675,
passed 5-21-12)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.20  TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Speed limits.  No person shall drive, or propel, or cause to
be driven along or over any road within the park, any vehicle, or conveyance
at a rate of speed greater than speed limit signs erected along the
right-of-way nor, in the absence of signs, at a speed in excess of 20 miles
per hour, at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper with regard to
traffic conditions and the use of such roads, or endangers the safety of any
person or property.



   (B)   Storage of vehicles in parks prohibited.  No person shall
park or store any vehicle within the park, except in places designated by the
Superintendent for such purposes and payment of a parking fee which, if any,
may be set by the Board.  A vehicle parked in the park in excess of 24
consecutive hours will be towed away at the expense of the owner thereof.



   (C)   Vehicles restricted to roadways.  No person shall ride or
operate any vehicle on, over, along, or on any park except roadways,
driveways, and parking areas designated for the use of such vehicle, or
except in specially limited areas designated by the Superintendent from time
to time for particular type vehicles.



   (D)   Reckless driving of vehicles.  No person shall drive or
propel, or cause to be driven or propelled along or over any highway, road,
parkway, drive, or parking area within the park, any vehicle without due
regard for the safety and rights of pedestrians and drivers and occupants of
all other vehicles.  No person shall endanger the life, limb, or property of
any person while in the lawful use of any road, parkway, wooded or open land
trail, drive, or parking area.



   (E)   Driving on park areas and closed roads or drives.  No person
shall drive a vehicle of any kind on or along any park area, road, or drive
which has been closed or posted with appropriate signs or barricades.  The
Superintendent shall have authority to order areas, roads, or drives closed
during the process of construction, reconstruction, repair, or when, on the
basis of engineering investigation, weather, or other conditions render
travel either unsafe or duly destructive of the area, road, or drive.



   (F)   Reduced speed limits.  Whenever the Superintendent shall
determine on the basis of any engineering and traffic investigation that the
speed of 20 miles per hour is greater than is reasonable, or safe under the
conditions found to exist at any intersection, playground, picnic area, or
other place on any part of the area, roads, or drives within the park, the
Superintendent shall determine and declare a reasonable and safe prima facie
speed limit thereat, which declaration and determination so made shall be
effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such
intersections, playgrounds, picnic areas, and other places on the park roads
or drives.



   (G)   Drag racing.



      (1)   For the purpose of this subchapter "DRAG RACING" shall
mean the act of two or more individuals competing or racing on any park road,
roadway, or drive in a situation in which one of the motor vehicles is beside
or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated by a competing driver and the one
driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking
him, either by acceleration or maneuver, or one or more individuals competing
in a race against time on any park road, roadway, or drive.



      (2)   No person shall participate in a drag race within the
park.



   (H)   All  operators of vehicles shall stop at all posted "STOP"
signs.



   (I)   Parking, hours of parking, and lights.  No vehicle shall be
parked on any area other than a properly designated parking lot or parking
area.  No vehicle shall be parked in any manner which will block in whole or
in part any road, driveway, doorway, trail, water way, or recreational
area.  Except in areas designated for night parking, no person shall park or
leave standing any vehicle or conveyance whether attended or unattended,
between the hours of ll:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., however, this restriction
shall not apply to the driver or occupants of any vehicle or conveyance which
is disabled in such manner and to such extent that parking is necessary. 
When any person shall occupy any parked vehicle in any park between the hours
of sunset and sunrise, the parking lights of that vehicle shall be lighted at
all times.



   (J)   Driving without license.  No person shall drive a vehicle
within the park unless such person has a valid license or permit as an
operator or chauffeur when such license or permit is required under the state
vehicle code.



   (K)   Driving without license plates.  No person who is the owner
or operator of a vehicle shall operate, cause, or permit such vehicle to be
operated within the park unless such vehicle or conveyance displays the
distinctive number and registration marks or license plates, legally fastened
to the vehicle when such registration marks or license plates are required
under the state vehicle code.



   (L)   No person who is under the influence of alcoholic liquor or
controlled substances shall operate any vehicle or other conveyance within a
park.



   (M)   No person who is under the influence of alcoholic liquor or
controlled substances shall be in actual physical control of any vehicle
within the park.



   (N)   Driving vehicle in unsafe condition.  No person shall drive
or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be driven, or moved within the park,
any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is or may be in unsafe condition
so as to endanger any person or property.



   (O)   Lights.  Every motor vehicle including motorcycles,
motorbikes, and snowmobiles shall exhibit head lamps, tail lamps, and all
other illuminating lamps meeting all of the requirements with respect to
color, display period, or times and illuminating distance as are set forth
under the state vehicle code.



   (P)   Spotlights.  No person shall use or shine spotlights, or
unnecessarily or continuously shine vehicle  headlights  of  any  kind
onto the park, except under the direction of a park ranger or law enforcement
officers or park employee, or except where necessary for the preservation of
life or property.



   (Q)   Mufflers.  Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped
with an adequate muffler or exhaust system in constant operation and properly
maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual noise.  No such muffler or
exhaust system shall be equipped with a cutout, bypass, or similar device.



   (R)   Trucks and buses.  Except by authority of special permit
granted by the Superintendent, no person shall drive or operate a vehicle in
excess of 3/4 ton, designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property, or a bus except a school bus or recreational
vehicle, or a truck tractor including mechanized farming machinery over any
road or drive within any park, except for vehicles servicing authorized park
functions or concessionaires.



   (S)   All vehicles shall keep to the right when meeting.  All
vehicles when passing other vehicles going in the same direction shall pass
to the left.



   (T)   Safety inspection.  All motor vehicles entering any park
shall have current valid Indiana safety inspection sticker or out of state
safety inspection as required by law.



   (U)   Space between moving vehicles.  The operator of a motor
vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and
prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles, and the traffic,
and on the condition of the roadway.



   (V)   Signaling, starting, backing, and turning movements.  No
person shall start, back, or change from a direct course on a roadway until
such person has given a clear and discernible signal before exercising such
movement and having first ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Traffic code, see Title VII



Statutory reference:



   State vehicle regulations, see IC Title IX



§ 96.21  EQUESTRIANS AND MOUNTS.



   (A)   No person shall use, ride, or drive any horse or other animal
within the park, except on bridle paths and roadways designated and
established for horseback riders.



   (B)   No person shall ride a horse or other  animal along any
bridle trail without due respect for other riders, vehicles, or pedestrians,
or so as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person while in 
lawful use  of  the park.  At all points where bridle trails cross roads,
drives, paths, or parkways, riders shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles
or pedestrians.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Riding animals, see § 70.02



§ 96.22  SNOWMOBILES, SLEDDING, SKIING, AND SKATING.



   (A)   No person shall operate a self-propelled vehicle which is
designed to travel on snow covered surfaces within a park other than in areas
designated by the Superintendent as snowmobile areas.



   (B)   Before any snowmobile can be operated within a park operated
by the Board of Park Commissioners, a waiver of liability form must be filled
out by the owner and operators of the snowmobile.



   (C)   All snowmobiles must be registered with the state and with the
Parks and Recreation Department.



   (D)   Snowmobilers must check in with the park office before
unloading machines.  Snowmobiling is allowed only during park hours, unless
special permit is issued by the Parks and Recreation Department.  All
persons operating a snowmobile within the parks shall abide by state statutes
regarding snowmobiles and off-road vehicles.



   (E)   No person shall sled, ride, ski, or ice skate within the park
except in areas designated for such purpose.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Snowmobiles, see IC 14-16-2-1 et seq.



§ 96.23  POWER MODELS AND TOY ENGINE UNIT PERMITS.



   Engine-powered model and toy airplanes, boats, cars, sirens, or other
noise-making devices are not permitted to be operated within the confines of
the park, except by express written permit of the Superintendent.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.24  AVIATION.



   Except on land owned by the Department, no person shall volun- tarily
bring, land, or cause to descend or alight on park lands or waters any
airplane, flying machine, balloon, parachute, or other apparatus for
aviation, except by written permit of the Superinten- dent.  Any landing
other than one caused by mechanical or structural failure of the aircraft
shall be deemed to have been made voluntarily.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Department of Aviation, see §§ 32.20 through 32.30



§ 96.25  SWIMMING, BATHING, AND WADING.



   (A)   No person shall bathe, wade, or swim in any park except in
Department swimming pool or in such other areas as are designated for such
activity.



   (B)   All swimmers at Department pools shall abide by the rules and
regulations posted at such pools.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  GOLFING.



   No person shall swing or make use of any golf club nor play golf, nor
hit or putt golf balls within or into the park except in areas designated by
the Board.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.27  BOWS AND ARROWS.



   (A)   The use of bows and arrows of any kind in the park is
prohibited except in areas designated by the Superintendent as archery ranges.



   (B)   All shooters shall abide by the rules and regulations posted
at the designated ranges.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.28  USE OF FIREARMS.



   (A)   The use of shotguns, rifles, pistols, or other type firearms
shall not be allowed except in areas designated by the Superintendent.



   (B)   All trap, skeet, rifle, pistol, target, or other type firearm
shooters shall abide by the rules and regulations posted in the designated
shooting areas.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Discharge of firearms, see § 130.01



   Possession of firearms, see § 96.16



§ 96.29  REQUIRED GAME SAFETY.



   (A)   No person shall engage in any sport, game, or amusement except
in such area as may be designated by the Superintendent and then only under
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by him.



   (B)   Baseball is permitted only in designated parks with diamonds.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.30  HOUSEHOLD PETS AND GRAZING.



   (A)   Dogs shall be on a leash not more than eight feet in length.
Cats and other pets shall be under the owner's control at all times. No
person shall permit his dog, cat, or other pet to interfere in any manner
with the enjoyment or use of any area by others.



   (B)   No person shall herd, graze, drive, or permit to run at large
within the park, any cattle, horse, mules, donkey, goat, swine, or other
animal, or any poultry or other fowl, without a permit from the
Superintendent.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see Ch. 90



§ 96.31  COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale any articles, thing, privilege,
or service within the park without a permit or contract from the
Superintendent or Board.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.32  ADVERTISING AND PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   No person shall expose, distribute, or place any sign, advertisement,
circular, notice, or statement, or display any banner, emblem, or design
within the park without a permit from the Superintendent.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.33  WATERCRAFT.



   (A)   No motor boat shall be moored to or beached on any park land
unless designated by the Superintendent by permit.



   (B)   No person shall ride, sail, or float in any watercraft on park
property except in areas designated by the Superintendent or by special
permit from the Superintendent.  The Superintendent also shall determine
what type of watercraft are allowable in any specific area.



   (C)   No person shall ride, sail, or float in any watercraft which
is not equipped with an adequate number of life jackets or other coast guard
approved floatation gear.  No person shall ride, sail, or float in any
watercraft not conforming to state regulations controlling them and designed
for watercraft, nor shall anyone operate watercraft in a manner unsafe to the
operator, its occupants, or other persons.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Watercraft, see IC §§ 14-15-1-1 et seq.



§ 96.34  HOURS OF CLOSING.



   No person shall be permitted to remain, stop, or park within the
confines of a park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. prevailing
local time, except in overnight fee permit family camping or designated youth
group camping areas, in emergency, or with special permit for just cause
issued by the Superintendent, or except at special facilities where other
authorized and posted hours are designated by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.35  PERMITS AND RESERVATIONS.



   A permit or reservation shall first be obtained from the Superintendent
prior to the entrance into the park or the use of any park property or
facility whenever required by this subchapter or by any rule or regulations
promulgated by the Board.  In addition, the fee, if any, as required by the
Board may be paid at the time that such permit or reservations is applied
for.  All permits and reservations shall be applied for in advance at the
park and recreation office.  The Superintendent may in his discretion, issue
such permit or reservation on application when same is consistent with the
proper use and protection of the park property and likewise, in his
discretion, may refuse same.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.36  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Fees and charges for the use of various facilities operated by
the Department on property of the Department shall be established by the
Board, and may be changed from time to time.



   (B)   No person, except those with valid reason, or those having
special permission of the Superintendent, shall use any pay facility of the
district such as, but not limited to, community center, swimming pools, and
eating rooms without first paying the proper fee for same as may be
established by the Board from time to time.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.37  ENTRANCEWAYS.



   No person shall enter the park except through designated entranceways.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.38  NONPUBLIC TELEPHONES.



   Nonpublic telephones located in caretaker's quarters or park office are
limited to use by visitors for emergency use only.



(Ord. 4809, passed 2-26-79)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $1,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Department of Streets



   97.02   Interference with construction materials or equipment



   97.03   Obstructions



   97.04   Placement of debris and rubbish



   97.05   (Reserved)



   97.06   Maintenance of sidewalks



   97.07   Height of trees



   97.08   Awnings, signs, and marquees



Excavations



   97.15   Exceptions



   97.16   Permit



   97.17   Right-of-way excavation permit fees



   97.18   Bond



   97.19   Completion of work; extensions



   97.20   Right-of-way application procedure



   97.21   (Reserved)



   97.22   Actions by city on failure to comply



   97.23   (Reserved)



   97.24   Removal of guards



   97.25   Removal of obstructions



Moving Buildings



   97.30   Permit



   97.31   Bond



Planter Boxes



   97.35   Authority to place and where



   97.36   Permit



   97.37   Restrictions



Sidewalk Improvements



   97.40   Bond



   97.41   Duty of City Civil Engineer



Visual Obstructions



   97.50   Definitions



   97.51   Signs



   97.52   Trees



   97.53   Obstruction to traffic signs or signals



   97.54   Compliance period



 



   97.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Cable television franchise, see Ch. 112



   Driving on sidewalks, see § 71.03



   Mobile homes, see § 150.35



   Peddlers and solicitors, see Ch. 117



   Railroads, see Ch. 77



   Sewers and sewage disposal, see Ch. 50



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 155



   Taxicabs, see Ch. 118



   Thoroughfare plan, see Ch. 156



Statutory references:



   Eminent domain and improvements, see IC §§ 32-11-1.5-3 et seq.



   Power of city over streets and highways, see IC §§ 36-9-2-5 and
36-1-3-9(a)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DEPARTMENT OF STREETS.



   For provisions concerning the Department of Streets, see § 30.18(G)



§ 97.02  INTERFERENCE WITH CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall interfere with or damage any equipment or material used
in the construction of any street, alley, or sidewalk.



('75 Code, § 22-4)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.03  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall obstruct or endanger, or permit anything to
obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use of the public of any
street, sidewalk, alley, or public place, except as may be provided otherwise
in this section.



   (B)   Goods, wares, and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for
such reasonable time as may be necessary while loading and unloading them if
they are removed within 24 hours.



('75 Code, § 22-5)



   (C)   An establishment having a fixed location and in the regular
business of offering food and beverages for on-site consumption to the
general public may utilize the public sidewalk and pedestrian ways adjoining
the establishment for the purpose of providing outside seating for patrons
upon the following terms and conditions:



      (1)   The President of the Kokomo Board of Public Works and
Safety is authorized to approve or disapprove permit applications and issue
permits.



      (2)   No more than 50% of the width of the public sidewalk or
pedestrian way measured perpendicularly from the building face, may be used
for patron seating.



      (3)   No litter or debris shall be allowed to migrate to
adjoining sidewalk, pedestrian way, or street surfaces.



      (4)   The permit applicant shall execute an indemnification
agreement, in a form acceptable to the city, indemnifying the city against
all liability claims arising from the use of the sidewalk or pedestrian way
permitted herein, including reasonable attorney fees.



      (5)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may require the
production of certificates of insurance, naming the city as an additional
named insured, evidencing such policies of insurance, and in such amounts, as
may be determined by the Board.



      (6)   Permit holders shall be responsible for maintaining
order in their outdoor seating area. Failure to maintain order shall
constitute grounds for revocation of a permit, or denial of additional
requests for permits.



      (7)   Permits shall be prominently displayed on-site and are
subject to inspection by city officials upon request.



      (8)   Permits are subject to revocation by the Board of Public
Works and Safety should the permit holder fail to comply with any of the
conditions set out herein. In addition, permit holders are subject to fines
as set out at § 97.99. Permit holders may request a hearing before the Board
of Public Works and Safety to show cause why a permit should not be revoked.



      (9)   Should a permit be revoked, the permit holder shall not
be eligible for issuance of another permit until the following calendar year.



      (10)   Should the President of the Kokomo Board of Public
Works and Safety disapprove a permit application, the applicant may appeal
the President's decision to the full membership of the Kokomo Board of Public
Works and Safety.



      (11)   Permit holders must follow all applicable rules and
requirements of the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission regarding outdoor
seating.



   (D)   No person shall allow the temporary or permanent installation
of any signage within the public right-of-way. The City Engineer shall notify
the owner of a sign located within the right-of-way and provide a reasonable
time to remove the sign. Failure to remove the sign will result in the sign
being removed and destroyed.



(Am. Ord. 6311, passed 5-24-04; Am. Ord. 6431, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 6567,
passed 12-8-08; Am. Ord. 6713, passed 3-11-13)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  PLACEMENT OF DEBRIS AND RUBBISH.



   No person shall deposit any rubbish, debris, or objects or material in,
or on any street, alley, sidewalk, or public place except by direction or
with the consent of the city.



('75 Code, § 22-6)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and trash, see §§ 95.05 through 95.12



§ 97.05  (RESERVED)



§ 97.06  MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be the responsibility of every person owning premises
adjoining a sidewalk to immediately notify the Board of Public Works and
Safety of any damage, defects, or obstructions to the sidewalk which might
impede, endanger, or preclude the public's lawful use of the sidewalk.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Health and sanitation, see Ch. 95



§ 97.07  HEIGHT OF TREES.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of
ground, or any other person having the management of such lot or ground, to
permit any shade tree in or on any street fronting or bordering on such lot
or parcel of ground to remain untrimmed to the height of 15 feet from the
ground.



('75 Code, § 22-9)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Trees, see § 97.52



§ 97.08  AWNINGS, SIGNS, AND MARQUEES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the
control of any real estate abutting on any public street or right-of- way to
construct or maintain awnings, marquees, or signs of any character so that
the same shall be elevated less than seven feet in the clear at their lowest
point, above the grade of the right-of-way.



   (B)   All awnings, marquees, or signs projecting over any public
right-of-way shall be supported without posts or other obstructions extending
to the right-of-way, but shall be supported by an iron framework of good
engineering design, and attached firmly to the building, so as to leave the
public right-of-way unobstructed.



('75 Code, § 22-10)  Penalty, see § 97.99



EXCAVATIONS



§ 97.15  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to
excavations made under contract with or by order of the city.



   (B)   Aerial work rising five feet vertically above the pavement or
sidewalk which does not obstruct traffic or cause any traffic hazards and
does not damage the city's right-of-way is exempt from this permit.



   (C)   The bonding requirements of § 97.18 are not required for work
conducted under § 97.16(C)(10).



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08)



Cross-reference:



   Community antenna television service, see § 112.05



§ 97.16  PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to open, cut, bore
into or under any street, alley, or other public way or right-of-way, paved
or unpaved, shall be required to obtain a specific permit for such purpose.



   (B)   The Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection
Services shall have the responsibility for the management of all city
rights-of-way.  Determinations regarding the proper use of the public
rights-of-way shall be at the discretion of the Department of Engineering,
Traffic, and Inspection Services.  The Common Council shall hereby grant the
City Engineer the authority to enforce the provisions of this section as an
agent of the city.



   (C)   Activities that shall require a right-of-way permit shall
include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The extension of services to a new development in the
existing right-of-way;



      (2)   The extension of services to existing homes in the
right-of- way;



      (3)   The upgrade of service to single user within the
right-of-way;



      (4)   Directional bores occurring within the right-of-way;



      (5)   Parallel, diagonal, or perpendicular cuts through the
existing pavement of the right-of-way;



      (6)   The installation of overhead services within the
right-of-way, excluding those that fall under the exemption provided for in
§ 97.15(B);



      (7)   Emergency excavations in the right-of-way performed
under IC 8-1-26-19;



      (8)   Open trenching;



      (9)   The addition of auxiliary lanes (i.e. acceleration and
deceleration lanes or any other traffic control devices) within the
right-of-way; and



      (10)   The installation or repair of driveways or sidewalks
that require curb cuts.



   (D)   Excavation of brick streets, alleys, sidewalks or any other
decorative surface within the right-of-way shall require an additional
permitting fee to be established by the Board of Works and Safety upon
recommendation by the City Engineer.



   (E)   Permit applications may require review of construction plans
by the Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.17  RIGHT-OF-WAY EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   A separate permit application shall be required for each
individual right-of-way cut.



      (1)   Unless otherwise stated, permits being requested
pursuant to § 97.16 shall require a minimum $50 application fee to be paid
upon the receipt of the approved permit.



      (2)   Permits being requested pursuant to § 97.16(C)(10)
require a minimum $25 application fee to be paid upon the receipt of the
approved permit.



      (3)   In addition to the fee assessed under division (A)(1)
above, a permit sought under § 97.16(C)(8) shall require an additional fee
of $.10 per foot if the trench is extended in excess of 100 feet.



   (B)   A separate permit fee shall be assessed, at the time of permit
approval, under the following conditions:



      (1)   Excavation of pavement, curb, or sidewalk resurfaced
within 12 months of the right-of-way excavation application shall require an
additional fee of $300.



      (2)   Excavation of pavement, curb, or sidewalk resurfaced
within 24 months of the right-of-way excavation application shall require an
additional fee of $200.



      (3)   Excavation of pavement, curb, or sidewalk resurfaced
within 36 months of the right-of-way excavation application shall require an
additional fee of $100.



      (4)   Excavation of pavement, curb, or sidewalk resurfaced
greater than 36 months before the right-of-way application shall require an
additional fee of $50.



      (5)   For any surface covered under § 97.16(D), an additional
fee of $100 shall be required upon receipt of an approved right-of-way
excavation.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08; Am. Ord. 6850, passed 12-12-16)  Penalty, see §
97.99



§ 97.18  BOND.



   (A)   Whenever any application for the permit required by this
subchapter is approved, the applicant shall give a bond in a sum as fixed by
the City Engineer in an amount to be governed by the character of the work to
be done, but not less than $l,000, guaranteeing that the place where the work
is to be done shall be restored to a good condition and in the manner
provided for by this subchapter, and guaranteeing that the permit holder
shall keep the same in first-class condition for a period of one year after
the date of the completion and acceptance of the work.  The bond shall also
be conditioned to hold the city harmless from all damages to person or
property which may arise from neglect or skill, or want of care on the part
of such principal or his employees in the prosecution of any such work, and
that such principal will comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations
relating to such work and the manner in which it is to be done.  The bond
shall be underwritten by a surety company approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety, and shall be delivered by the applicant to the City Civil
Engineer.  No permit shall be issued by the Engineer until such approved
bond has been filed with him.



   (B)   An annual bond may be given any person having a large volume
of excavation work to do.  Application for permission to give annual bonds
shall be made to the City Engineer and the application shall state the
particular kind of trenching, digging, or excavating which the applicant
expects to do.  Such application shall also pledge conformity to all
ordinances on the subject, set forth the willingness and ability of the
applicant to execute the bond required by this section in such cases, and
shall be signed by the name of such person under which shall be written the
street and number of the applicant's place of business or residence.  Such
application shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by two reputable
citizens, which certificate shall state that such applicant is known to them,
and is fully qualified for the work the applicant proposed to undertake.  If
permission is given by the City Engineer for the applicant to give an annual
bond, thereupon the applicant shall execute to the city a bond with surety to
be approved by the Mayor in a sum not less than $3,000 conditioned to hold
the city harmless from all damages to person or property, which may arise
from neglect or skill, or want of care on the part of such principal or their
employees, in the prosecution of any such work, and that principal will
promptly and at proper times repair and restore the street, alley, sidewalk,
or other public place so excavated, in a good condition, and that such
principal will comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to
such work, the manner in which it is to be done, and the restoration of such
place to good condition.



('75 Code, § 22-27)



Cross-reference:



   Bond and insurance, see § 110.08



§ 97.19  COMPLETION OF WORK; EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   The holder of any permit, issued under this section, shall
complete the work and repair the place or places where the work was done
within the time specified in the permit. Failure to timely complete the
repair work shall result in a fine of $100 a week until such time as the City
Engineer or his designee shall certify the repair work has been properly
completed.



   (B)   The City Engineer may extend the time for the completion of
the work for which the permit was granted.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08)



§ 97.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   All excavations within the right-of-way shall be performed in
accordance with the latest adopted edition of the "City of Kokomo
Right-of-Way Excavation Handbook" as approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (B)   All right-of-way excavation permit applications shall be in
writing in a form prescribed by the City Engineer. All applications must be
submitted to the Department of Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services
prior to the encroachment being granted. The right-of-way excavation permit
application shall be administered and reviewed by the Department of
Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services and approved only after the
required conditions of the permit have been established and all conditions
are met to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or his designee.



   (C)   Applications for permits under this section are subject to a
five day review period. No work will be allowed prior to the review. In
addition to any penalty fee, a stop work order for unauthorized work will be
enforced for work performed before permits are reviewed.



   (D)   All permit work shall be performed during the city's normal
business hours unless preapproved by the City Engineer or his designee.



   (E)   All permittees are responsible for reimbursement of any
overtime incurred by the inspectors for any work done outside normal business
hours.



   (F)   Possession of a properly endorsed right-of-way excavation
permit shall constitute permission to excavate in the right-of-way. The
permit shall be made available on site at all times during the excavation.



   (G)   Excavations in the right-of-way without a valid permit are
allowed under emergency circumstances only. An application for an emergency
permit must be submitted within two working days from the commencement of the
work and must include the properly issued IUPPS emergency locate ticket
number. Inspections on emergency cuts shall still be required.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.21  (RESERVED)



§ 97.22  ACTIONS BY CITY ON FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   On the failure of the holder of a permit, of this chapter, to make
repairs as provided in the most recent and adopted "City of Kokomo
Right-of-Way Excavation Handbook", the city may make such repairs as are
deemed necessary to bring a right-of-way into compliance and may charge the
associated permittee up to 110% of the cost of bringing the right-of-way into
compliance.



(Ord. 6567, passed 12-8-08)



§ 97.23  (RESERVED)



§ 97.24  REMOVAL OF GUARDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to take down or remove any barrier,
signal, or light placed by any builder, contractor, or any other person, at
or near any trench or excavation, for the purpose of giving notice or warning
of such obstruction.



('75 Code, § 22-33)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.25  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who may have prosecuted any work or
caused or permitted any work to be done under a permit to dig or trench in
any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, to neglect to remove any
obstruction to the free use of any such street, alley, sidewalk, or other
public place occasioned by such work, within 48 hours after the condition of
such work will permit traffic over the same.



('75 Code, § 22-34)  Penalty, see § 97.99



MOVING BUILDINGS



§ 97.30  PERMIT.



   (A)   Required.  It shall be unlawful for any person to move any
building through or along any street or alley without a permit issued by the
Board of Public Works and Safety.  ('75 Code, § 22-46)



   (B)   Application.  Any person desiring the permit required by this
subchapter shall file with the City Civil Engineer a written application,
setting forth the kind of building to be moved, its dimension in extreme
length, height, and width, its present location and the particular lot or
site, naming the street on which the lot is situated, to which it is proposed
to be moved, and the route to be taken and the streets and alleys to be
passed over.  ('75 Code, § 22- 47)



   (C)   Actions by City Engineer.  On receipt of an application for a
permit required by this subchapter, the City Engineer shall examine the
building and refer the application to the Board of Public Works and Safety
together with his opinion endorsed in writing on the application as to
whether the proposed removal can be made without serious injury to persons or
property, and whether or not the location of such building on the lot or site
named in the application would be a detriment to, or depreciate the value of
adjacent or surrounding property.  ('75 Code, § 22-48)



   (D)   Issuance hearing.  Before the permit required by the
provisions of this subchapter is issued, the Board of Public Works and Safety
shall hold a hearing at which property holders who suffer damages by reason
of the issuance of the permit shall have an opportunity to be heard.  Notice
of the hearing shall be given by publication.  ('75 Code, § 22-50) 
Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Permit fee, see § 150.04



§ 97.31  BOND.



   No permit required by this subchapter shall be issued until the person
applying for it shall have filed with the Board of Public Works and Safety a
bond in such sum as may be determined by the Board with good freehold
security, conditioned for the faithful and prompt performance of the work
according to the specifications in the permit, and to secure the city against
damage to streets and alleys and the citizens or property owners of the city,
against damage to their private property.  Until such bond is filed and
approved by the Clerk, the permittee shall not remove such building described
over any street or alley.  The bond shall be made payable to the city or
anyone damaged by such removal, and anyone so damaged may maintain an action
for such damage on the bond.



('75 Code, § 22-49)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Bond and insurance, see § 110.08



PLANTER BOXES



§ 97.35  AUTHORITY TO PLACE AND WHERE.



   (A)   The property owners and tenants of properties within the
boundaries described in this section are authorized to place planter boxes on
the public sidewalks surrounding the courthouse square.



   (B)   The boundaries within which such planter boxes shall be
permitted shall be the area bounded on the north by the north side of Taylor
Street; on the east, the east side of Union Street; on the south, the south
side of Superior Street; on the west, the west side of Buckeye Street; and on
each corner of the intersection of any of those streets not nearer to the
middle of any intersection than the extended line of the building on the
corner and not further than ten feet from such extended building line.



('75 Code, § 22-63)  (Ord. 4084, passed 10-26-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.36  PERMIT.



   (A)   Application.  An application for the permit required by this
subchapter shall be made to the City Controller on a form provided and shall
be referred to the City Traffic Supervisor for investigation, consideration,
and approval.  The application shall contain the full name and address of
the applicant, the exact location of the proposed placement of the planter
box, a statement that the applicant will hold the city harmless from any and
all claims arising out of the placement or maintenance of the planter box,
and a statement that the applicant has in force and will keep in force
liability insurance with limits of not less than $10,000 per person covering
his business operation at the subject location.  ('75 Code, § 22-64)



   (B)   Required.  No person shall place a planter box without a
permit issued by the City Traffic Supervisor.  ('75 Code, § 22-65)



   (C)   Issuance.  If an application for the permit required by this
subchapter is completed in due form, signed by the applicant, and approved by
the City Traffic Supervisor, the Controller shall issue the permit without a
fee.  ('75 Code, § 22-66)



   (D)   Validity.  A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall
be valid until and unless revoked by the City Controller for violation of any
of the conditions or restrictions imposed by this subchapter. ('75 Code, §
22-67)



(Ord. 4084, passed 10-26-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.37  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Not more than one planter shall be allowed between any two
parking meters nor between any one parking meter and the extended building
line vertical thereto at an intersection.



   (B)   All such planters shall be nearly uniform in height, diameter
and weight not varying more than one inch or one pound from the following
measurements of 27 inches in height, 20 inches in diameter, and ten pounds in
weight, exclusive of fill on corners, and 22 inches in height, l9 inches in
diameter, and eight pounds in weight on locations other than on corners.



   (C)   All such planters shall be set 22 inches from the outer curb
edge and in such position as to not interfere with the opening of the doors
of a legally parked automobile.



   (D)   All such planters shall be bonded to the sidewalk with liquid
adhesive.  No bolts or guy wires shall be permitted.



   (E)   No plant shall protrude from any planter beyond a height of 30
inches, nor beyond the perimeter of any planter.



   (F)   All planter colors and substance shall be subject to the
approval of the City Traffic Supervisor.



('75 Code, § 22-68)  (Ord. 4084, passed 10-26-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS



§ 97.40  BOND.



   Any property owner who improves any sidewalk which adjoins or fronts on
his property shall, before so doing, file a surety bond approved by the Board
of Public Works and Safety with the city.  The bond shall be conditioned on
the performance of the work in a good and workmanlike manner to the approval
of the City Civil Engineer according to the specifications made and stakes
set by the Engineer and in accordance with the plan for such improvements.



('75 Code, § 22-80)



Cross-reference:



   Bond and insurance, see § 110.08



§ 97.41  DUTY OF CITY CIVIL ENGINEER.



   On the filing of a bond required by the provisions of this subchapter
it shall be the duty of the City Civil Engineer to set the proper stakes for
the work in accordance with the general plan of such improvements, and to
make such specifications for the work as may be necessary to render the same
permanent, and to supervise the same during its construction and when
completed, to report the same to the Common Council.



('75 Code, § 22-81)



VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 97.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "COMMERCIAL EXIT."  Any vehicular exit from any automobile service
station, shopping center, store, medical or professional center, or other
similar public place.



   "CRITICAL VISIBILITY ZONE."  The area within which the presence of
obstructions to vision such as trees, shrubbery, and signs could prevent the
driver of a motor vehicle which is stopped behind the stop line of any
street, highway, alley, or commercial exit at its intersection with any other
street or highway from seeing any other vehicle which is approaching on the
intersection street or highway and is within 200 feet of the intersection.



   "SHRUBBERY."  Any bush, hedge, flowering or ornamental plant, weed
growth, low-growing evergreen, or other form of vegetation.



   "SIGN."  Any temporary or permanent structure, banner, pennant, or
string of pennants, used for advertising or decorative purposes.



   "STOP LINE."  The actual obedience line if there be one.  If there is
none, one shall be assumed to exist four feet before the nearest edge of the
intersection street or highway.



   "TREE."  A large, woody, perennial plant having a clearly recognizable
trunk.



('75 Code, § 22-93)  (Ord. 4086, passed 12-13-71)



§ 97.51  SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in
any critical visibility zone any sign of which any part thereof is higher
than 36 inches above the grade level, unless the lowest portion of the sign
exclusive of a supporting structure no wider than 12 inches in its greatest
dimension is at least eight feet above grade level.



('75 Code, § 22-94)  (Ord. 4086, passed 12-13-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.52  TREES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling property to
cause or permit any tree within any critical visibility zone to remain
untrimmed below a height of eight feet above the ground, or to permit any
shrubbery within any critical visibility zone to grow to a height greater
than 36 inches above ground.



('75 Code, § 22-95)  (Ord. 4086, passed 12-13-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



Cross-reference:



   Height of trees, see § 97.07



§ 97.53  OBSTRUCTION TO TRAFFIC SIGNS OR SIGNALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling property to
permit the foliage of any tree or shrubbery growing on that property to
obscure any driver's view of any lawfully placed stop sign or traffic-control
signal during any part of the last 200 feet of his approach to the sign or
traffic-control device.



('75 Code, § 22-96)  (Ord. 4086, passed 12-13-71)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.54  COMPLIANCE PERIOD.



   Any person violating any section of this subchapter shall, on receipt
of official notification from the traffic division that a violation has taken
place, correct the cause of the violation within 14 days from the date of
notification, or be subject to the penalties provided by this code.



('75 Code, § 22-97)  (Ord. 4086, passed 12-13-71)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $l,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 98:  RECYCLING PROGRAM



Section



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Authority to establish and implement program



   98.03   Recycling regulations



   98.04   When program to go into effect



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "RECYCLABLE MATERIAL."  Any waste material generated by domestic use,
as that term is defined in § 95.06 of this City Code, otherwise eligible for
collection by city collection crews, that is designated by the City Board of
Public Works and Safety as material eligible for collection as part of a
recycling program.  By way of example and not limitation, such materials may
include glass, aluminum, and certain categories of paper products.  Waste
materials generated by commercial, industrial, or other sources not subject
to collection by city collection crews shall not be included within this
definition of "RECYCLABLE MATERIALS" for the purpose of this chapter, even
though they are of a category of materials that would be subject to
collection for recycling purposes if generated by domestic use.



   "RECYCLING PROGRAM."  A program wherein specific waste materials
generated by domestic use, as designated by the City Board of Public Works
and Safety, or its designee, are identified as being subject to special and
separate collection for purposes of recycling and/or resale.  Such a program
shall be considered as commencing on a date certain as specified by the Board
of Public Works and Safety, and may be of determinate or indeterminate
duration.  The provisions of this chapter shall be effective only during the
term of a "RECYCLING PROGRAM" as defined herein.



   "SPECIAL COLLECTION."  A separate collection intended to collect
recyclable materials generated by domestic use as part of a recycling
program.  Such collections may be made by city collection crews, or by
private collection crews under contract with the Board of Public Works and
Safety to provide such services during the term of any such contract, and
upon the terms and conditions contained in any such city contract.



(Ord. 5740, passed 4-23-90)



§ 98.02  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH AND IMPLEMENT PROGRAM.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, the Board of
Public Works and Safety of the city is authorized to establish and implement
a program for the special collection of recyclable materials within the city,
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. The Board of Public
Works and Safety is authorized to establish and implement such a program for
all, or a portion, of the households in the city served by the city waste
collection service.  The number and location of the households for which
special waste collection service is provided may, from time to time, be
adjusted by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board, or its designee, is also authorized to designate
those recyclable materials which will be collected as part of a recycling
program.  The list of recyclable materials may, from time to time, be
amended.  Only materials so designated are to be placed in receptacles to be
provided by the city for special collection.



(Ord. 5740, passed 4-23-90)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.03  RECYCLING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The receptacles provided by the city for receiving recyclable
materials for special collection shall be clearly marked as being property of
the city, and intended for receiving recyclable materials only.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring
households otherwise subject to this chapter to separate recyclable materials
and place such materials in receptacles for special collection.  Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting households otherwise subject
to this chapter from separating recyclable materials and disposing the same
at a recycling center, or donating the same to groups or organizations
soliciting donations of such recyclable materials.  However, should
households separate recyclable materials, and place the materials in
city-provided receptacles for special collection, the provisions of this
chapter shall be applicable to such materials.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any private citizen, firm,
corporation, or scavenger, to collect, obtain, possess, or pick up or remove
from any properly designated receptacle, any designated recyclable materials
placed for special collection as part of the recycling program of the city,
except as hereinafter provided.



   (D)   The content of the receptacles provided by the city as part of
a recycling program may be collected, obtained, possessed, or picked up only
by city collection crews, or by employees of private collection contractors
under written contract with the city, acting by and through its Board of
Public Works and safety, to perform such collection services upon the terms
and conditions set out in any such contract.



(Ord. 5740, passed 4-23-90)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.04  WHEN PROGRAM TO GO INTO EFFECT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall become applicable only upon and
after the passage of a resolution by the Board of Public Works and Safety,
made in open session, establishing a date certain upon which a recycling
program shall commence.  The provisions of this chapter shall continue to be
applicable only during the term of any such recycling program.



(Ord. 5740, passed 4-23-90)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any private citizen, firm, corporation, or scavenger who is cited for
violation of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10 nor more than
$100.  Each violation may be considered as constituting a separate offense.



(Ord. 5740, passed 4-23-90)



CHAPTER 99:  NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Prohibition



   99.03   Nuisances described



Enforcement Procedures



   99.10   Authority to make inspections



   99.11   Abatement notice



   99.12   When abatement notice not required



   99.13   Hearings



   99.14   Compliance with abatement notice



   99.15   Failure to comply with abatement notice



   99.16   Abatement by the city



Nuisance Solid Waste Accumulation, Illegal Dumping and Littering



   99.30   Purpose



   99.31   Definitions



   99.32   Acts prohibited



   99.33   Investigation and enforcement authority



   99.34   Abatement notice



   99.35   When abatement notice is not required



   99.36   Hearings



   99.37   Appeal



   99.38   Compliance with abatement notice



   99.39   Failure to comply with abatement notice



   99.40   Abatement by District



 



   99.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY."  A property which meets the following
criteria:



      (1)   Any commercial property that requires more than three
law enforcement runs in a 30 day period to respond to a report of theft for a
value less than §$50;



      (2)   Any commercial, residential or residential rental
property that receives three ordinance citations or verified complaints of
nuisance activity in any 30 day period; or



      (3)   Any apartment complex that receives five ordinance
citations or verified complaints of nuisance activity in any 30 day period.



   "ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY."  The City of Kokomo’s Division of Building
and Code Services.



   "LITTER."  Includes any man-made or man-used waste, which, if
deposited within the city otherwise than in a litter receptacle, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare or tends to impair the
environment or aesthetic well-being of the community. “LITTER” shall
include, but not be limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, debris, grass
clippings or other lawn or garden waste, paper products, glass, metal,
plastic or paper containers, motor vehicle parts, furniture, appliances,
carcasses of dead animals, or other waste material of an unsightly,
unsanitary, nauseous or offensive nature.



   "NUISANCE."  Defined as set out in IC 32-30-6-6, to-wit: whatever is
injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to
the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.



   "OF RECORD."  Recorded in the records of the recorder of Howard
County, Indiana, or in the records of the auditor of Howard County, Indiana.



   "PERSON."  A human being, a firm, labor organization, partnerships,
associations, corporations, limited liability companies, legal
representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, or receivers.



   "PRIVATE PREMISES."  All property, including, but not limited to,
vacant land or any land upon which is located one or more buildings or other
structures designated or used for residential, commercial, business,
industrial, institutional, or religious purposes, together with any yards,
grounds, walks, driveways, fences, porches, or other structures or
improvements appurtenant to the land, except any public place.



   "PROHIBITED CONDUCT."  Conduct or activities occurring in violation of
statutes or ordinances relating to any of the following:



      (1)   Use of sale of illegal drugs or controlled substances,
as defined in I.C. 35-48;



      (2)   Prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, or promoting
prostitution, as defined in I.C. 35-45-4;



      (3)   Gambling, as defined in I.C. 35-45-5-1;



      (4)   Battery, as defined in I.C. 35-42-2-1;



      (5)   Contributing to the delinquency of a minor, as defined
in I.C. 35-46-1-8;



      (6)   Resisting law enforcement, as defined in I.C. 35-44-3-3;



      (7)   Disorderly conduct, as defined in I.C. 35-45-1-3;



      (8)   Criminal recklessness, as defined in I.C. 35-42-2-2;



      (9)   Unnecessary noises, as prohibited by Chapter 132 of the
code of ordinances;



      (10)   Failure to keep vacant property secured against entry,
in violation of Chapter 150 of the code, or I.C. 36-7-9 (Unsafe Building Law)
or any other fire or property maintenance codes constitutes prohibited
conduct regardless of whether the city has issued a citation for the
violation, issued an order to secure, or taken action to abate the condition.



   “PROPERTY DESIGNATIONS.”  Shall be defined as follows:



      (1)   "APARTMENT COMPLEX."  Real property consisting of at
least five units that are regularly used to rent or otherwise furnish
residential accommodations for periods of at least 30 days.



      (2)   "COMMERCIAL PROPERTY."  A business engaging in the
purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or
services, or the maintenance or operation of offices, recreational, or
amusement enterprises.



      (3)   "RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY."  A dwelling used exclusively
for residential occupancy, including single-family units and two-family
dwelling units.



      (4)   "RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY."  Real property
consisting of not more than four units that are regularly used to rent or
otherwise furnish residential accommodations for periods of at least 30 days.



      Not included within this definition would be a public entity as
defined as follows: (a) any state or local government; (b) any department,
agency, special purpose district, or other instrumentality of a state or
states or local government; and (c) the National Railroad Passenger
Corporation, and any commuter authority.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any and all streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks,
alleys or other public ways, any and all public parks, lakes, spaces,
publicly owned rights-of-way, grounds, or buildings within the corporate
limits of the city, or owned by the city.



   "SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST."  Any right in real property that may
be affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this chapter,
including a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a
present possessory interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser.



   "VERIFIED COMPLAINT."  A law enforcement documented call for service
that an incident took place at a specific property address requiring sworn
law enforcement personnel to be dispatched or caused to respond. The term
does not include incidents involving an occupant of the premises who is the
victim of the crime, or any ambulance or medical service response.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6595,
passed 10-26-09; Am. Ord. 6825, passed 4-25-16)



§ 99.02  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   No owner, occupant, tenant, or any person having a substantial
property interest in any real or personal property within the city limits, or
any agent thereof, shall maintain, create, cause, place, deposit, leave, or
permit a nuisance to remain on such property, or upon any public place
abutting such real or personal property.



   (B)   No owner, occupant, tenant, or any person having a substantial
property interest in any real or personal property with the city limits, or
any agent thereof, shall own, rent, or lease a chronic nuisance property.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 6825, passed 4-25-16)



§ 99.03  NUISANCES DESCRIBED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following list includes, but is
not limited to, conditions which constitute a nuisance:



      (1)   Litter.



      (2)   Accumulations of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, or other
abandoned materials, metals, and lumber.



      (3)   Fallen trees, stumps, dead trees, cut brush, fallen or
cut limbs except stacked firewood.



      (4)   Boxes, appliances, household items and tires.



      (5)   Demolition remains.



      (6)   Open excavations, uncovered or improperly covered holes,
whether lined or unlined, and dirt piles on any open or unfenced real
property within the city.



      (7)   Automobile parts, disassembled automobiles, automobiles
without engines, plumbing and piping materials and parts, scrap metal,
unseaworthy or dilapidated boats, dilapidated, deteriorated, or nonoperable
jet skis, snowmobiles, bicycles, trailers, or mopeds.



      (8)   Structures defaced with paint, graffiti, or wording.



      (9)   Any waste water, filth, offal, garbage, rubbish, animal
waste, human excrement, which is deposited, allowed or caused to be upon any
public or private property.



      (10)   Any water or any other substance which is caused or
permitted to flow onto or be deposited upon any private or public way, except
natural surface water drainage.



      (11)   Any dead animal or animal parts.



      (12)   The erection of a dam or any other obstruction by a
private party which prevents the natural flow of water and causes it to
collect in pool upon any public property.



      (13)   Any real or personal property which is infected with
contagious disease or is likely to cause an immediate health hazard.



      (14)   The placing or accumulating on or within any real or
personal property or the permitting of the same, of any matter which attracts
rodents, insects, domestic or wild animals in such manner as to create a
health hazard or unsanitary or dangerous condition.



      (15)   Any real or personal property, used as a place of
residence or habitation or for sleeping, that is maintained in such a way as
to be dangerous or detrimental to life or health due to lack of or defects in
water, drainage, heat, electricity, plumbing, ventilation or garbage and
trash removal.



      (16)   The storage of any explosive, combustible or other
material which creates a safety or health hazard.



      (17)   Trees, shrubbery, weeds, or other matter obstructing
public ways, or causing visual barriers which create vehicular traffic or
pedestrian safety hazards.



      (18)   Any furniture, not originally designed or manufactured
solely for outdoor use, or furniture which was originally designed or
manufactured for outdoor use, which is now dilapidated or deteriorated.



      (19)   Accumulations of stagnant water.



      (20)   Any real or personal property infested with insects,
rats, vermin, or wild or domestic animals, to a degree that prevents the
reasonable use and enjoyment of adjoining and surrounding properties.



      (21)   Basketball goals or other privately owned structures
erected in, or infringing upon, any public place.



      (22)   Fences and walls on commercial or industrial properties
that are not maintained to community standards, in a state of disrepair
and/or a danger to the public.



      (23)   Exterior lighting fixtures on commercial or industrial
structures and/or lighting fixtures in the parking lot surrounding commercial
or industrial structures that are broken, non-functioning, burned out and/or
are insufficient in number or brightness to provide for the safety and
security of employees or patrons of the commercial or industrial
establishment.



      (24)   Paint, siding, shingle, stucco, wood or any other
exterior covering on commercial or industrial structures that is chipping,
flaking, missing, decayed, in disrepair, or detached from the exterior of the
structure.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 6421, passed 4-24-06; Am. Ord. 6720,
passed 5-13-13)



ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE



§ 99.10  AUTHORITY TO MAKE INSPECTIONS.



   It is made the duty of all officers and employees of the city to report
the existence of nuisances to the enforcement authority. The enforcement
authority, or any other municipal employees so designated by the Board of
Public Works and Safety, shall be authorized to visit, enter into or upon any
building, lot, grounds, or premises within the limits of the city for the
purpose of ascertaining and discovering any nuisances and to make examination
thereof.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96)



§ 99.11  ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   (A)   Abatement notice. Where, upon inspection, reasonable cause is
found to believe that a Nuisance or a Chronic Nuisance Property exists, the
enforcement authority shall issue a written abatement notice.



   (B)   To whom notice is given. Abatement notices shall be served
upon all know holders of substantial property interests in the real estate
upon which the nuisance or chronic nuisance property is alleged to exist. If
the resident or occupant of the premises is not the owner of record of the
real estate, the enforcement authority is authorized to serve the owner of
record as shown in the records of the Howard County Recorder's Office in
addition to other known holders of substantial property interests, including
the resident, or occupant.



   (C)   Content of notice.  The abatement notice must contain:



      (1)   The name of the person to whom the order is issued.



      (2)   The legal description or address of the real estate
where the nuisance is located which is the subject of the notice.



      (3)   The action that the notice requires.  The ordered
action must be reasonably related to abatement of the conditions constituting
the nuisance.



      (4)   The period of time within which the action ordered is
required to be accomplished, measured from the time when the abatement notice
is served.  The time allowed must allow a sufficient time, of at least 48
hours from the time the abatement notice is served, to accomplish the
required action.  If the notice allows more than 30 days to accomplish the
action, the notice may require that a substantial beginning be made in
accomplishing the action within the initial 30 day period following service
of the notice.



      (5)   A statement that the order becomes final ten calendar
days after notice is served, unless a hearing is requested in writing by the
owner of record, the tenant or occupant, or by a person holding a substantial
property interest in the private premises upon which the nuisance is alleged
to exist.  The request for a hearing must be served upon the enforcement
authority prior to the expiration of the aforementioned ten calendar day
period.



      (6)   A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken
by the city if there is non-compliance with the orders contained in the
abatement notice.



      (7)   The name, business address, and business telephone
number of the enforcement authority.



   (D)   Manner of giving notice.  Service of abatement notices shall
be made by any of the following means:



      (1)   Sending a copy of the notice by registered or certified
mail to the residence or place of business or employment of the person to be
notified, with return receipt requested.



      (2)   Delivering a copy of the notice personally to the person
to be notified.



      (3)   Leaving a copy of the notice at the dwelling or usual
place of abode of the person to be notified.



      (4)   Posting a copy of the notice in a prominent place upon
the premises where the nuisance is located.



      (5)   If, after a reasonable effort, service cannot be
obtained by any of the means described in subdivisions (D)(1) through (4),
service may be made by publishing the notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the property subject to the notice is
located. Publication shall be made one time.



   (E)   Proof of service.  When service is made by any of the means
described in this section, except by mailing or by publication, the person
making service must make an affidavit stating that he has made the service,
the manner in which service was made, to whom the order or statement was
issued, the nature of the order or statement, and the date of service.  The
affidavit must be placed on file with the Department of Engineering, Traffic
and Inspection Services.  Where service is made by mailing, proof of service
will be evidenced by the postal service return receipt signed by the
recipient.  Where service is made by publication, service shall be evidenced
by the publisher's certificate.



   (F)   Effective date of notice.  The date when notice is considered
given is as follows:



      (1)   If the notice is delivered personally or left at the
dwelling or usual place of abode, notice is considered given on the day when
the order or statement is delivered to the person or left at his dwelling or
usual place of abode.



      (2)   If the notice is mailed, notice is considered given on
the date shown on the return receipt, or, if no date is shown, on the date
when the return receipt is received by the Department of Engineering, Traffic
and Inspection Services.



      (3)   Notice by publication is considered given on the date of
publication.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6825,
passed 4-25-16)



§ 99.12  WHEN ABATEMENT NOTICE NOT REQUIRED.



   Where, in the opinion of the enforcement authority, a nuisance exists
which creates a substantial and imminent health or safety hazard requiring
immediate abatement in order to protect health and safety, the enforcement
authority, shall abate the nuisance without the necessity of issuing an
abatement notice as set out in § 99.11 but only after notifying the Kokomo
Board of Public Works and Safety.  The enforcement authority shall then
present its actions to the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety at the
Board's next meeting following the abatement action.



(Ord. 6504, passed 9-24-07)



§ 99.13  HEARINGS.



   (A)   Any owner, tenant or occupant, or person holding a substantial
property interest in private premises upon which a Nuisance or a chronic
nuisance property is alleged to exist who disputes the existence of such, or
disputes the nature of the abatement action ordered in the abatement notice,
may, within ten calendar days of service of the abatement notice, serve upon
the enforcement authority a written request for a hearing. The written
request does not need to be in any particular form, but shall clearly
indicate that a hearing is requested, and shall set out the nature of the
individual's disagreement with the content of the abatement notice.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the
enforcement authority shall place the matter on the agenda of the Kokomo
Board of Public Works and Safety for hearing.  The Board of Public Works and
Safety shall function as hearing body to adjudicate the matter.  If the
Director of the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services is
also a member of the Board of Public Works and Safety, the Director may not
present the city's case for its actions and sit simultaneously as a member of
the Board.



   (C)   The enforcement authority shall give written notice to the
party requesting the hearing of the date and time of the hearing. Such notice
shall be given no less than five calendar days prior to the date set for the
hearing.



   (D)   At the hearing, which may be adjourned from time to time, it
shall be the city's burden to go forward with evidence sufficient to
demonstrate that a nuisance exists, and that the actions required are
reasonably calculated to abate the nuisance within a reasonable period of
time.  The party requesting the hearing shall have the right to dispute the
existence of the nuisance, the reasonableness of the remedy, or the
reasonableness of the time allowed for remedial action.  The party
requesting the hearing may propose alternative remedies or time periods for
remedial action, or alternate remediation plans.



   (E)   At the hearing, both sides may present witnesses, elicit
testimony, introduce physical evidence, cross-examine opposing witnesses or
dispute evidence submitted by their hearing opponent.  Both sides may
present oral arguments.  Both sides may be represented by counsel.



   (F)   All such hearings shall be open to the public pursuant to
Indiana statutes on open meetings.



   (G)   Upon conclusion of the presentation of evidence and oral
argument, if any, the Board shall deliberate and render a decision either
confirming, amending, or rescinding the disputed content of the abatement
notice.  The decision of the Board shall be final.



   (H)   All time parameters set out in the abatement notice for
completion of compliance actions shall be tolled, pending the outcome of the
Board of Public Works and Safety's decision.  In cases where the actions of
the enforcement authority are upheld, or are upheld as modified by the Board,
it shall be the responsibility of the Board, in its decision, to establish
time periods for completion of compliance activities held in abeyance during
the hearing process.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6825,
passed 4-25-16)



§ 99.14  COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   It being the intent of this chapter to promote the abatement of
nuisances within the City of Kokomo, in those instances where the nuisance is
abated to the satisfaction of the enforcement authority as required in the
abatement notice, or as required by the Board of Public Works and Safety
after hearing, and within the time periods set out in the abatement notice,
or within any other extended time periods agreed to by the enforcement
authority, or such time extensions as are, after the hearing, ordered by the
Board of Public Works and Safety, no further fines or penalties will be
imposed.  The enforcement authority shall make written note of the
compliance and the enforcement file shall be closed.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96)



§ 99.15  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   Failure, neglect, or refusal by the record owner or his agent, or the
tenant or occupant, to comply with the orders set out in the abatement notice
within the time periods set out therein, or within any extended time periods
agreed to by the enforcement authority, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall render the individual upon whom the abatement notice was
served liable to a fine as set forth in § 99.99.  Each day's failure,
neglect or refusal to abate the nuisance during the time period allowed for
compliance shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter.  The
record owner of the premises upon which the nuisance is found to exist, and
the tenant or occupant, may be held jointly and severally liable for the
payment of fines assessed under this chapter.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96)



§ 99.16  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   (A)   In addition to fines imposed under § 99.15, in non-emergency
situations where abatement is not accomplished immediately by the city,
failure, neglect, or refusal of any party to abate a nuisance as required by
the abatement notice shall authorize the enforcement authority to obtain the
permission of the Board of Public Works and Safety to abate the nuisance as
set out in the abatement notice.  Where such permission is sought, the
enforcement authority shall file a copy of the abatement notice with the
Recorder of Howard County, Indiana, to give constructive notice to subsequent
purchasers that the real estate is subject to the costs associated with the
abatement.  Work may be accomplished with city crews if the work is within
their capacity to accomplish, or the work may be advertised for public bid
and awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.  An accurate
accounting shall be kept of all costs incurred in abating the nuisance. 
Upon completion of the abatement, a statement for costs incurred shall be
forwarded to the record owner by certified mail.  Should such costs remain
unpaid ten calendar days after receipt by the owner of record, or upon return
of the certified mail as undeliverable, appropriate legal action may be taken
to compel payment of costs incurred.  Any judgment for costs obtained shall
be filed as a judgment lien against the real estate upon which the nuisance
was abated.



   (B)   In the alternative, where there has been non-compliance with
the abatement notice, the city is also authorized to seek equitable relief in
a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with the orders set
out in the abatement notice.



(Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96)



NUISANCE SOLID WASTE ACCUMULATION, ILLEGAL DUMPING AND LITTERING



§ 99.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to prohibit illegal dumping, nuisance
solid waste accumulation and littering along roadways, and on public and
private property in the city.  This subchapter establishes the Howard County
Recycling District as the entity that investigates, files reports and
enforces this subchapter in conjunction with the Howard County Recycling
District's Board of Directors.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this subchapter.



   "ABANDONED VEHICLE."  Any machinery, equipment, watercraft or trailer
that has remained on private or public property without the consent of the
owner or person in control of that property for more than 48 hours and is
mechanically inoperable.  Also, any vehicle, machinery, equipment,
watercraft or trailer that is mechanically inoperable and continuously in a
location visible from public property or public right-of-way, or visible from
the immediate vicinity of private residences or businesses for more than 20
days.



   "ABATE."  To end or eliminate nuisance solid waste accumulation,
illegal dumping, littering, or any other violation of this subchapter by
removal, clean up and proper disposal.



   "CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE."  Any discarded construction or
demolition materials including but not limited to, lumber, wood, paneling,
drywall, roofing material, siding, plumbing, electrical wiring, doors,
windows, furniture, floor coverings, fixtures and cabinets.



   "CONTAMINATED."  Un-rinsed containers with food or product residues,
non-container glass materials, materials with contained oils, pesticides,
fertilizers, herbicides, poisons, or other hazardous materials, materials
fouled with dirt or other substances foreign to their original contents or
composition, wet or saturated newspapers, and any other condition which
renders the materials an-recyclable.



   "DISCARD."  To abandon, deposit, desert, discharge, dispose, drop,
dump, eliminate, emit, leave, pitch, place, put, scrap, spill, leak, throw,
or toss any item of solid waste or derivative thereof, or any inherent
waste-like material in a manner such that the discarded substance remains
upon the land as solid waste.



   "DUMPING/TO DUMP."  The discarding of any items of solid waste
commonly known as garbage, rubbish, refuse, construction and demolition
debris, household trash, baby diapers, food wastes, appliances, tires, scrap
metal, vehicles or parts, and all other items and materials defined as solid
waste below.



   "ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY."  The Compliance Officer of the Howard County
Recycling District or some other person specifically designated by the
Director of the Howard County Recycling District, including but not limited
to, a police officer, a sheriffs officer, a conservation officer, an
appropriate representative of a state or local governmental department, or
other "sworn" enforcement officer.



   "FILL MATERIAL."  Any material that is used for fill such as soil,
clay, shale, gravel, sand or concrete.



   "GARBAGE."  Any animal solid, vegetable solid, and semi-solid wastes
from the processing, handling, preparation, cooking, serving, or consumption
of food or food materials.



   "GENERATE."  The act or process of producing solid waste. "GENERATOR"
means the person whose actions or processes result in unwanted solid waste
materials.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE."  Any waste, including but not limited to, household
hazardous wastes, used automotive fluids or parts, solvents and chemicals
that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an
increase in mortality or increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
handled, disposed of or otherwise mismanaged.



   "HOWARD COUNTY RECYCLING DISTRICT."  Includes all of the incorporated
and unincorporated territory in the county.



   "INERT SOLID WASTE."  Includes but is not limited to, uncontaminated
earth, rocks, rigid concrete, bricks, tiles, aged asphalt, uncontaminated
natural wood, brush, leaves, grass clippings, wood chips, or sawdust.



   "INFECTIOUS WASTE."  Any waste that is capable of transmitting a
communicable disease, including but not limited to, pathological waste (human
tissues, blood, excreta and secretions), medical and laboratory wastes,
contaminated or fouled bedding, bandages, dressings, diapers, contaminated
animal carcasses, offal, excreta, body parts.



   "JUNK."  Any of the following items which are considered abandoned,
dismantled, discarded or otherwise unusable including, but not limited to,
vehicles, machinery, equipment, appliances or other household goods and
furniture. The term shall also include but is not limited to, component
parts, such as engines, transmissions, drive trains, suspension, fenders,
doors, hoods, wheels, windshields and tires removed from vehicles or any
other part of a motor vehicle.



   "LITTER."  Any man-made or man-used waste, which, if deposited within
the county otherwise than in a proper waste storage container, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare or tends to impair the
environment or aesthetic well-being of the community. Litter shall include,
but not be limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, debris, grass clippings, other
lawn or garden waste, paper products, glass, metal, plastic or paper
containers, or other waste material of an unsightly, unsanitary, nauseous or
offensive nature. "LITTERING" may also include any item of waste material
moved by wind, water or animals or any other combination of these items.



   "MECHANICALLY INOPERABLE."  Any vehicle, machinery, equipment,
watercraft or trailer which is in a condition that prevents it from being
driven under its own power, or not able to be operated in its normal manner.



   "NUISANCE."  Defined as set out in IC 34-1-52-1, to wit: whatever is
injurious to health, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as
essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.  "NUISANCE" is any condition or thing existing or allowed to exist
that injures or endangers the comfort, health or safety of others or the
environment; unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to destruct or
renders dangerous for passage on any public or private property, or is likely
to depreciate the value of other's property.



   "OF RECORD."  Recorded in the records of the Recorder of Howard
County, Indiana, or in the records of the Auditor of Howard County, Indiana.



   "OPEN DUMP."  The consolidation of solid waste from one or more
sources or the discarding of solid waste at any location that does not
fulfill the requirements of a sanitary landfill, transfer station or other
facility as prescribed by state law or regulations, and that exists without
daily cover and without regard to the possibilities of contamination of
surface or sub-surface water resources, air, land or other hazard or threat
of hazard to the environment or safety.



   "PERSON."  An individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
trust, estate, legal representative or agent.



   "PRIVATE PREMISES."  All property, including, but not limited to,
vacant land or any land upon which is located one or more buildings or other
structures designated or used for residential, commercial, business,
industrial, institutional, or religious purposes, together with any yard,
grounds, walks, driveways, fences, porches, or other structures or
improvements appurtenant to the land, except any public place.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Shall include but is not limited to, any and all
streets and roads, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, alleys, or other public ways,
any and all public parks, lakes, waterways, spaces, publicly owned
rights-of-way, grounds, or buildings within the incorporated and
unincorporated territory in Howard County pursuant to IC 13-21-3 except those
areas excluded by each eligible entity as defined in an adopted ordinance
related to this subchapter.



   "RECYCLABLES."  Materials segregated from the waste stream for the
purpose of collection and reprocessing to recover and reuse as a material
resource. This shall include, but is not limited to, glass containers,
newspapers, office papers, corrugated cardboard, aluminum, steel containers
and certain plastic containers.



   "SALVAGING."  The controlled removal of reusable or recyclable waste
material.



   "SCAVANGING."  The uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of solid
waste materials or recyclables at any point in the waste management system.



   "SOLID WASTE."  Any garbage, refuse, sludge, or other discarded or
disposed materials, including but not limited to, solid, liquid, or
semi-solid or contained gaseous materials resulting from any operation,
activity, or source.



   "SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST."  Any right in real property that may
be affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by this subchapter,
including a fee interest, a life estate interest, a future interest, a
present possessor interest, or an equitable interest of a contract purchaser,
or a lease.



   "WASTE STORAGE."  Proper temporary containment of waste materials in a
waste storage container for a period not to exceed ten days or the standard
interval of local commercial collection service, whichever is less.



   "WASTE STORAGE CONTAINER."  A proper and suitable receptacle used for
the temporary storage of solid waste, infectious or hazardous wastes while
awaiting collection or proper disposal.



   "VECTOR."  Any animal, insect, substance or any other solid waste
object of transfer capable of harboring and/or transmitting micro-organisms
and/or insects or disease from one animal to another or to a human.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.32  ACTS PROHIBITED.



   No owner, occupant, tenant, or any person having a substantial property
interest in any real or personal property within the Howard County Recycling
District, shall maintain, create, cause, place, deposit, leave, or permit a
nuisance to remain on such property, or upon any public place abutting such
real estate or personal property.



   The following acts shall constitute a violation of this subchapter:



   (A)   No person shall discard or dump litter, abandoned vehicles,
junk, recyclables, garbage, construction/demolition waste, hazardous waste,
infectious waste, inert solid waste along any public roadway or near any
public or private river, lake, stream or ditch or on his or her property or
the property of another person.



   (B)   No person shall conduct any activity on public or private land
which results in the accumulation of litter, abandoned motor vehicles, junk,
recyclables, garbage, fill materials, construction/ demolition waste,
hazardous waste, infectious, inert solid waste, or solid waste so as to
interfere with the public health, safety, peace and the comfortable enjoyment
of life or property.



   (C)   No person owning real property shall cause or consent to final
disposal upon said property of solid waste materials (other than inert solid
waste or fill material) that is generated by said person or by any other
person, unless otherwise licensed or permitted as a disposal facility by the
state.



   (D)   No person shall litter, nor permit any dependent minor or
other person for whom he or she is legally responsible to litter, nor cause
another person to litter.



   (E)   No person shall discard any materials, other than recyclables,
at any facility or in any container intended for collecting recyclables.



   (F)   No person shall deposit any contaminated recyclable materials
in or at any city, county or Recycling District facility or container
intended for collecting recyclable materials.



   (G)   No person shall conduct scavenging of materials at any
facility or in any container intended for collecting recyclable materials.



   (H)   No person, either knowingly or unknowingly, shall contract
with another party to engage in any acts prohibited by divisions (A) through
(G) of this section.  A violation of this division (H) shall be an offense
of the same degree for the waste generator as the violation committed by the
hired contractor.



   (I)   No person shall store, accumulate or allow to remain on any
private property, any abandoned vehicles, automobile parts, disassembled
automobiles, automobiles without engines, plumbing and piping materials and
parts, scrap metal, unseaworthy or dilapidated boats, dilapidated,
deteriorated, or non-operable jet skis, snowmobiles, bicycles, trailers,
mopeds or junk, unless properly approved.



   (J)   No person shall store, accumulate or allow to remain on any
private property appliances, household items and tires outside of any
structure.



   (K)   No person shall have any waste water, filth, offal, garbage,
rubbish, animal waste, human excrement, which is deposited, allowed or caused
to be upon any public or private property, other than for the purpose of
approved forms of composting.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.33  INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The Compliance Officer, or other specifically designated enforcement
authority, shall have the right to enter onto any public or private property,
excluding structures within the jurisdictional coverage of this subchapter
for the purpose of performing any duties imposed by the provisions of this
subchapter.  The Compliance Officer is hereby authorized to issue warnings,
citations, and abatement notices under this subchapter.



   (A)   Upon receipt of any complaint, report, or personal sighting of
an alleged violation of this subchapter, the Compliance Officer shall conduct
an investigation of such complaint, report or personal sighting.



   (B)   In the event that the Compliance Officer determines that there
is not a violation of this subchapter, but has reason to believe that the
activity may constitute a violation of regulations enforced by other
agencies, the Compliance Officer(s) or designee(s) may forward a copy of the
report of investigation to another state, county or city agency for further
review and investigation.



   (C)   Items contained in waste materials or recyclable materials,
which bear information such as names and addresses, shall be considered as
evidence for identifying the owner or generator of the discarded materials
and shall constitute rebuttal and be evidence that the person whose name is
found therein has violated this subchapter.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.34  ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   Where, upon inspection, reasonable cause is found that a violation of
this subchapter exists, the Compliance Officer shall issue a written
abatement notice.



   (A)   An abatement notice shall be served upon all known holders of
substantial property interests in the real estate upon which the violation is
alleged to exist.



   (B)   The abatement notice under this subchapter shall be on a form
approved by the Howard County Recycling District's Board of Directors.



   (C)   The abatement notice issued shall include the name of the
person to whom the order is issued, a legal description or physical address
of the location of the alleged violation, a brief description of the nature
of the alleged violation together with the provision of the subchapter
alleged to have been violated, the date and time when the report was
observed, occurred or was filed, the name of the person issuing the warning,
the date the warning was issued, the action the notice requires and potential
fines for non-compliance.



   (D)   The action that the abatement notice requires must be
reasonably related to abatement of the conditions constituting the violation.



   (E)   The period of time within which the action ordered is required
to be accomplished, measured from the time when the abatement notice is
served.  The time allowed must allow a sufficient time, of at least 48 hours
from the time the abatement notice is served, to accomplish the required
action. If the notice allows more than 30 days to accomplish the action, the
notice may require that a substantial beginning be made in accomplishing the
action within the initial 30 day period following service of the notice.



   (F)   A statement that the order becomes final ten calendar days
after notice is served, unless a hearing is requested in writing by the owner
of record, the tenant or occupant, or by a person holding a substantial
property interest in the private premises upon which the nuisance is alleged
to exist. The request for a hearing must be served upon the enforcement
authority prior to the expiration of the aforementioned ten calendar day
period.



   (G)   A statement briefly indicating what action can be taken by the
Howard County Recycling District or enforcement authority if there is
non-compliance with the orders contained in the abatement notice.



   (H)   The name, business address, and business telephone number of
the enforcement authority.



   (I)   Service of abatement notices shall be made by any of the
following means:



      (1)   Sending a copy of the notice by registered or certified
mail to the residence or place of business or employment of the person to be
notified, with return receipt requested.



      (2)   Delivering a copy of the notice personally to the person
to be notified.



      (3)   Leaving a copy of the notice at the dwelling or usual
place of abode of the person to be notified.



      (4)   Posting a copy of the notice in a prominent place upon
the premises where the nuisance is located.



      (5)   If, after a reasonable effort, service cannot be
obtained by any of the means described in divisions (1) through (4) above,
service may be made by publishing the notice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county in which the property subject to the notice is
located. Publication shall be made one time.



   (J)   The date when notice is considered given is:



      (1)   The date left at the dwelling, date of personal service
or date signed by certified mail.



      (2)   Notice by publication is considered given on the date of
publication.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.35  WHEN ABATEMENT NOTICE IS NOT REQUIRED.



   Where, in the opinion of the enforcement authority, a nuisance exists
which creates a substantial and imminent health or safety hazard requiring
immediate abatement in order to protect health and safety, the enforcement
authority, upon prior approval by the Director or Howard County Recycling
District's Board of Directors, shall abate the nuisance without the necessity
of issuing an abatement notice.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.36  HEARINGS.



   (A)   Any owner, tenant or occupant, or person holding a substantial
property interest in private premises upon which a nuisance is alleged to
exist who disputes the existence of a nuisance, or disputes the nature of the
abatement action ordered in the abatement notice, may, within ten calendar
days of service of the abatement notice, serve upon the enforcement authority
a written request for a hearing. The written request does not need to be in
any particular form, but shall clearly indicate that a hearing is requested,
and shall set out the nature of the individual's disagreement with the
content of the abatement notice.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the
enforcement authority shall place the matter on the agenda of the Howard
County Recycling District's Board of Directors for hearing. The Howard County
Recycling District's Board of Directors shall function as hearing body to
adjudicate the matter.



   (C)   The Compliance Officer or designee shall give written notice
to the party requesting the hearing of the date and time of the hearing. Such
notice shall be given no less than five calendar days prior to the date set
for hearing.



   (D)   At the hearing, which may be adjourned from time to time, it
shall be the Compliance Officer's burden to go forward with evidence
sufficient to demonstrate that a nuisance exists, and that the actions
required are reasonably calculated to abate the nuisance within a reasonable
period of time. The party requesting the hearing shall have the right to
dispute the existence of the nuisance, the reasonableness of the remedy, or
the reasonableness of the time allowed to remedial action. The party
requesting the hearing may propose alternative remedies or time periods for
remedial action, or alternate remediation plans.



   (E)   All such hearings shall be open to the public pursuant to
state statutes on open meetings.



   (F)   Upon conclusion of the presentation of evidence and oral
argument, if any, the Howard County Recycling District's Board of Directors
shall deliberate and render a decision either confirming, amending or
rescinding the disputed content of the abatement notice.



   (G)   All time parameters set out in the abatement notice for
completion of compliance actions shall be tolled, pending the outcome of the
Howard County Recycling District's Board of Directors decision. In cases
where the actions of the enforcement authority are upheld, or are upheld as
modified by the Howard County Recycling District's Board of Directors, it
shall be the responsibility of the Howard County Recycling District's Board
of Directors, in its decision, to establish time periods for completion of
compliance activities held in abeyance during the hearing process.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.37  APPEAL.



   Pursuant to IC 36-1-6-9(e), a person who received a penalty under this
subchapter may appeal the order imposing the penalty to a court of record in
Howard County, Indiana no later than 60 days after the day on which the order
is entered.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.38  COMPLIANCE WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   No additional fines shall be imposed once the abatement order has been
satisfactorily complied with.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.39  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ABATEMENT NOTICE.



   Failure to comply with the orders set out in the abatement notice
within the time periods set out therein, or within any extended time periods
agreed to by the Compliance Officer shall constitute a violation of this
section and shall render the individual upon whom the abatement notice was
served liable to a fine as set forth by the Howard County Recycling
District's Board of Directors. Each day's failure, neglect or refusal to
abate the nuisance during the time period allowed for compliance shall
constitute a separate offense under this section. The record owner of the
premises upon which the nuisance is found to exist, shall be held liable for
the payment of fines assessed under this section.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.40  ABATEMENT BY DISTRICT.



   In addition to fines imposed under this subchapter, in non-emergency
situations where abatement is not accomplished immediately by the county,
failure, neglect, or refusal of any party to abate a violation as required by
the abatement notice shall authorize the enforcement authority to obtain the
permission of the District Director or Howard County Recycling District's
Board of Directors to abate the violation as set out in the abatement notice.
Where such permission is sought, the Compliance Officer or designee shall
file a copy of the abatement notice with the Recorder of Howard County,
Indiana, to give constructive notice to subsequent purchasers that the real
estate is subject to the costs associated with the abatement. Abatement may
be accomplished by crews designated by the District if the work is within its
capacity to accomplish, or the District may request quotes and award the job
to the lowest responsible and responsive contractor. An accurate accounting
shall be kept of all costs incurred in abating the nuisance. Upon completion
of the abatement, a statement for costs incurred shall be forwarded to the
record owner by certified mail. Should such costs remain unpaid 30 calendar
days after receipt by the owner of record, or upon return of the certified
mail as undeliverable, appropriate legal action may be taken to compel
payment of costs incurred. Any judgment for costs obtained shall be filed as
a judgment lien against the real estate upon which the violation was abated.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In addition to any other costs imposed under this chapter, any
person who is found to have violated this chapter, or willfully or
negligently failed to comply with any provision of this chapter or with any
orders issued hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than
$1,000 for each offense.  Each day a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense.  Citations for violations of this
chapter may be issued by the enforcement authority or by any sworn officer of
the Kokomo Police Department.  The Uniform Traffic Citation may be utilized
for the purpose of evidencing violation of this chapter.  Enforcement shall
be in effect by the filing of a civil suit seeking judgment in the amount of
the fine imposed, plus court costs.  (Ord. 6019, passed 12-17-96)



   (B)   (1)In addition to any other costs imposed under §§ 99.30
through 99.40, any person who is found to have violated §§ 99.30 through
99.40, or willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of
§§ 99.30 through 99.40 or with any orders issued thereunder, shall be fined
not less than $100, and no more than $2,500 for each offense. Each day a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.



      (2)   Citations for violations of §§ 99.30 through 99.40 may
be issued by the enforcement authority.  The Uniform Traffic Citation may be
utilized for the purpose of evidencing violation of §§ 99.30 through
99.40.  Enforcement shall be in effect by the filing of a civil suit seeking
judgment in the amount of the fine imposed, plus court costs.



      (3)   All expenses including fines and abatement costs
incurred by the Howard County Recycling District in enforcing §§ 99.30
through 99.40 or adopted ordinances by eligible entities related to §§
99.30 through 99.40 shall become a lien on property owned by the person or
persons as afforded by IC 36-1-6-2. The lien shall be placed and recorded on
the property tax duplicated and collected from the owner as taxes are
collected.



      (4)   A clean up fund is hereby established in the operating
budget of the Howard County Recycling District. This fund shall be
established for the purpose of accounting and paying for the costs of
investigating, enforcing and cleaning up properties in violation of §§
99.30 through 99.40.



      (5)   In matters involving a health and/or vector hazard, the
Howard County Recycling District Director, Compliance Officer(s) or
designee(s) may conduct investigation and enforcement according to laws
governing public health under the Director's supervision. The Director of the
Howard County Recycling District may designate some other person as the
enforcement authority to conduct investigation and enforcement according to
laws governing public health as needed.



      (6)   The Howard County Recycling District's Board of
Directors shall be empowered to order the abatement of nuisance solid waste
accumulation, illegal dumping, and littering and to issue orders and fines as
designated.



      (7)   Any person or persons identified violating §§ 99.30
through 99.40 shall be subject to the following schedule for abatement: the
Compliance Officer(s) or designee(s) shall notify the person of an alleged
violation. Depending upon the extent of the violation, the notice will state
that violation abatement must occur within a reasonable length of time
between ten days and 60 days, from the date of notice. If abatement does not
occur within the stated length of time, the Howard County Recycling District
Director reserves the right to abate the nuisance through the use of private
contractors or the public workforce.



      (8)   If a small amount of trash, litter or recycling, is
found on public land, designated county employees or other agents may search
the material for identification evidence and then properly dispose of or
recycle the material.  Evidence will be forwarded to the enforcement
authority for further action.



      (9)   The owner of property on which improper disposal acts
have occurred may be included as a party of an enforcement action against a
person who committed the violation for the purposes of obtaining access to
the land to clean up and properly dispose of the wastes.



      (10)   Either abatement of the violation or a request for
appeal must be filed with the Howard County Recycling District's Board of
Directors within the time frame designated in the notice for the identified
person or property owner to dispute fines, an order to appear, or other legal
action.



   (C)   Any person who is found to have a chronic nuisance property
shall be assessed a fine after receiving three violations in a 30 day period.
The owner shall be subject to the following civil penalties:



      (1)   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first
violation at a chronic nuisance property;



      (2)   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation
at the same chronic nuisance property; and



      (3)   Two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) for the third and
any subsequent violation(s) at the same chronic nuisance property.



(Ord. 6549, passed 8-25-08; Am. Ord. 6825, passed 4-25-16)



CHAPTER 100:  BURNING



Section



   100.01   Title



   100.02   Definitions



   100.03   Burning prohibited



   100.04   Exceptions



   100.05   Construction and development burning requirements



   100.06   Nonresidential burning



 



   100.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



§ 100.01  TITLE.



   This chapter may be cited and referred to as the City of Kokomo's
"Burning Ordinance".



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06)



§ 100.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BARBECUE PIT."  A permanent brick or masonry structure designed to
contain a fire for cooking food.



   "BURNING."  To be on fire, to give forth light and heat during the
process of combustion, or to be charred or scorched by action of fire or heat.



   "CLEAN WOOD."  Wood that is not painted, varnished, impregnated with
any substance used as a preservative, or have attached construction debris.



   "CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL."  Any material or substance used in
construction, remodeling, or maintenance of a structure.



   "DANGEROUS MATERIAL."  Any material or substance that poses a risk to
the environment or the health of the community.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to, construction, reconstruction, or
placement of a building or any addition to a building.



   "GARBAGE."  Food waste such as fruit, vegetables, meat, cooking
greases, dried cereal, bread, beverages, and semi-solid waste resulting from
processing, handling, preparation, and cooking of dead animals, animal waste
and the like.



   "NUISANCE."  A fire that generates products of combustion that, in the
opinion of the responding fire officer, would be offensive to the senses of
sight or smell of a reasonable person.



   "PROHIBIT."  To stop or prevent.



   "RUBBISH."  Any substance that is not readily combustible such as
rubber, plastics, cloth, oily liquids, glass, metal, aluminum, leather and
the like.



   "YARD WASTE."  Leaves, grass, weeds, brush and the like.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06)



§ 100.03  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person within the city shall burn
rubbish, garbage, yard waste, leaves, construction materials, tree limbs, or
dangerous materials at any time within the incorporated limits of the City of
Kokomo, Indiana.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of § 100.03 hereof notwithstanding, the following shall
be permitted fires within the City of Kokomo, Indiana:



   (A)   Fires utilized for cooking in commercially available grills,
grills designed for the sole purpose of food preparation (unless otherwise
restricted by the Indiana Fire Code), barbecue pits that are designed to
contain their fire in a non-combustible vessel, and devices manufactured as
portable outdoor fireplaces.



   (B)   The following types of exempted fires are permitted with prior
written approval of the Kokomo Fire Chief or his or her designated
representative:



      (1)   Fires used for Twelfth Night Ceremonies.



      (2)   Fires used for celebrating school pep rallies.



      (3)   Fires used for scouting activities.



      (4)   Fires which, in the opinion of the Fire Chief or
designated representative, are necessary for preservation of public health
and safety.



   (C)   Exempted fires shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   Only clean wood products shall be burned.



      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times, until completely
extinguished.



      (3)   A supply of water or extinguishing agent shall be on
hand sufficient to control the fire.



      (4)   If the fire creates an air pollution problem, a
nuisance, or a fire hazard, they shall be extinguished.



      (5)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions, such as air inversions, high winds, air stagnation
and the like.



      (6)   Burning shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any
combustible material or structure.



      (7)   Fires shall not be permitted within 500 feet of any fuel
storage area or pipeline.



      (8)   No burning shall take place in any public right-of-way.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06)



§ 100.05  CONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT BURNING REQUIREMENTS.



   All burning in furtherance of construction and development shall meet
all the requirements of the State of Indiana for burning, emissions and the
like.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06)



§ 100.06  NONRESIDENTIAL BURNING.



   The following additional regulations apply to nonresidential burning,
including, but not limited to, businesses, factories, institutions, churches,
and governmental agencies:



   (A)   All burning must meet the guidelines and restrictions of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management on incinerator limitations.



   (B)   All such burning must utilize a stationary incinerator and
shall not take place in any portable incinerator or home-made incinerator
unless approved by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



   (C)   All burning shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m., local time.



   (D)   All incinerators in which burning takes place shall be
maintained as specified by the manufacturer's recommendation.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or entity violating the provisions of this chapter for which
a penalty is attached shall be fined no less than $25, nor more than
$1,000.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day a
violation occurs or continues.  Any person or entity served a citation for
violating the provisions of this chapter may appear at the office of the
Corporation Counsel of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, and pay the civil penalty
stated on the citation. If a person, or process agent for an entity does not
so appear within 14 days of issuance of the citation, the city may take
appropriate action to enforce payment.  It shall be the duty of the Kokomo
Police Department, Fire Department, or Building Inspector to furnish a copy
of the citation to the office of the Corporation Counsel within 72 hours
after issuance.



(Ord. 6438, passed 7-10-06)



CHAPTER 101:  GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS TELEVISION STATION



Section



   101.01   Establishment



   101.02   Purpose and goals



   101.03   Administrative Board



   101.04   Terms of Administrative Board



   101.05   General authority of the Administrative Board



   101.06   KGOV 2 staff



   101.07   General provisions



§ 101.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There shall be established for the city a governmental access
television station.  This governmental access television station shall
broadcast on a designated governmental channel provided by the locally
franchised cable television operator.  The governmental access television
station shall be designated as KGOV 2.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.02  PURPOSE AND GOALS.



   It shall be the purpose of the governmental access television station
to broadcast programming that is governmental in nature.  The goals are:



   (A)   To increase public awareness and understanding of the
structure, functions, services, resources, and activities of municipal
government and of public issues.



   (B)   To foster and enhance communication between municipal
government and citizens.



   (C)   To stimulate and increase access to government and citizen
participation in the decision making process of municipal government.



   (D)   To market Kokomo and enrich the quality of life in Kokomo
through programming that contributes to making Kokomo and its surrounding
area a better place to live.



   (E)   To ensure that KGOV 2 programming meets a journalistic mode of
unbiased nonpartisanship while providing professional broadcasts which meet
the highest standards of technical production and artistic protocol.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.03  ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD.



   (A)   A Cable Governmental Access Television Administrative Board
shall be established, consisting of five voting members appointed as follows:



      (1)   Three members shall be named by the Common Council;



      (2)   One member shall be named by the Mayor; and



      (3)   One member shall be named by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (B)   Each member appointed by the Common Council must be approved
by a two-thirds vote of all elected members of the Common Council.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.04  TERMS OF ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD.



   (A)   The terms of service of the Board members are as follows:



      (1)   Member appointed by the Common Council, two years;



      (2)   Member appointed by the Mayor, three years; and



      (3)   Member appointed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety, three years.



   (B)   No appointee shall serve more than two consecutive terms.



   (C)   All members shall reside within the corporate limits of the
city.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.05  GENERAL AUTHORITY OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE BOARD.



   (A)   The Cable Governmental Access Television Administrative Board
shall have authority for planning and developing all matters related to the
governmental access television station and to see to the operation and
maintenance of the governmental access television station. The Cable
Governmental Access Television Administrative Board shall also have input on
the necessary expenditures to carry out the KGOV 2 programs, but subject to
the budget established by the Common Council.



   (B)   The Cable Governmental Access Television Administrative Board
may create an Advisory Committee which will serve the Board in generating an
effective policy for continued development of KGOV 2.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.06  KGOV 2 STAFF.



   (A)   Certain positions in the city administration shall have
included in their job descriptions KGOV 2 responsibilities.



   (B)   The city shall be responsible for hiring the most qualified
individual(s) and assigning the appropriate duties for the operation of KGOV
2. These individuals will direct, manage, and carry out the programs
established by the city administration, the Common Council and the
Administrative Board within the limitations of the budget appropriated
annually by the Common Council for KGOV 2.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



§ 101.07  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The policies and procedures of KGOV 2 will be formulated by
the city administration, approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety and
ratified by the Common Council before implementation.  These policies shall
be used by the Administrative Board in planning, developing, operating and
managing KGOV 2.



   (B)   The Common Council shall have authority over KGOV 2 and its
programming and procedures. Before any funds are utilized on KGOV 2 an
appropriation ordinance must be presented to the Common Council. The Common
Council's authority will be in effect until the Cable Governmental Access
Television Administrative Board is formed and formal policies adopted. The
Administrative Board must be formed and formal policies must be adopted and
ratified within ten days after passage of the ordinance. If the Board is not
formed and/or the policies not approved by the Board of Public Works and
Safety and not ratified by the Common Council, the Common Council shall be
responsible for appointing the entire Board for the terms stated in § 101.04
and/or enacting the policies without Board of Public Works and Safety
approval. If the Common Council does not make the appropriate Board
appointments within ten days after passage of the ordinance then KGOV 2 will
continue to operate until the Board is in place.



(Ord. 6474, passed 5-14-07)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



         110.   LICENSES GENERALLY



         111.   AMUSEMENTS



         112.   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SERVICE



         113.   RESERVED



         114.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



         115.   PAWNBROKER, SECONDHAND DEALER, PRECIOUS METALS
AND STONES DEALER, AND VALUABLE METALS DEALER



         116.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



         117.   TAXICABS



         118.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PERMITS



         119.   EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS



         120.   DUMPSTERS



CHAPTER 110:  LICENSES GENERALLY   



Section



   110.01   Application



   110.02   Issuance



   110.03   Renewal



   110.04   Term



   110.05   Appeal when license not issued or renewed



   110.06   Fees; proration



   110.07   Transferability of license



   110.08   Bonds and insurance



   110.09   License certificates



   110.10   Exhibition of license certificate



   110.11   License suspension or revocation



   110.12   Record of licenses



 



   110.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Amusements, see §§ 111.01 and 111.10



   Bicycle licenses, see § 74.02



   Dogs, see § 90.13



   Fire sales, see § 114.01



   Garbage collection and disposal, see §§ 95.25 et seq.



   Peddlers, see § 117.02



   Rooming houses and hotels, see §§ 152.70 through 152.76



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to license generally, see IC §§ 36-1-3-8, 36-8-2-10,
36-8-2-11, and 36-9-2-4



§ 110.01  APPLICATION.



   Unless otherwise provided application for a license shall be made in
writing to the City Controller on forms provided by the city and applicant
shall state the location of the proposed activity and such other facts as may
be required for or be applicable to the granting of the license.



('75 Code, § 14-1)



§ 110.02  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Where the approval of any city officer or state officer is
required prior to the issuance of any license such approval must be presented
to the City Controller before the license is issued.



   (B)   No license shall be approved by any city officer or issued by
the city if it appears that the conduct of the activity for which a license
is sought will be contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or
any regulation, law, or ordinance applicable to such activity.



('75 Code, § 14-2)



§ 110.03  RENEWAL.



   All license renewals shall be issued in the same manner and be subject
to the same conditions as original licenses unless otherwise provided.



('75 Code, § 14-3)



§ 110.04  TERM.



   Unless otherwise provided, the term of the license year shall begin and
end with the calendar year.  Where the issuance of licenses for period of
less than one year is permitted, the effective date of such license shall
commence with the date of issuance.



('75 Code, § 14-4)



§ 110.05  APPEAL WHEN LICENSE NOT ISSUED OR RENEWED.



   Except as may be otherwise provided, any person aggrieved by the action
of any city official in denying a license shall have the right to a hearing
before the Board of Public Works and Safety on any such action, provided a
written request therefor is filed with the City Controller within ten days
after receipt of notice that the license shall not be granted or renewed.



('75 Code, § 14-5)



§ 110.06  FEES; PRORATION.



   The fees required for any license shall be paid at the office of the
City Controller before the granting of the license.  If on the original
issuance of a license for ll months or less of the current license year
remain, then the required license fee shall be reduced by prorating it in
accordance with the number of months left in the license year.



('75 Code, § 14-6)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to charge license fee, see IC 36-1-3-8



§ 110.07  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.



   Except as may be specifically provided otherwise, all licenses shall be
nontransferable.



('75 Code, § 14-7)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  BONDS AND INSURANCE.



   All required bonds shall be executed by two sureties, or a surety
company, and be subject to the approval of the Mayor.  Where policies of
insurance are required, such policies shall be approved as to substance and
form by the City Attorney.  Satisfactory evidence of coverage by bond or
insurance shall be filed with the City Controller before the license is
issued.



('75 Code, § 14-8)



§ 110.09  LICENSE CERTIFICATES.



   All license certificates shall show the date of issue, the activity
licensed, and the term of the license, and shall be signed in the name of the
city by the Mayor and City Controller, and be impressed with the city seal.



('75 Code, § 14-9)



§ 110.10  EXHIBITION OF LICENSE CERTIFICATE.



   Every licensee shall carry his license certificate on his person at all
times when engaged in the activity for which the license was granted, except
that where such activity is conducted at a fixed place or establishment, the
license certificate shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place
in his place of business.  The licensee shall exhibit the license
certificate when applying for a renewal and on demand of any police officer
or person representing its issuing authority.



('75 Code, § 14-10)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.11  LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   Any license issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor
after the required hearing for any of the following causes:



   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statement contained in
the application for license, or made in carrying on the licensed activity.



   (B)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.



   (C)   Conducting such licensed activity in such manner as to con-
stitute a breach of the peace, or a menace to the health, safety, or welfare
of the public, or a disturbance of the peace or comfort of residents of the
city, on recommendation of the appropriate official.



   (D)   Expiration or cancellation of any required bond or insurance.



   (E)   Actions unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license
granted.



   (F)   Violation of any regulation or provision of this code
applicable to the activity for which the license has been granted, or any
regulation or law of the state so applicable.



   (G)   Failure to continuously comply with all conditions required as
precedent to the approval of the license.



('75 Code, § 14-11)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Statutory reference:



   License revocation hearing required, see IC 36-4-5-5



§ 110.12  RECORD OF LICENSES.



   The City Controller shall keep a record of all licenses that he issues.



('75 Code, § 14-12)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this title, for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Outdoor Block Parties



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Permit required



   111.03   Limitation on permits



   111.04   General provisions for block parties



   111.05   Prohibitions



   111.06   Exclusions



   111.07   Permit application content



   111.08   Public notice of application submission; public hearing



   111.09   Issuance of permit



   111.10   Appeal



 



   111.99   Penalty



OUTDOOR BLOCK PARTIES



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “AMPLIFIED SOUND.”  Musical sound, the volume of which has been
increased by means of electronic amplification or enhancement.



   “BLOCK PARTY EVENT.”



      (1)   An out-of-doors gathering to which members of the
general public are invited or are encouraged to attend, and which includes
the presentation of live or recorded vocal or instrumental music by means of
amplified sound; and



      (2)   Is held on public or private property, but requires the
temporary closure of public streets or rights-of-way to accommodate the
event, either at the request of the individual(s) or organization sponsoring
the event, or as determined by the Chief of the Police Department, or his
designee, based either upon past experience with the same event, or as can be
reasonably anticipated given the nature of the event, or experience with
other events of a similar nature; and



      (3)   Is reasonably expected to attract more than 75 attendees.



   “COMMISSION.”   The Kokomo Traffic Commission.



   “CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.”  The area encompassed by the
following description: A section of the city bounded by Mulberry Street on
the north, Union Street on the east, Superior Street on the south, and
Washington Street on the west.



   “OWNER.”  The owner of real property as shown in the records
maintained by the Auditor of Howard County.



   “PROMOTER.”  The organization sponsoring a block party, and the
individual designated by the sponsoring organization to be the responsible
party for assuring compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



   “RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.” Any site having a residential zoning
classification under the zoning ordinance of the City of Kokomo, Indiana.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03; Am. Ord. 6376, passed 5-9-05)



§ 111.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as herein provided, no block party event shall be held
within the city, without a permit for such block party event having first
been obtained by the promoter.



   (B)   Block party permits shall be issued by the Kokomo Traffic
Commission.



   (C)   All block party permit applications shall be submitted to the
secretary of the Kokomo Traffic Commission no more than 365 calendar days
before the planned block party event, and no less than 60 days prior to the
proposed date of the block party event.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  LIMITATION ON PERMITS.



   Except for events held in the Central Business District, no more than
one block party event permit will be issued to a promoter sponsoring a block
party event, in any one calendar year, provided that, the same individual may
be designated by different promoters in the course of a calendar year to be
the responsible party for the purpose of assuring compliance with this
subchapter.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR BLOCK PARTIES.



   (A)   Block party events reasonably expected to generate over 75
attendees may require on-site security officers who may be off duty sworn
officers, or Emergency Management Agency volunteer police officers. Whether
security officers will be required, and, if so, the number of officers
required, and whether such officers must be off duty sworn officers or may be
Emergency Management Agency volunteer officers, shall also be determined by
the Commission on a case by case basis depending on the size and nature of
the event.



   (B)   Permits shall be issued per event, an event may extend over
multiple calendar days.



   (C)   The use of amplified sound, as defined herein, at block party
events will be required to conclude prior to 10:00 p.m. Sunday through
Thursday, and 12:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. This provision shall not be
construed as setting a limitation on block party activities other than the
use of amplified sound.



   (D)   Promoters will be required to provide trash collection and
cleanup of the event site, adjoining properties, and public thoroughfares
immediately upon conclusion of the event. If the promoters of an event fail
to satisfactorily provide for trash collection and clean up immediately
following an event, any and all costs incurred by the city in collecting
trash and/or cleaning the event site shall be assessed to the promoters of
the event. Such charges shall be in addition to any fines imposed by other
provisions of this ordinance. Failure to satisfactorily provide trash
collection and clean up following an event may constitute grounds for the
denial of future block party events sponsored by the same promoter and/or the
same block party event in subsequent years.



   (E)   Event activities shall not interfere with or hamper the normal
flow of traffic or parking on surface streets adjacent to the event location
except as approved in advance by the Commission.



   (F)   Promoters shall maintain amplified sound volume at reasonable
levels and shall comply with the request of the Police Department to moderate
volume should the Department receive neighborhood complaints about volume
levels.



   (G)   Promoters shall be required to assume all costs incurred by
the city relative to any necessary city services needed to support the event
such as barricading, sanitation, traffic control measures, or safety and
security measures, including the cost of event security officers. To assist
in budget planning for the block party event, at the time a permit
application is approved, the Commission shall provide a good faith estimate
of such costs, which estimate may be superceded by actual costs incurred.
Should the promoter fail to reimburse the city within 30 days after the block
party event for such costs as are incurred by the city, the city shall have
the right to sue for the recovery of such costs in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no block party event will be
permitted to be conducted within 1,000 feet of a hospital, retirement home,
or constant care facility at any time when such facilities are open to
patients.



   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, no block party event will be
permitted to be conducted within 500 feet of any property having a
residential zoning classification under the zoning ordinance of the city,
provided that, a permit may be issued where the promoter provides the
Commission with a petition consenting to the issuance of a permit signed by
at least 50% of the owners of residentially zoned property within a 500 feet
radius of the proposed block party event as measured from the projected
location of the event's main performance stage.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of § 111.02 notwithstanding, no permit shall
be required when the number of individuals reasonably expected to attend is
less than 75.



   (B)   There shall be no distance requirements for block party events
held in the Central Business District.



   (C)   There shall be no requirement to present a petition as
required in § 111.05(B) hereof for events held in the Downtown Business
District as a precondition to permit issuance.



   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to amplified
sound associated with events regulated elsewhere in this chapter, including,
but not limited to, parades, circuses, or carnivals.



   (E)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to events
held in city parks and approved by the Board of Park Commissioners.



   (F)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to instances
where, amplified sound, as herein defined, is ancillary to the primary use of
public address systems for other purposes, e.g. announcing a sporting event.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENT.



   The Commission shall prepare block party event permit application
forms. Such forms shall call for the following information:



   (A)   The name of the promoter, or promoting organization.



   (B)   The mailing address of the promoter or promoting organization.



   (C)   The telephone number of the promoter or promoting organization.



   (D)   The name, address, and telephone number of a contact person if
different than the name of the promoter.



   (E)   Facsimile telephone number or e-mail address of promoter,
promoting organization, and that of contact person, if such additional
numbers or e-mail addresses exist.



   (F)   Name of proposed block party event.



   (G)   Site of proposed block party.



      (1)   Applicant shall be required to provide a site diagram
which shall show the following:



         (a)   Approximate location of performance stage and all
sound amplification equipment.



         (b)   Access and egress points for emergency equipment,
including police, fire, and ambulance.



         (c)   Approximate distance to nearest residentially
zoned property.



      (2)   Applicant shall state whether any street closing shall
be required, and, if so, describe which streets, or portions of streets, are
required to be closed.



      (3)   Applicant shall describe steps which will be taken to
prevent the encroachment of pedestrians and/or vehicles onto adjacent
properties, e.g. barricades or fencing.



   (H)   Expected attendance at block-party event.



   (I)   Description of provisions for sanitary facilities, e.g.
portable toilets, hand washing stations.



   (J)   Date of proposed block party and rain date, if applicable.



   (K)   Evidence of a certificate of liability insurance, in an amount
to be determined by the Commission, showing the city as an additional named
insured.



   (L)   The names of all site supervisory staff and the means of
contacting such staff, such as cell phones, pagers, etc. during the course of
the event.



   (M)   If non-pre-packaged food is to be served, or if beverages will
be dispensed with ice into containers on-site for individual consumption,
evidence of a food permit issued by the Howard County Department of Health.



   (N)   If a permit is required from the Alcoholic Beverage
Commission, a copy of the permit. In addition, if alcoholic beverages are to
be sold or distributed, a description of the designated area where alcoholic
beverages will be sold and/or distributed, and a description of the means by
which the designated area will be segregated and controlled to prohibit the
unlawful sale or distribution of alcohol to minors (e.g. fencing or
barricades, and identification checkpoints and procedures).



   (O)   A brief description of the event.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  PUBLIC NOTICE OF APPLICATION SUBMISSION; PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   The applicant shall cause legal notice of the submission of
the application to be published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
The notice will be published one time, at least ten days before the date of
the hearing required under this section.



   (B)   The notice shall briefly describe the nature of the event,
including location and the hours of the proposed event.



   (C)   The notice will name a time and place, to be provided by the
President of the Commission, but no later than 60 days after submission of
the application, at which time and place public comment will be heard by the
Commission concerning issuance of the permit.



   (D)   The notice shall state that all citizens will be given an
opportunity to be heard, or to submit written comments concerning the
proposed event.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall consider all
matters presented at the public hearing, and all application materials
submitted by the promoter. In arriving at its decision to issue a permit, the
Commission will take into account the completeness of the application,
demonstrated compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, past
experience with the same event, and comments offered at the public hearing.
Should a permit be denied, the Commission shall make written findings in its
minutes setting out the reasons for its denial. Grounds for denial would
include an incomplete application; non-compliance with any other provision of
this subchapter, a history of non-compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter by the event promoter or the event itself, or a finding by the
Commission that, based upon the testimony heard at the hearing, a reasonable
person would find the block party event to be injurious to the health or
safety of the surrounding community. The Commission may continue its
deliberations to a later meeting.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.10  APPEAL.



   The decision of the Commission shall be final, subject to statutory
rights to appeal from the actions of municipalities as set out in state law.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   The city may seek injunctive relief to prevent threatened
violations of §§ 111.02 through 111.09.



   (B)   Persons found to be in violation of §§ 111.02 through 111.09
may be fined not more than $2,500 per violation.



   (C)   Remedies for violation of §§ 111.02 through 111.09 shall be
cumulative and not mutually exclusive.



(Ord. 6276, passed 9-29-03)



CHAPTER 112:  COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SERVICE



Section



   112.01   Franchise Agreement incorporated by reference



§ 112.01  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   A Community Antenna Television Service Franchise granted by Ordinance
4016, passed 5-25-70, and any amending ordinances from time to time, is
incorporated as if set forth in full herein.



(Ord. 4016, passed 5-25-70; Am. Ord. 4494, passed 3-29-76; Am. Ord. 4824,
passed 4-9-79; Am. Ord. 5519, passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord. 5998, passed 5-22-96)



CHAPTER 113:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 114:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Exception



   114.03   Hours of operation



   114.04   Advertising



   114.05   Sanitation of establishments



   114.06   Cleaning of toilet, bath, and similar facilities



   114.07   Sheets and towels



   114.08   Dressing rooms



   114.09   Where service is to be rendered



   114.10   Keeping of daily register



   114.11   Employees' and masseurs' clothing



   114.12   Sanitation of personnel



   114.13   Patrons to be covered by towels, cloths, or undergarments



   114.14   Inspections



   114.15   Rules and regulations



Permits for Establishments



   114.20   Permit required



   114.21   Filing of application; fee



   114.22   Application



   114.23   Hearing; notice



   114.24   Issuance



   114.25   Facilities required as prerequisite to issuance



   114.26   Revocation or suspension of permits



   114.27   Transfer of permits



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate business generally, see IC 36-1-3-8 and
36-8-2-10



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clear1y indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "EMPLOYEE."  Any and all persons, other than the masseurs or
masseuses, who render any service to the permittee, who receive compensation
directly from the permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers
and clients.



   "MASSAGE."  Any method of pressure on or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimu- lating
of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.



   "MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT."  Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or
carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any massage activities.



   "MASSEUR" or "MASSEUSE."  Any person who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage.



   "RECOGNIZED SCHOOL."  Any school or institution of learning which has
for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of
massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less than 70
hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student
shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such
school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such
course of study or learning.



('75 Code, § 14-81)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.02  EXCEPTION.



   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria,
the YMCA or YWCA, or other establishments where 80% of the gross receipts are
derived from sources other than massage activities, or to persons holding an
unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under state law, or to
persons working under the direction of any such persons or in any such
establishments.



('75 Code, § 14-82)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.03  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   A massage establishment shall not carry on, engage in, or conduct
business on Sunday and on other days shall not carry on, engage in, or
conduct business before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.



('75 Code, § 14-83)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.04  ADVERTISING.



   No massage establishment shall place, publish, or distribute or cause
to be placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that depicts
any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective
patrons that any service is available other than massage services, or that
employees, masseurs, or masseuses, are dressed in any manner contrary to this
chapter, nor shall any massage establishment indicate in the text of such
advertising that any service is available other than massage services.



('75 Code, § 14-84)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.04  SANITATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS.



   Every portion of a massage establishment, including all appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.



('75 Code, § 14-85)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.06  CLEANING OF TOILET, BATH, AND SIMILAR FACILITIES.



   A massage establishment's wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments,
and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation and all bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.



('75 Code, § 14-86)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.07  SHEETS AND TOWELS.



   All massage establishments shall be provided with clean laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which shall be laundered after each
use thereof and stored in approved sanitary manner.



('75 Code, § 14-87)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.08  DRESSING ROOMS.



   Every massage establishment shall make provisions for a separate
dressing room for each sex available on the premises with individual lockers
for each employee.  Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall
be self-closing.



('75 Code, § 14-88)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.09  WHERE SERVICE IS TO BE RENDERED.



   All massage services regulated by this chapter shall be carried on in
one cubicle, room, booth, or area within the massage establishment and no
such service shall be carried on in any other cubicle, room, booth, or area
except where such cubicle, room, booth, or area has transparent doors or
walls, such that all activity within the cubicle, room, booth, or area is
visible from outside the same.



('75 Code, § 14-89)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.10  KEEPING OF DAILY REGISTER.



   Every person who engages in or conducts a massage establishment shall
keep a daily register, approved as to form by the Police Department, of all
patrons, with names, addresses and hours of arrival and, if applicable, the
rooms or cubicles assigned.  The daily register shall at all times during
business hours be subject to inspection by officials of the County Health
Department and by the Police Department and shall be kept on file for one
year.



('75 Code, § 14-90)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.11  EMPLOYEES' AND MASSEURS' CLOTHING.



   All employees of massage establishments shall wear clean outer garments
whose use is restricted to the establishment; all such employees, masseurs,
and masseuses must be modestly attired, and diaphanous, flimsy, transparent,
form-fitting, or tight clothing is prohibited.  All clothing must cover the
employees', masseurs' or masseuses' chest at all times and hemlines of
skirts, dresses, or other such attire may be no higher than the top of the
knee.



('75 Code, § 14-91)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.12  SANITATION OF PERSONNEL.



   All personnel of massage establishments shall maintain themselves in a
clean and sanitary condition.



('75 Code, § 14-92)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.13  PATRONS TO BE COVERED BY TOWELS, CLOTHS, OR UNDERGARMENTS.



   The private parts of a patron of a massage establishment shall be
covered by towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee, masseur, or masseuse, and any contact by the masseur or masseuse
with a patron's genital area shall be unlawful.



('75 Code, § 14-93)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.14  INSPECTIONS.



   The Police Department and the Department of Public Health shall, from
time to time and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage
establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this
chapter are complied with.  Such inspections shall be made at reasonable
times and in a reasonable manner.



('75 Code, § 14-94)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.15  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police or the Director of Public Health may, after a
public hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in
conflict with this chapter to carry out its intent.  In the event the
regulations promulgated by these officials conflict, then those promulgated
by the Chief of Police shall be controlling.



('75 Code, § 14-96)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate businesses, see IC 36-8-2-10



PERMITS FOR ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 114.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on,
or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in, or upon any
premises, the operation of a massage establishment without a permit issued by
the Police Department after the approval of the Director of Public Health.



('75 Code, § 14-103)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 114.21  FILING OF APPLICATION; FEE.



   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application with the Chief of Police and pay a
filing fee of $25, which shall not be refundable.



('75 Code, § 14-104)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.22  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for a permit to operate a massage estab-
lishment shall set forth the exact nature of the massage to be administered,
the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and
address of each applicant.



   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for such a permit
shall furnish the following information:



      (1)   Written proof that the applicant is at least l8 years of
age.



      (2)   Two portrait photographs of him at least two inches by
two inches.



      (3)   His fingerprints.



      (4)   His business, occupation, or employment for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.



      (5)   His massage or similar business license history.



      (6)   Whether such person, in previously operating in this or
another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.



      (7)   Any criminal convictions, except minor traffic
violations.



('75 Code, § 14-105)



§ 114.23  HEARING; NOTICE.



   (A)   When an application is filed for a massage establishment
permit, the Chief of Police shall fix a time and a place for a public
hearing, which shall be held and at which the applicant may present evidence
on the question of his application.



   (B)   Not less than ten days before the date of such hearing, the
Chief of Police shall cause to be posted a notice of such hearing in a
conspicuous place on the property in which or on which the pro- posed massage
establishment is to be operated or shall publish notice of the hearing in a
newspaper having general countywide circulation at least five days prior to
the date of such hearing.



('75 Code, § 14-106)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.24  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for a massage
establishment within l4 days following the required hearing if all
requirements of this subchapter for a massage establishment are met and may
issue such a permit unless he finds that:



      (1)   The operations as proposed by the applicant if permitted
would not have complied with all applicable ordinances including, but not
limited to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes.



      (2)   The applicant and any other person who will be directly
engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment has been
convicted of a felony, or an offense involving sexual misconduct with
children, or any obscenity, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame,
solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution, or pandering.



   (B)   The Chief of Police in his discretion may issue a permit to
any person convicted of any of the crimes in division (A) (2) above if he
finds that such conviction occurred at least three years prior to the date of
application and the applicant has had no subsequent convictions.



('75 Code, § 14-107)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.25  FACILITIES REQUIRED AS PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   (A)   No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued
unless an inspection by the Director of Public Health or his authorized
representative reveals that the establishment complies with each of the
following minimum requirements:



      (1)   The construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam
baths, and showers is waterproof with approved waterproof materials.



      (2)   Toilet facilities are provided in convenient loca-tions,
and when five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the
premises at the same time, separate toilet facili- ties shall be provided. 
A single water closet for each sex shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time.  Urinals
may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been
provided.  All toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated
therein.



      (3)   All lavatories or wash basins that are provided with
both hot and cold running water are installed in either the toilet room or a
vestibule and lavatories or wash basins are provided with soap in a dispenser
and with sanitary towels.



   (B)   The Director of Public Health shall certify that the proposed
massage establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section
and shall give or send such certification to the Chief of Police.



('75 Code, § 14-108)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.26  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Any permit issued for a massage establishment shall be revoked
or suspended by the Chief of Police, after a public hearing before the Chief
of Police where it is found that any of the provi- sions of this subchapter
are violated or where the permittee or any employee of the permittee,
including a masseur or masseuse, has been convicted of any offense found in
§ 115.33 and the permittee has actual or constructive knowledge of the
violation or conviction, or in any case, where the permittee refuses to
permit any duly authorized police officer or Health Inspector to inspect the
premises or the operations therein.



   (B)   No such public hearing shall be held unless the Chief of
Police gives the permittee whose permit is its subject at least ten days
written notice of the specific charges against him and of the date of the
hearing.



   (C)   At the required hearing, the person whose permit is its
subject shall have the right to present evidence, cross-examine those who
testify against him and be represented by an attorney.



('75 Code, § 14-109)  (Ord. 4251, passed 10-29-73)



§ 114.27  TRANSFER OF PERMITS.



   No permit required by this subchapter shall be transferable except with
the written consent of the Chief of Police and the approval of the Department
of Public Health, however, on the death or incapacity of the permittee a
massage establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of
time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit.



('75 Code, § l4-95)  (Ord. 425l, passed l0-29-73)  Penalty, see § 110.99



CHAPTER 115:  PAWNBROKER, SECONDHAND DEALER, PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES
DEALER, AND VALUABLE METALS DEALER



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Sales in general



   115.03   Record of transactions



   115.04   Report of transactions



   115.05   Inspections



   115.06   Necessity of license



   115.07   Annual license/renewal fee



   115.08   Exceptions



   115.09    Violation



Statutory reference:



   Pawnbroker law, see IC 28-7-5-l et seq.



   Power of city to regulate crafts, see IC 36-8-2-l0



   Powers of police, see IC 36-8-3-l0



   Precious metals, see IC 23-2-6-15



   Valuable metals, see IC 25-37.5-1-0.6



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "PAWNBROKER."  Any person, partnership, association, limited liability
company or corporation lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal
property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on the condition
of selling the property back again at a stipulated price, other than chooses
in action, securities or printed evidence of indebtedness.



   “PRECIOUS METALS AND STONES DEALER."  Any person engaged in the
business of purchasing and reselling valuable items containing precious
metals or stones, including, but not limited to, silver, gold and platinum or
containing gems including, but not limited to, diamonds, rubies or emeralds
either at a permanently established place of business or in connection with a
business of an itinerant nature, including junk shops, junk stores, antique
dealers, secondhand stores or flea markets.



   "SECONDHAND DEALER."  Any person who purchases secondhand property of
any description for the purpose of dealing in the same and reselling same.



   "VALUABLE METALS."  Copper, lead, titanium, stainless steel, copper
alloy or brass, formed as a bar, cable, rod, tubing, wire, wire scrap, clamp,
connector, bushing, bearing or other appurtenances utilized or that can be
utilized by persons, firms, corporations or municipal corporations engaged in
either the generation, transmission or distribution of electric energy in
telephone, telegraph or other communications, or by railroads, or any copper,
copper alloy, brass or aluminum materials utilized for the purpose of
plumbing, storm doors, windows, siding or gutters of building structures or
automotive parts.



   "VALUABLE METALS DEALER."  Any individual, firm, corporation, limited
liability company or partnership engaged in the business of purchasing and
reselling valuable metal either at a permanently established place of
business or in connection with a business of an itinerant nature, including
junk shops, junk yards, junk stores, auto wreckers, scrap metal dealers or
processors, salvage yards, collectors of or dealers in junk and junk carts or
trucks.



('75 Code, § 14-132)  (Am. Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09)



§ 115.02  SALES IN GENERAL.



   (A)   No personal property shall be accepted as collateral security
or for purchase if such property normally bears a manufacturer's serial
number or other identifying insignia and such identification is not plainly
visible on the personal property being offered as collateral or for purchase.



   (B)   All goods or articles received by any proprietor, manager or
employee of any licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious metals and
stones dealer or valuable metal dealer shall be retained at the place of
business of the licensed dealer, by the proprietor, manager or employee for a
period of not less than 10 days after the transaction has been electronically
transmitted to the Kokomo Police Department before any such goods or articles
may be disposed of or sold.



('75 Code, § 14-133)  (Am. Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 6759, As
Amended, passed 7-14-14)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 115.03  RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious metals and
stones dealer, and valuable metals dealer shall keep record and preserve data
electronically through a computer data system as stipulated by the Kokomo
Police Department.



   (B)   Each record of transaction occurring at the place of business
must include:



      (1)   The name, date of birth and address of the seller. If
the sale is conducted by an agent of the property owner, the person acting as
agent must disclose the name, date of birth and address of both principal and
agent;



      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer, precious metals and stones dealer and valuable metals
dealer;



      (3)   The date of the transaction;



      (4)   The amount of the loan;



      (5)   (a)   The article or articles pledged, a description
of the articles to include manufacture’s serial numbers or other
identifying insignias. However, if multiple articles of a similar nature that
do not contain an identification or serial number (such as precious metals,
gemstones, musical recordings, video recordings, books or hand tools) are
delivered together in one transaction, the description of the articles is
adequate if the description contains the quantity of the articles delivered
and a physical description of the type of articles delivered, including any
other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, letters or special features;



         (b)   A clear photograph of each article or articles
pledged that captures all characteristics of each individual piece including
any serial numbers, names, numbers, letters, special features or other unique
identifying marks must be taken and preserved electronically through a
computer data system as stipulated by the Kokomo Police Department. Any item
that contains a manufacturer's serial number must be entered with the correct
serial number. If law enforcement finds that an article has been entered
incorrectly by the covered business, the store has 24 hours to correct this
mistake after notification by law enforcement and hold the item for an
additional ten days. This notification will be made in writing which writing
includes email;



      (6)   The type of government issued identification used to
verify the identity of the seller, together with the name of the governmental
agency that issued the identification and the identification number present
on the government issued identification. A legible photo copy of the
identification must be recorded;



      (7)   The method of recording data must be recorded in
electronic or computerized format as established by the Kokomo Police
Department. Electronic or computerized data must be preserved by the business
on the business premises for a period of two years from the date of the
transaction; and



      (8)   Any stolen article located by law enforcement in a place
of business operated by a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious metals and
stones dealer or valuable metals dealer is subject to confiscation by law
enforcement. Law enforcement will provide a written receipt for any
confiscated property.



('75 Code, § 14-134)  (Am. Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09; Am. Ord. 6759, As
Amended, passed 7-14-14) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 115.04  REPORT OF TRANSACTIONS.



   Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious metals and stones dealer,
and valuable metals dealer shall submit to the Kokomo Police Department each
business day, all required data set forth in § 115.03 regarding all
transactions at that business during the preceding 24 hour period of
operation. The data shall be submitted via electronic format as stipulated by
the Kokomo Police Department.



('75 Code, § 14-135)  (Am. Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09) Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 115.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The computerized data entry of all transactions recorded at
the place of business shall be open at all times during business hours for
inspection by the Chief of Police or any member of the Kokomo Police
Department as authorized by the Chief of Police to examine such records.



   (B)   The electronic media storing the computerized data and/or a
print out of the transactions shall be subject to removal by the Chief of
Police and/or his or her designee for inspection, examination and/or
investigation purposes. The electronic media shall be stored at the Kokomo
Police Department.



('75 Code, § 14-136)  (Am. Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09)



§ 115.06  NECESSITY OF LICENSE.



   No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer,
precious metals and stones dealer or valuable metals dealer except as
authorized by this chapter and without first obtaining a license from the
city as provided in § 115.07.



(Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09)



§ 115.07  ANNUAL LICENSE/RENEWAL FEE.



   (A)   The annual license fee payable to the city by each pawnbroker,
secondhand dealer, precious metals and stones dealer and valuable metals
dealer for any license issued under the provision of this chapter shall be
$50. A business having more than one location must have a separate license
for each location. Licenses are nontransferable.



   (B)   License fees shall be due annually on the date the license was
first issued under § 115.07. The fee shall be remitted to the Kokomo Police
Department.



(Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09)



§ 115.08  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Transactions between a pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious
metals and stones dealer or valuable metals dealer and a not-for-profit
organization shall be excluded from the sales, record keeping and reporting
requirements outlined in §§ 115.02 through 115.04.



   (B)   All business entities, properly registered as nonprofit
organizations with the Internal Revenue Service, will obtain exempt status
upon providing the necessary Federal Tax ID number and other business entity
documentation defining its nature and existence.



(Ord. 6584, passed 8-10-09)



§ 115.09 VIOLATION.



   Every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, precious metals and stones dealer
and valuable metals dealer is subject to a fine up to $2500 for any violation
of this chapter.



(Ord. 6759, As Amended, passed 7-14-14)



CHAPTER 116:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS



Section



General Provisions



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   License required



   116.03   License application



   116.04   Fingerprinting of applicant



   116.05   License fee



   116.06   Investigation of applicant



   116.07   Standards for issuance of license



   116.08   Agent for service of process



   116.09   Duty of Controller



   116.10   Term of license



   116.11   Transferability of license



   116.12   Exhibition of licenses and badges



   116.13   Hours of soliciting or peddling



   116.14   Grounds for license revocation



   116.15   License revocation procedure



   116.16   Appeal to Common Council



Charitable Solicitation



   116.30   Definitions



   116.31   Prohibition



   116.32   Exemptions



   116.33   Permit procedures



   116.34   Solicitation regulations



   116.35   Suspension or revocation of permit



   116.36   Right to appeal



   116.37   Permit fee



 



   116.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 97



Statutory reference:



   Transient Merchant Law of Indiana, see IC 25-37-l-l et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUSINESS."  The business carried on by any person who is a peddler or
solicitor.



   "GOODS."  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but
is not restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.



   "ITINERANT MERCHANT."  Any person, whether as owner, agent, or
consignee, who engages in a temporary business of selling goods and who, in
the furtherance of such business, uses any building, struc- ture, vehicle, or
any place within the city.



   "PEDDLER."  Any person who travels from house to house by any means
carrying goods for sale, or making sales, or making deliveries, or any person
who, without traveling from house to house sells or offers goods for sale
from any public place within the city, provided, that the term shall not
include an itinerant merchant.



   "SOLICITOR."



      (1)   Any person who travels by any means from house to house
taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to delivered in the
future or for services or repairs to be performed either presently or in the
future; or



      (2)   Any person who, by use of telephone takes or attempts to
take orders for sale of goods to be delivered or for services or repairs to
be performed.



('75 Code, § 14-148)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74; Am. Ord. 4393, passed
4-28-75)



§ 116.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the city, provided
that no license is required for persons, firms, or organizations who solicit
funds or sell goods or services for the purpose of raising revenue on behalf
of not-for-profit organization, and that no license shall be required for
persons, firms, or organi- zations which have transacted business from a
fixed business location in the city continuously for a one-year period prior
to enactment of this chapter.  The license shall entitle the licensee to
peddle or solicit goods or services from house to house in the city only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



('75 Code, § 14-149)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74;  Am. Ord. 4393, passed
4-28-75)  Penalty, see § 110.99



Cross-reference:



   Licenses, see Ch. 110



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to license transient merchants, see IC 25-37-1-11,
36-1-3-8, and 36-8-2-10



§ 116.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall
file a written sworn application with the City Controller.  Such application
shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a
partnership, or by the president if a corporation.



   (B)   The application shall state:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The name of the individual having management authority
or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is
proposed to be carried on in the city and the local address of such
individual, his permanent address, and the capacity in which he will act.



      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose
purpose the business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of
incorporations.



      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed
to carry on applicant's business.



      (5)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or
services to be offered for sale or delivered, and if goods, their invoice
value, whether they are to be sold by sample as well as from stock, where and
by whom such goods are manufactured or grown, and where such goods are at the
time of the application.



      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for
the business.



      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual iden-
tified in division (2) above or the person identified in division (3) above
has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of each
offense and the penalty assessed for it.



   (C)   All applications for peddler's or solicitor's license shall
state, in addition to statement required by division (B):



      (1)   A description of the applicant.



      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the
business, including its registration number, if any.



   (D)   In addition, all applicants for licenses required by this
chapter shall attach to their license application the following:



      (1)   Two letters of recommendation from any person residing
or doing business in the county certifying the applicant's good moral
character and business responsibility or, in lieu of such letters, other
evidence which may be used by the City Controller to satisfy his duties under
§ 116.06.



      (2)   If required by the City Controller, copies of all
printed advertising proposed to be used in connection with the applicant's
business.



      (3)   Credentials from the person, if any, for which the
applicant purposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.



      (4)   Two photographs two inches by two inches accurately
describing themselves.



   (E)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach
to their application, in addition to all other attachments, a statement from
a licensed physician, dated not more than ten days prior to the date of
application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.



('75 Code, § 14-150)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.04  FINGERPRINTING OF APPLICANT.



   On receipt of an application for a license required by the provisions
of this chapter, the City Controller shall cause a set of applicant's
fingerprints to be taken.



('75 Code, § 14-151)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.05  LICENSE FEE.



   Every applicant for a license required by this chapter shall pay to the
City Controller a fee of $l0.



('75 Code, § 14-152)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to charge license fee, see IC 25-37-1-11 and 36-1-3-8



§ 116.06  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   On receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter,
the City Controller shall cause an investigation of the applicant's business
reputation and moral character.



('75 Code, § 14-153)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.07  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Controller shall approve an application for a license
required by this chapter and issue the license unless such investigation
discloses tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business
would pose a substantial threat to the public health, safety, morals, or
general welfare.



   (B)   In particular, the following shall constitute valid reasons
for disapproval of an application, such as tangible evidence that the
applicant:



      (l)  Has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude.



      (2)   Has made willful misstatements in the application.



      (3)   Has committed prior violations of ordinances pertain-ing
to itinerant merchant, peddlers, solicitors, and the like.



      (4)   Has committed prior fraudulent acts.



      (5)   Has a record of continual breaches of solicited con-
tracts.



      (6)   Has an unsatisfactory moral character.



('75 Code, § 14-154)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.08  AGENT FOR SERVICE OF PROCESS.



   (A)   On the the receipt of notice of approval of his applica-tion,
an applicant for a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall
file with the City Controller an instrument appointing the City Controller as
his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge
service of process for and on behalf of applicant in respect to any matter
arising under this chapter.



   (B)   Forms for the required statement shall be available at the
City Controller's office.  Such form or instrument shall contain recitals to
the effect that the applicant consents and agrees that service of any notice
or process may be made on the agent, and when so made shall be taken and held
to be as valid as if personally served on the applicant, according to the law
of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason
of such acknowledgment.



('75 Code, § 14-155)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



Cross-reference:



   City Controller, see § 31.26



§ 116.09  DUTY OF CONTROLLER.



   Immediately on service of any process on the Controller pursuant to
this chapter, the City Controller shall send, by registered mail, a copy of
the process to the person licensed under this chapter at his last-known
address.



('75 Code, § 14-156)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.10  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire 90 days after the
date of issuance thereof.



('75 Code, § 14-157)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.11  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable.



('75 Code, § 14-158)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 116.12  EXHIBITION OF LICENSES AND BADGES.



   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter
shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein.  In the
event more than one place within the city shall be used to conduct the
business licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.



   (B)   The City Controller shall issue a badge to each peddler or
solicitor licensed under this chapter.  The badge shall contain the words
"licensed peddler" or "licensed solicitor," the licensee's picture, the
expiration date of the license, and the number of the license.  Such badge
shall be worn conspicuously by the licensee during such time as he is engaged
in the business licensed.



   (C)   All peddlers or solicitors shall exhibit their licenses at the
request of any person.



('75 Code, § 14-159)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 116.13  HOURS OF SOLICITING OR PEDDLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit goods or
services from house to house at any time other than between 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.



('75 Code, § 14-160)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 116.14  GROUNDS FOR LICENSE REVOCATION.



   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for:



   (A)   Any fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license
application.



   (B)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the business being conducted under the license.



   (C)   Any violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.



   (E)   The licensee conducting the business licensed in an unlaw-ful
manner or in such a way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety,
morals, or general welfare of the public.



('75 Code, § 14-161)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



§ 116.15  LICENSE REVOCATION PROCEDURE.



   Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Mayor
after notice and hearing.  A notice of hearing for revocation shall be given
in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing.  Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee
at his last-known address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the
hearing.



('75 Code, § 14-162)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



Statutory reference:



   Power of Mayor to revoke licenses, see IC 36-4-5-5



§ 116.16  APPEAL TO COMMON COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under § 116.07 or under §
116.14 shall have the right to appeal to the Common Council.  Such appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Council, within l4 days after notice of the
decision has been mailed to such person's last- known address, a written
statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Council shall set the
time and place for a hearing, and notice for such hearing shall be given to
such person in the same manner as provided in § 116.14.



   (B)   The order of the Common Council after such hearing shall be
final.



('75 Code, § 14-163)  (Ord. 4309, passed 7-29-74)



CHARITABLE SOLICITATION



§ 116.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS."  An organization qualified under Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and, if a non-profit corporation, be
in possession of a current certificate of existence issued by the Indiana
Secretary of State. The term shall include persons or organizations acting on
the charitable organization's behalf.



   "STREET" or "HIGHWAY."  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part of the way is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)



§ 116.31  PROHIBITION.



   Except as provided in this subchapter, no individual shall impede the
free flow of traffic upon the streets within the municipal boundaries of the
city or endanger themselves or others, by standing in the street and
communicating, or attempting to communicate with the occupants of vehicles
operating upon the streets for the purpose of soliciting employment, offering
to perform a service in connection with a vehicle, begging, or selling to, or
soliciting contributions from, the person or persons in the vehicle.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.32  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Charitable organizations.  Charitable organizations as herein
defined, and persons and organizations acting on behalf of the charitable
organization, are exempted from the prohibition set out in § 116.31 above,
provided that, each such charitable organization shall have first obtained a
permit as provided hereinafter. Furthermore, charitable organizations may
receive only two permits for solicitation in the street in any calendar year.



   (B)   Political campaigning.  Political campaigning is exempted
from the provisions hereof, and no permit shall be required.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)



§ 116.33  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any organization exempted from the prohibitive provisions of
§ 116.31 shall file its application for a permit with the Office of the City
Controller.



   (B)   The application shall call for the following information:



      (1)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the
organization applying for the permit.



      (2)   A description of the proposed activities including the
date(s) of the activity; alternate rain dates if desired. In no event shall
the duration of the activity exceed 48 hours.



      (3)   A copy of the organization's letter of exemption from
the Internal Revenue Service confirming the organization Section 501(c) (3)
tax exempt status.



      (4)   If applicable, the organization's certificate of
existence issued by the Indiana Secretary of State confirming that the
organization is a non-profit corporation authorized to do business within the
State of Indiana.



      (5)   The name, home address, and telephone number of a local
resident or local charitable affiliate who will serve as liaison contact
between the organization and the Kokomo Police Department. This individual
will be responsible for assuring the compliance with the terms of this
subchapter of all persons participating in the activity on behalf of the
charitable organization.



      (6)   A statement agreeing to indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the city from all claims, demands, liabilities, and suits of any
nature arising out of, or because of, or due to any actions taken by the
permittee, or the agents thereof.



      (7)   A certificate of insurance, with the city named as an
additional named insured, evidencing that the applicant will have in force on
the date(s) of the activity, a commercial general liability policy in the
aggregate amount of $2,000,000, subject to a $1,000,000 limit for any one
occurrence.



      (8)   The name, mailing address, and telephone number of each
person who will be engaged in solicitation activities on behalf of the
charitable organization. This roster shall be maintained in a current status
and may be amended from time to time as required to remain current. Amended
lists of volunteers shall be filed with the Office of the City Controller.
Should that office be closed, amended lists may be filed with the watch
commander of the Kokomo Police Department who will forward the same to the
Office of the City Controller.



      (9)   The site or sites, at which solicitation activities will
take place.



      (10)   The hours during which the activity will take place,
provided that no street solicitation shall commence before the hour of 8:00
a.m. local time, or end after sunset, except as hereinafter provided.



      (11)   If a group is acting on behalf of a permitted
organization, a letter of authorization from the organization on behalf of
which the group is engaging in solicitation activities.



   (C)   Solicitation activities may not occur before all required
information has been provided and approval of the permit application has been
evidenced by issuance of a permit. All permits will be obtained by the
organization no less than 14 days prior to the intended solicitation activity.



   (D)   The application for permit to solicit in the public street
shall be referred to the Police Department which shall review the
intersections proposed by the applicant for solicitation. The Police
Department and Traffic Systems Manager shall develop a list of intersections
where solicitation shall not occur due to the volume of traffic and number of
accidents. The Police Department shall approve of all intersections which are
reasonably safe which meet the criteria of this division. The permit will be
issued by the Office of the City Controller for those intersections approved
by the Police Chief or designee provided the application is in compliance
with this section.



   (E)   Only one street charitable solicitation activity will be
scheduled to occur in the city at any one time. An effort will be made to
schedule events on the dates requested by the charitable organization in its
permit application. In case of a conflict, dates will be assigned in the same
order as the date permit applications were received. Organizations may
request alternate "rain dates." If a scheduling conflict exists between a
rain date and a previously scheduled event, the Office of the City Controller
and the organization shall confer and settle upon an alternate date.



   (F)   The provisions of division (B)(2) and (B)(10) above shall not
apply to charitable solicitations related to seasonal observances where, by
the nature of the event, the solicitation occurs over a period greater than
48 hours, and customarily during hours after sunset, such as seasonal light
displays.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.34  SOLICITATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall be permitted to solicit in the public street
who is under 18 years of age. It shall be grounds for revocation of a permit
for a person to permit a minor less than 18 years of age to solicit upon the
public street or accompany an adult soliciting in the public street.



   (B)   Solicitors shall not intentionally touch any part of a motor
vehicle while soliciting in the public street.



   (C)   All solicitors shall wear a bright orange vest, or other color
as approved by the Police Chief or the Chief’s designee.



   (D)   It shall be grounds for revocation of a permit for any person
to solicit at an intersection that is not controlled by four-way stop signs
or an intersection controlled by an automatic traffic control device.



   (E)   Orange traffic cones shall be used to separate traffic into
collections lanes and forewarn motorists of the approaching solicitation
activity. The cones shall extend at least 200 feet in the direction of
oncoming traffic.



   (F)   A sign, not less than two feet square, identifying the
soliciting organization, shall be displayed to oncoming traffic at each
intersection where solicitation in the public street occurs.



   (G)   Solicitors shall not persist after solicitation has been
denied, nor shall they harass persons, be demanding, threatening, or use
intimidating tactics to obtain a contribution.



   (H)   Solicitors shall not obstruct, delay, or interfere with the
free movement of either pedestrians or vehicular traffic, or hamper or impede
the conduct of any authorized business to a degree greater than that
minimally necessary to carry out the solicitation activity.



   (I)   Solicitors shall not use any sound or voice, or horn, or other
noise making device to draw attention to their solicitation activity, nor
engage in dancing, singing or chanting during the solicitation activity. The
purpose of this division is to prevent unnecessary distractions to vehicle
operators.



   (J)   Solicitors shall not misrepresent their identity, or the
identity of the charitable organization they represent.



   (K)   Solicitors shall offer contributors a receipt, or other
evidence of a contribution having been made, suitable for display in the
contributor's windshield. The purpose of this division is to reduce the
frequency of multiple solicitation of the same contributor.



   (L)   Solicitors shall comply with the directions of law enforcement
officers should conditions at the solicitation site create an endangerment to
public safety.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.35  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   A permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the Office of
the City Controller for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   Loss of federal income tax exemption, or any other required
local permits.



   (B)   Violation of the restrictions set out in § 116.34.



   (C)   Multiple, substantial complaints in writing from the public
complaining of harassment of motor vehicle operators.



   (D)   Any action which would adversely affect the health or safety
of the traveling public, including failure to comply with the directions of
law enforcement officers.



   (E)   Fraud or misrepresentation in any document submitted as part
of the permit application process.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.36  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Should an application for a permit be denied, or should a permit be
revoked, the applicant or permit holder may request a hearing on the matter
before the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety. The Board shall set the
matter for hearing. At the hearing, the applicant/permit holder may be
represented by counsel and have the right to call witnesses on its behalf,
cross-examine witnesses, and present arguments. The Board shall hear all
matters and render a decision. The decision of the Board shall be final.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)



§ 116.37  PERMIT FEE.



   A permit fee reflecting the actual cost of processing an application
and issuing a permit shall be charged. The fee shall be in the amount of $50
for the first permit application filed in any given calendar year, and $20
for a second permit application in the same calendar year.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, organization, partnership, firm, or corporation
who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is
provided shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in § 110.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person, organization, partnership, firm, or
corporation who violates any provision of §§ 116.30 - 116.37 shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 for a first offense, not to exceed $500
for a second offense, and not to exceed $1,000 for each subsequent offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day when a violation
occurs or continues.



      (2)   In addition to all other penalties, the city may seek
injunctive relief to prevent ongoing violations of §§ 116.30 - 116.37.



(Ord. 6310, passed 6-14-04)



CHAPTER 117:  TAXICABS



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   Scope



   117.03   License



   117.04   Insurance required



   117.05   License revocation



   117.06   Contents of licenses



   117.07   License display



   117.08   Records of licensees



   117.09   Fares



   117.10   Passengers in front seat



Cross-reference:



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see Title VII



   Parking, see §§ 72.07 through 72.09



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to license and regulate taxicabs, see IC 36-9-2-4



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "OPERATE." The act of operating a taxicab over and upon the streets of
the city.



   "PUBLIC PASSENGER CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE."  The license issued by the
state under the provisions of IC 9-24-1-3, and as that statute may, in the
future, be amended.



   "TAXICAB."  A motor vehicle that:



      (1)   Is designed and constructed to accommodate and transport
not more than eight passengers in addition to the driver;



      (2)   Does not operate over any definite and designated routes
within the corporate boundaries of the city, or the suburban territory of the
city;



      (3)   Transports passengers to the destination designated by
the passengers at the time of their transportation;



      (4)   Is being used as a public passenger vehicle; and



      (5)   Effects such transportation for hire and charges a fare
therefor.



   "TAXICAB OPERATOR." The individual physically operating the taxicab
upon the streets of the city.



   "TAXICAB OWNER." The legal owner of the motor vehicle being used as a
taxicab as evidenced on the certificate of title for the motor vehicle.



('75 Code, § 23-1) (Am. Ord. 6250, passed 12-10-02)



§ 117.02  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both the owners and
operators of taxicabs, and the owners and operators shall obey these
provisions except where indicated otherwise.



('75 Code, § 23-2)



§ 117.03  LICENSE.



   (A)   Required.  No person shall own or operate a taxicab unless it
is licensed by the City Controller.



   (B)   Application. The owner of any taxicab who desires a license
for the same shall make application to the City Controller in writing,
stating therein the seating capacity of the taxicab proposed to be operated,
with the maximum number of persons proposed to be carried at any one time,
the registered number of the taxicab, and the fare to be charged each
passenger for a single continuous passage.



   (C)   Public Passenger Chauffeur's License Required. An operator of
a taxicab in the city shall possess a current valid Public Passenger
Chauffeur's License issued by the state. It shall be the responsibility of
the taxicab owner to file with the City Controller photocopies of the Public
Passenger Chauffeur's License of each taxicab operator operating a taxicab
for the taxicab owner within the city, and to maintain such filings in a
current status.



   (D)   Fee. The annual fee to be paid for a taxicab license shall be
$25 for each taxicab having a carrying capacity of five persons or less, and
an additional license fee of $3 for each taxicab for each additional person
with a capacity in excess of five.



('75 Code, §§ 23-3 to 23-7) (Am. Ord. 6250, passed 12-10-02)  Penalty, see
§ 110.99



Cross-reference:



   Licenses, see Ch. 110



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to charge a license fee, see IC 36-1-3-8



§ 117.04  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   The owner of every taxicab shall maintain in effect a policy of
liability insurance or equivalent bond for the taxicab which extends coverage
in the amount of no less than $500,000 per person/$500,000 per accident or
$500,000 single limit coverage. In addition, owner shall carry $100,000
property damage coverage. No license shall be issued under this chapter until
proof of such insurance is furnished to the City Controller.



('75 Code, § 23-5; Am. Ord. 4674, passed 11-28-77; Am. Ord. 6250, passed
12-10-02)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 117.05  LICENSE REVOCATION.



   If any owner or operator of any taxicab should violate the provisions
of this chapter, then, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, the
City Controller may prefer charges against the violator to the Board of
Public Works and Safety. The Board shall hold a hearing on the matter. Owners
or operators appearing at said hearing shall have the right to counsel of
their choice, the right to present evidence, the right to examine and
cross-examine witnesses, and make arguments in their own defense the Board.
At the conclusion of the hearing, which shall be open to the public, the
Board may find in favor of the owner or operator, or find against them. The
Board may impose such non-monetary sanctions as it deems necessary to assure
compliance with the terms of this chapter including temporary suspension or
revocation of the license issued under the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 23-8) (Am. Ord. 6250, passed 12-10-02)



§ 117.06  CONTENTS OF LICENSES.



   All taxicab licenses issued by the City Controller shall be numbered by
him and shall specify the maximum number of persons that may be carried at
any one time in it and the rates of fare that are to be charged.



('75 Code, § 23-9)



§ 117.07  LICENSE DISPLAY.



   All persons who own or operate a taxicab shall display, or cause to be
displayed in the cab, the license issued to it at all times.



('75 Code, § 23-1)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 117.08  RECORDS OF LICENSEES.



   The City Controller shall keep in a book, used solely for that purpose,
the name of the owners, operators, or persons in charge of the taxicabs,
together with the post office address of each owner and operator and state
registration number of each vehicle.



('75 Code, § 23-11)



§ 117.09  FARES.



   All taxicab owners or operators shall be free to charge such fares as
they deem reasonable, provided, that they shall notify the City Controller of
any changes in the fares from those stated in the applications for their
taxicab licenses, and provided further that the Common Council reserves the
right to regulate the fares if it should deem them to be unreasonable.



('75 Code, § 23-12)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 117.10  PASSENGERS IN FRONT SEAT.



   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to permit more than
one passenger in the front seat of his taxicab, or for more than one
passenger to occupy the front seat with the driver.



('75 Code, § 23-13)  Penalty, see § 110.99



CHAPTER 118:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE PERMITS



Section



   118.01   Eligibility



   118.02   Commitment



   118.03   Permit renewal



   118.04   Commitments are binding



§ 118.01  ELIGIBILITY.



   In order to be eligible for an economic development alcohol permit
within the city and under I.C. §§ 7.1-3-19-17 and 7.1-3-20-16(d), a
proprietor (and/or applicant or holder) must enter into formal written
Commitments pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 6903, passed 7-9-18)



§ 118.02  COMMITMENT.



   (A)   The commitments, the adequacy of which are in the sole
discretion of the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, may relate to the character
or type of business that will be conducted on the permitted premise, and
should be designed to ensure that the proprietor operates a restaurant that
is consistent with the economic development goals and visions of the city.
Each set of commitments may be unique to each separate proprietor,
restaurant, or circumstances.



   (B)   The Commitments must be formally approved by the Kokomo
Redevelopment Commission prior to submission of any application for an:
Economic Development Alcohol Permit within the city.



(Ord. 6903, passed 7-9-18)



§ 118.03  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   A permit issued in the city under the act may not be renewed or permit
ownership transferred, including if the area is no longer designated an
economic development area, an area needing redevelopment, or a redevelopment
district, unless the proprietor enters into new commitments with the city
pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 6903, passed 7-9-18)



§ 118.04  COMMITMENTS ARE BINDING.



   Commitments entered under this chapter are binding on the permit
holder, and continuing compliance with such commitments constitutes a
condition to operating under an Economic Development Alcohol Permit within
the city. In the event that a permit holder violates commitments entered
under this chapter, the city may recommend that the permit be revoked or any
renewal be denied.



(Ord. 6903, passed 7-9-18)



CHAPTER 119:  EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   119.01   Definitions



   119.02   Permit required



   119.03   Permit application



   119.04   Issuance of permit; fee



   119.05   Grace period



   119.06   Change in information



   119.07   Location of permit



   119.08   Registration; renewal fee



   119.09   Identification cards required



   119.10   Automatic telephone dialing devices



   119.11   Consumer protection



   119.12   False alarm



   119.13   Notice of violations



   119.14   Service of notice; contents



   119.15   Appearance of violator



   119.16   Failure to appear



   119.17   Deposit of fees



   119.18   Acceptance of compromise



 



   119.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Licenses, see Ch. 110



§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALARM BUSINESS."  Any individual, partnership, corporation, or other
entity who in addition to selling alarm systems, also leases, maintains,
services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves, or installs any alarm system or
causes to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved, or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure,
facility, or grounds.



   “ALARM AGENT.” Any person who is employed by an alarm business
either directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, servicing, or repairing any alarm system in or on any
building, place or premise.



   "ALARM SYSTEM."  Any device used for the detection of fire or an
unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or facility, or for alerting
others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure,
facility, or grounds, which, when activated, causes notification to be made
directly or indirectly to the Fire or Police Departments.  An "ALARM SYSTEM"
shall not include:



      (1)   An alarm installed on a motor vehicle.



      (2)   An alarm installed upon premises occupied by the United
States, the State of Indiana, or any political subdivision thereof.



   "AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE."  Any device connected to an
alarm system which automatically sends a pre-recorded message or coded signal
to a fire or law enforcement agency indicating the activation of the alarm
system.



   "FALSE ALARM."  An alarm eliciting a fire or police response when the
situation does not warrant a response.  For the purpose of this chapter,
this does not include alarms triggered by severe atmospheric conditions or
other circumstances not reasonably under the control of the alarm user,
installer, or maintainer.



   "PERMIT HOLDER."  The individual, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity to whom an alarm system permit is issued.



   "RESPONSE."  An alarm which precipitates a fire or police officer's
being dispatched to the alarm.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person in control of property to operate,
cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an alarm system on that
property unless a current permit has been obtained from the Kokomo Police
Department.  Failure to secure a permit within 48 hours of installation will
constitute violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.03  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Application for a permit for the operation of an alarm system
shall be made by a person or legal entity having control over the property on
which the alarm system is to be installed and operated.



   (B)   The application shall be made in writing to the Kokomo Police
Department on a form designated by the city for that purpose.  The
application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of each person
in control of the property.



      (2)   The street address of the property on which the alarm
system is to be installed and operated.



      (3)   Any business name used for the premises on which the
alarm system is to be installed and operated.



      (4)   Whether the alarm system or systems are or are not local
alarms and whether the alarm system or systems are designated to give notice
of a burglary, hold-up, or of other type of emergency.



      (5)   The name of the person or alarm system business who will
install the alarm system.



      (6)   The name and telephone number of two persons or of an
alarm system business which are able to and have agreed:



         (a)   To receive notification at any time;



         (b)   To come to the alarm site within 30 minutes after
receiving a request from the Police or Fire Department to do so; and



         (c)   To grant access to the alarm site and to
deactivate the system if it becomes necessary.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; FEE.



   (A)   The Kokomo Police Department shall issue an alarm system
permit to the person or other legal entity in control of the property upon
submission of an application therefore in accordance with this section,
unless the Kokomo Police Department finds that any statement made in the
application was incomplete or false.  Should the property in which an alarm
system is located change ownership, or should the entity in control of the
property change, a new application for a permit must be made.  The permits
are not transferable.



   (B)   The fee for an alarm system permit will be $l0 for a
residential property and $25 for a commercial property for each calendar
year.  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.



   (C)   For the year 2016, both residential and business alarm permits
shall be renewed using the following schedule:



   Last Name A-C       Expires March 31, 2016



   Last Name D-F       Expires April 30, 2016



   Last Name G-I       Expires May 31, 2016



   Last Name J-L       Expires June 20, 2016



   Last Name M-N       Expires July 31, 2016



   Last Name O-Q       Expires August 31, 2016



   Last Name R-T       Expires September 30, 2016



   Last Name U-Z       Expires October 31, 2016



After receipt of the application for a permit and payment of the permit fee,
the Kokomo Police Department shall forward the application to the Howard
County Communications Center. To the extent protected by state law, these
Departments shall protect all information on the application as confidential
information. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of the
information for legitimate law enforcement purposes and for enforcement of
this chapter.



   (D)   Prior to expiration, the Kokomo Police Department shall send a
notice of renewal to each permit holder at the address shown on the permit
holder's application. However, failure to receive notice shall not excuse the
permit holder from renewing the permit or from any penalty for failure to
renew the permit.



   (E)   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be personal to
the permit holder and is not transferable.



   (F)   A person or legal entity having control of an alarm system at
the time this chapter becomes effective shall have 30 days to obtain a permit
as set out herein.



   (G)   A permit issued pursuant to this section may be suspended or
revoked pursuant to the conditions and procedures established in § 110.11 of
this code.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5439, passed 2-ll-85; Am. Ord. 6366,
passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.05  GRACE PERIOD.



   (A)   A grace period of l5 days from the date of the granting of the
alarm system permit shall be granted to the permit holder.  The purpose of
this period is to allow the permit holder time to correct technical
malfunctions in a newly installed alarm system.



   (B)   Any citations issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter
during the grace period granted herein shall not be counted as violations for
the purposes of § 119.99 of this chapter and shall not be considered in
determining the total number of violations in a permit year as set out in
that section.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.06  CHANGE IN INFORMATION.



   The permit holder shall promptly notify the Kokomo Police Department in
writing of any change in the information contained in the permit application.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.07  LOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep the permit at the
alarm site in a location which is visible to any law enforcement official who
responds to an alarm.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.08  REGISTRATION; RENEWAL FEE.



   (A)   Prior to doing business within the city an alarm system
business shall register with the Kokomo Police Department on a form
designated by the city for that purpose. The fee for registration shall be
two hundred dollars ($200) for each Alarm Systems Business and one hundred
dollars ($100) for each Alarm Agent. On the form the business shall set forth:



      (1)   The full name and address of the alarm system business;



      (2)   The full name, business address, and home address of the
manager;



      (3)   A telephone number at which the Police or Fire
Department can notify personnel of the business of a need for assistance at
any time;



      (4)   The names, addresses, date of birth, and telephone
number of all Alarm Agents employed by the alarm system business.



   (B)   The first time an Alarm Agent registers, they shall provide a
recent 2” x 2” color photograph, valid government issued photo ID, and
fingerprint results to the Kokomo Police Department. Alarm Agents shall be
fingerprinted at the Kokomo Police Department or an authorized site as
approved by the Kokomo Police Department. Each subsequent registration will
only require an updated 2” x 2” color photograph and valid government
issued photo ID.



   (C)   All alarm system applicants shall present a certificate of
insurance to the Controller's Office showing liability insurance in the
amount of not less than $300,000.



   (D)   An alarm system business doing business at the time this
chapter becomes effective shall have 30 days to register as required above.



   (E)   An alarm business shall promptly notify the Controller in
writing of any change in the information contained in the registration form.



   (F)   An alarm business may have its registration revoked pursuant
to the conditions and procedures established in § 110.11 of this code.



   (G)   The registration of an alarm business set out in this section
shall be valid for one year from the date of registration and shall be
renewed annually thereafter.



   (H)   The annual registration renewal fee shall be two hundred
dollars ($200) for each Alarm Systems Business and one hundred dollars ($100)
for each Alarm Agent.



   (I)   An alarm business registration shall be personal to the holder
and is not transferable.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 5868, passed 4-12-93; Am. Ord. 6366,
passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.09  IDENTIFICATION CARDS REQUIRED.



   Every agent of an alarm business shall carry on his person at all times
a photo ID, issued by the Kokomo Police Department, on his/her outer clothing
while engaged in the alarm business.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.10  AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any automatic
telephone device or attachment that automatically selects any telephone line
leading into the communication center of the Police or Fire Department, and
then transmits any pre-recorded message or signal.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell or install any automatic
telephone device that automatically selects any telephone line leading into
the communication center of the Police and Fire Department, and then
transmits any pre-recorded message or signal.



   (C)   Any person who operates or uses an automatic telephone device
at the time this chapter becomes effective shall have 60 days to comply with
the requirements of this section.



   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the
penalties set out in § 119.99.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.11  CONSUMER PROTECTION.



   It shall be the obligation of businesses selling alarm systems and
doing business within the city to inform customers at the point of sale that
local ordinance requires anyone in control of an alarm system, as defined by
this chapter, to obtain a permit for the system within 15 days of
installation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an alarm business,
or its agents and employees, to knowingly and willfully withhold this
information from a customer. The Alarm System Business must provide the
Kokomo Police Department a list of the names and addresses of installed alarm
systems within 15 days of installation. Violations of this section are
subject to the general penalties of this code.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.12  FALSE ALARM.



   It shall be unlawful for a person who controls property on which an
alarm system is installed to issue, cause to be issued, allow or permit the
issuance of false alarm.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.13  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever a police or fire officer of the city, or a person so
authorized by the Board of Public Works and Safety, shall find that the owner
or operator of any alarm system has committed any of the acts that have been
declared unlawful by any provision of this chapter, the officer shall give
notice to the person of the violation in the manner directed in § 119.14.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.14  SERVICE OF NOTICE; CONTENTS.



   (A)   A police or fire officer, or any other person so authorized by
the Board of Public Works and Safety, shall notify the owner or operator of
an alarm system, or his representative, of any violation subject to this
chapter, by presenting the person found in possession or in charge of the
alarm system with a written notice.  If the officer shall not find any
person in possession or in charge of the premises, or if the person is a
child or incapable of receiving the notice, the officer shall notify the
owner or operator thereof by posting or attaching a written notice of the
violation in a conspicuous place upon the premises, and the person shall be
bound thereby.



   (B)   All notices of violations, as required by this section, shall
be executed by the police or fire officer or other authorized person, in
triplicate.  One copy shall be served upon the violator, one copy shall be
filed by the officer in the officer's departmental files, and one copy shall
be filed in the office of the City Attorney, which copy shall also be for the
use of the officer or other authorized person.  The latter two copies shall
be filed by the respective officer or other authorized person by the
individual, at his earliest opportunity before or when he goes off duty for
the particular day on which the notice was served on the violator.



   (C)   All notices provided for in this section shall be numbered and
shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The specific violation with which the violator is
charged;



      (2)   The name and address of the person who controls property
on which the alarm system is installed;



      (3)   The location of the violation;



      (4)   The signature of the officer or other authorized person;



      (5)   The badge number, if any, of the officer;



      (6)   The date of the violation.



   (D)   The copy of the notice served upon the violator or his
representative, or the owner of the premises, shall also state that the
violator or the other person shall appear, after the first false alarm in the
calendar year of permit, in person or by attorney or agent, at the office of
the City Attorney, office of which is located in the city building, within
five days of the date of the violation appearing upon the notice; and the
violator so appearing shall have the privileges accorded by law.  However,
if the period of five days shall expire upon a Sunday or a legal holiday,
then the period of time in which the violator must appear shall be extended
24 additional hours.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.15  APPEARANCE OF VIOLATOR.



   It shall be the duty of any person who receives a notice of violation
served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to appear in person or by
attorney or agent at the office of the City Attorney, the office of which is
located in the city building, if he desires to take advantage of the
privilege of compromising the offense.  Any person who has received a notice
and who has been guilty of an alarm violation, may so appear in person or by
attorney or agent at the office of the City Attorney during the period of
time allowed to appear pursuant to the notices served under this chapter and
admit liability for the offense charged in the notice and tender payment of
the penalty specified in § 119.99 together with any costs required by law.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.16  FAILURE TO APPEAR.



   (A)   Upon the failure or refusal of any person receiving a notice
of any violation under this chapter to appear, as provided in this chapter,
and report to the Corporation Counsel’s office, which is located in the
city building, within the time frame set out herein, the Corporation Counsel
and/or City Attorney may proceed to file suit for violation of the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)  Proceedings in court against the violator shall thereupon be
brought in the manner provided by statute or as hereafter may be provided
and, upon conviction of the offense charged and in lieu of the sums
prescribed by any compromise, the penalties provided for in § 10.99 of this
code may be assessed for each offense, together with the costs as are
provided by statute.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.17  DEPOSIT OF FEES.



   All sums generated by reason of the terms of this chapter shall be
deposited in the general fund of the city.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6777, passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.18  ACCEPTANCE OF COMPROMISE.



   Either the office of the Corporation Counsel or the Kokomo Police
Department is authorized and empowered to accept, on behalf of the city, any
offer of compromise of any violator, when the required amount of the penalty
is properly tendered pursuant to this chapter.  The acceptance on behalf of
the city shall be effected by issuing to or for the violator a receipt signed
by the person acting therefor, acknowledging the payment of the proper sum,
which payment and receipt shall constitute a complete satisfaction for the
violation.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   (A)  The penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be as follows:



      (1)   For the first citation issued for a false alarm or
operation of an illegal telephone dialing device in any one certificate year,
no fine shall be charged, but a record of the violation shall be made.



      (2)   Upon any additional violations for a false alarm or
operation of an illegal telephone dialing device within one certificate year,
a fine of seventy five dollars ($75) shall be imposed. This fine shall be
paid within thirty (30) days of the issue date or an additional fee of twenty
five ($25) will be assessed.



   (B)  In addition to the penalties set out above, it shall be a
separate violation to operate in the city any alarm system without permit. 



      (1)   Upon the first citation, no fine will be made. 



      (2)   A second citation shall result in a fine of up to five
hundred dollars ($500). This fine shall be paid within thirty (30) days of
the issue date or the city may pursue legal action to collect the fine.



      (3)   For the third citation, and each citation thereafter,
the fine shall be up to twenty five hundred dollars ($2,500). This fine shall
be paid within thirty (30) days of the issue date or the city may pursue
legal action to collect the fine.



   (C)   An alarm business shall be fined for failure to comply with
the provisions of § 119.08. Fines shall be assessed to an Alarm System
Business for failure to comply with the provisions of §§ 119.08 and 119.11.



      (1)   Upon the first citation, a fine of up to two hundred
dollars ($200) will be assessed. This fine shall be paid within thirty (30)
days of the issue date or the city may pursue legal action to collect the
fine.



      (2)   Upon the second citation and each citation thereafter, a
fine of up to twenty five hundred dollars ($2,500) will be assessed. This
fine shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the issue date or the city may
pursue legal action to collect the fine.



(Ord. 5290, passed 8-29-83; Am. Ord. 6366, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 6777,
passed 11-24-14)



CHAPTER 120:  DUMPSTERS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Exclusion



   120.03   Permit required



   120.04   Responsibility of dumpster owners and applicants



   120.05   Content of permit application



   120.06   Display of permit



   120.07   Application procedure



   120.08   Application review; permit issuance



   120.09   Permit term



   120.10   Fee schedule



   120.11   Intersection clearance



   120.12   Additional warning devices



   120.13   Notice of removal



   120.14   Revocation of permit



   120.15   Indemnification



   120.16   Appeals



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   "DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT."  That geographic location in the city
bounded on the south by the Wildcat Creek on the north by Jefferson Street,
on the east by Apperson Way, and on the west by Washington Street.



   "DUMPSTER."  Includes any container designed to hold construction or
other debris, or other materials intended for imminent disposal, for the
purpose of storing the same until the container is removed, or the contents
of the container are removed for disposal. The term includes "ROLL OFFS" or
containers designed with a mechanism for depositing the contents thereof in a
truck designed to transport the contents to a disposal site.



   "ENFORCEMENT OFFICER."  The City Traffic Engineer, the City Traffic
Systems Manager, or their designee, or any sworn member of the Police
Department.



   "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  Includes the entire area dedicated to public use,
which area may include unimproved property adjoining a street or other public
way, depending on the boundaries of the right-of-way granted to the public
for its use.



   "STREET."  The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part of the way is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes an alley.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.02  EXCLUSION.



   The regulatory provisions established in this chapter, including the
necessity of obtaining a permit, shall not be applicable to any dumpster
located on privately owned real estate, provided that, all such dumpsters
shall remain subject to all other ordinance provisions regulating public
health and safety.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, company, or business shall place any dumpster within any
portion of a public street or upon public right-of way within the city
limits, and no person, company, or business shall lease any dumpster to any
third party for placement within any public street or upon public
right-of-way, without obtaining a permit therefore as required by this
section.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 6217, passed 2-12-02)



§ 120.04  RESPONSIBILITY OF DUMPSTER OWNERS AND APPLICANTS.



   (A)   Responsibility of dumpster owner.



      (1)   All companies or businesses that own a dumpster shall
ensure that the dumpster has reflective taping covering an area of one square
foot on each corner of the dumpster.



      (2)   Prior to placing any dumpster upon the public street or
public right-of-way the owner of the dumpster shall confirm that a permit has
been issued for the placement of the dumpster by contacting the Permits
Office. Any company or business not complying with this section shall be
responsible for all fines and penalties resulting from the violation of this
section.



   (B)   Responsibility of applicant. Application for the permit
required under this section may be made by either the owner of the property
utilizing the dumpster; a contractor; or the owner of the dumpster. Whoever
submits the application for placement shall be considered the "Applicant".
The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the terms of
this section and shall be responsible for all fines and penalties resulting
from violation of this section. It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to assure that the dumpster is placed in conformity with the terms
of the permit, and that the dumpster has a valid permit in effect for the
entire period of time daring which the dumpster is located on a public
street, or upon public right-of-way.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 6217, passed 2-12-02)



§ 120.05  CONTENT OF PERMIT APPLICATION.



   A permit application shall be prepared for use in conjunction with the
administration of this chapter. The application form shall contain the
following information:



   (A)   The applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.



   (B)   The proposed location of the dumpster, including street
address.



   (C)   Date permit application made.



   (D)   Dumpster owner, name, address, telephone number.



   (E)   Site inspected by whom.



   (F)   Special conditions of permit, including but not limited to,
any measures required to protect the public or municipally owned property.



   (G)   Duration of permit.



   (H)   Date dumpster to be placed.



   (I)   Permit cost.



   (J)   Date permit approved.



   (K)   Date dumpster actually removed.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 6217, passed 2-12-02)



§ 120.06  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   Upon approval of the permit application as provided in this chapter,
the applicant shall be issued a permit placard which shall be posted in such
a manner as to be visible at all times from adjoining public street.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.07  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Application for permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be made
at the municipal permit office, First Floor, City Hall, 100 S. Union, Kokomo,
Indiana, during regular business hours. Application shall be made at least 48
hours prior to the anticipated placement of the dumpster to allow the city
sufficient time to act upon the application.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.08  APPLICATION REVIEW; PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   Permit application will be reviewed by enforcement officers who will
issue or deny the permit within 48 hours of application being made. If a
weekend or holiday occurs within this 48 hour period, an additional 24 hours
shall be allowed for processing of the application. Application approval
shall not unreasonably be withheld. Should a permit application be denied,
the enforcement officer shall give written reasons for any such denial.
Permit denials shall be subject to appeal rights as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.09  PERMIT TERM.



   A permit shall be issued for a maximum period of 60 calendar days.
Should additional time be required, application shall be made for issuance of
a succeeding permit not less than ten days prior to the expiration of a valid
permit.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.10  FEE SCHEDULE.



   The following permit fee schedule is adopted:



   Non-metered residential streets/30 day permit   $20



   Non-metered downtown business district street/30 day permit   $25



   Placement in non-metered municipal parking lots/30 day permit   $1
per day per space occupied



   Placement in parking metered spaces   $5 per day per space occupied



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 6217, passed 2-12-02; Am. Ord. 6301,
passed 5-10-04)



§ 120.11  INTERSECTION CLEARANCE.



   No dumpster shall be placed on a public street or upon the public
right-of-way within 75 feet of an intersection unless specifically approved
by the City Engineer, which approval will be noted in writing on the permit
application as a "special condition."



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.12  ADDITIONAL WARNING DEVICES.



   In addition to fluorescent tape attached to the dumpster itself, a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall require the permittee to erect
barricades, traffic barrels, or similar devices to be placed next to traffic
lanes to warn motorists of the dumpster’s location.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.13  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   The applicant shall advise the permit office of the date when the
dumpster is removed from its approved location in order that enforcement
officers may inspect the site to determine if there has been any damage to
public property or right-of-way.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.14  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by an
enforcement officer at any time if it is shown that the dumpster has been
located in a materially different site than the one identified in the permit,
or should it appear that the dumpster presents an obstruction to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. Revocation will be subject to rights of appeal as
hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.15  INDEMNIFICATION.



   The applicant shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and
all damages arising from claims concerning the dumpster and the use thereof,
including any claims arising from alleged environmental damages resulting
from disposal of materials stored in the dumpster. The applicant shall be
responsible to the city for any damage to city right-of-way caused by
placement or use of the dumpster.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.16  APPEALS.



   Any applicant or permit holder aggrieved by the non-issuance or
withdrawal of a permit or alleging a grievance concerning the terms and
conditions of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal the
decision of the enforcement officer to the Board of Public Works and Safety,
which Board shall act as a hearing authority. The Board will investigate the
complaint, and may, in any such investigation, hold hearings concerning the
grievance. Upon the completion of its investigation, the Board shall render
its decision and shall either confirm, rescind, or modify and confirm the
action of the enforcement officer. The decision of the Board shall be final,
subject to statutory rights of appeal to the judicial system.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Any applicant found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in
violation of the terms of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to
$500 per day for each day such violation continues. The Office of the
Corporation Counsel is authorized to prosecute violations of this chapter,
including seeking temporary and permanent enjoinment of any such violation.



(Ord. 6157, passed 4-24-00)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



         130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         131.   RESERVED



         132.   NOISE



         133.   SMOKING PROHIBITED



         134.   FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS WITHIN CITY PROPERTY
PROHIBITED



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Discharge of firearms



   130.02   Strikebreakers



   130.03   Keeping and attending dives



   130.04   Interference with official



Curfew



   130.15   Curfew



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Civil emergencies, see Ch. 93



   Police, see §§ 32.10 through 32.14



   Smoking prohibited, see Ch. 133



Statutory reference:



   Criminal mischief, see IC 35-43-1-2



   Criminal trespass, see IC 35-43-2-2



   Police power, see IC 36-8-2-2 and 36-8-2-4



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   No person shall discharge any firearm within the municipal limits of
the city.  However, this section shall not apply to:



   (A)   Any military unit performing military duties;



   (B)   Any police officer while in the discharge of his duty;



   (C)   Any police or military organization, while the members of such
organization are engaged in practice on a safely and properly conducted
indoor range which meets all applicable state and federal licensing
requirements, health and safety regulations, or other applicable legal
requirements;



   (D)   Any safely and properly conducted indoor range which meets all
applicable state and federal licensing requirements, or other applicable
legal requirements.  Provided that, the location of such range shall also
meet all applicable zoning regulations as those regulations are set out
elsewhere in this code;



   (E)   Any person acting in defense of his own life or the lives of
others.



(Ord. 5584, passed 4-13-87)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  STRIKEBREAKERS.



   (A)   No person shall recruit, procure, supply, or refer any person
for employment who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment
in place of any employee involved in a labor dispute in which such person is
not directly involved.



   (B)   No person involved in a labor dispute shall, directly or
indirectly, employ in the place of an employee involved in such dispute, any
person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for employment in the
place of employees involved in a labor dispute, or contract or arrange with
any other person, to recruit, procure, supply, or refer persons for
employment in place of employees involved in such a labor dispute.



   (C)   No person who customarily and repeatedly offers himself for
employment in place of employee involved in a labor dispute shall take or
offer to take the place in employment of any employee involved in a labor
dispute.



('75 Code, § 16-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  KEEPING AND ATTENDING DIVES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, "DIVE" shall mean any
unlicensed place where alcoholic, malt, or vinous liquors, or narcotics, are
kept, sold, dispensed, or disposed of, and where men and women, or minors,
are permitted to come and drink, or to obtain alcoholic, malt, or vinous
liquors, or to use, or obtain narcotics, either in the place or room where
such liquors or narcotics are kept, sold, dispensed, or disposed of, or in a
place of business or other place connected therewith, or in a place not
directly connected with such place, but where such liquors, or narcotics, are
kept, sold, dispensed, delivered, or disposed of for any such purposes, or
any place where men and women, or minors, drink intoxicants, or use
narcotics, or commit, or aid and abet others therein to commit, any acts of
immorality in any such place.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a dive
or to go to or frequent any such place, or engage in, or to aid and abet
other persons to engage in any of the purposes in division (A), or for any
person at such place to commit or aid and abet others in committing any acts
of immorality.



('75 Code, § 16-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hamper, harass, interfere with,
or hinder any city officer or employee who is engaged in the performance of
his duties as such.



('75 Code, § 16-7)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Disorderly conduct, see § 96.19



CURFEW



§ 130.15  CURFEW.



   (A)   It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of
age to be in a public place:



      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;



      (2)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday; or



      (3)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday.



   (B)   It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years of age to
be in a public place after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a child who
is:



      (1)   Accompanied by his parent, guardian, or custodian;



      (2)   Accompanied by an adult specified by his parent,
guardian, or custodian; or



      (3)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:



         (a)   Lawful employment;



         (b)   A school sanctioned activity; or



         (c)   A religious event.



(Ord. 5890, passed 10-4-93)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The custodial parent or legal guardian of any child
who commits a curfew violation, as defined § 130.15, shall be subject to the
following fines:



         (a)   $25 for a first offense, plus court costs;



         (b)   $100 for a second offense within a one-year
period, plus court costs; or



         (c)   $200 for a third offense and every subsequent
offense within a one-year period, plus court costs.



      (2)   Monies collected from such violators shall be placed in
the General Fund.



(Ord. 5890, passed 10-4-93)



   (B)   A person who smokes in City Hall is in violation of § 130.07
and commits a Class B infraction.  However, the violation is a Class A
infraction if the person has at least three previous unrelated judgements for
violating § 130.07 that are accrued within 12 months immediately preceding
the violation as provided by IC 16-41-37-4.



(Ord. 6182, passed 3-12-01)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this title for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1,000.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 131:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 132:  NOISE   



Section



   132.01   Definitions



   132.02   Noise limit



   132.03   Prohibited noises



   132.04   Exemptions



 



   132.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Traffic noise, see § 71.04



§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL."  The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated dB(A).



   "DECIBEL(dB)."  A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20)
micronewtons per square meter.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE."  Any automobile, van, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle,
motor scooter, dune buggy, snowmobile, all terrain vehicle, go- cart,
minibike, trail bike, and trucks with gross vehicular weight of less than
8,000 pounds.



   "NOISE LEVEL."  The A-weighted sound level produced by a motor vehicle.



   "SOUND LEVEL METER."  An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output meter, and
weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.  Such instrument
shall be used for measurement of the intensity of sound and calibrated in
decibels as standardized by the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI).  Readings shall be made on a dB(A) scale.



(Ord. 6187, passed 4-9-01)



§ 132.02  NOISE LIMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause noise levels from  the
operation or use of motor vehicles in excess of 83 dB(A) in any area within
the corporation limits of the city at any time.  Such noise level limit
shall be measured at a distance of not less than 15 feet from the noise
source.



(Ord. 6187, passed 4-9-01)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03 PROHIBITED NOISES.



   (A)   Loud noises prohibited.  No person shall make, continue, or
cause to be made or continued any loud, raucous, improper, unreasonable,
offensive, or unusual noise which disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the city.



   (B)   Prohibited noises.  The following acts, among others, are
declared to be loud, raucous, or disturbing noises in violation of this
section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
motor vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud and
raucous sound; and any such signaling device for an unreasonable period of
time.  The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand,
electricity, or automatically when a vehicle is in reverse; the use of any
horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any
such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.



      (2)   Using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or
operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner
as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or
at any time louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the
person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or
device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener.  The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device, in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.



      (3)   Using, operating, or permitting to be played, used, or
operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing of
sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial
advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or
structure.



      (4)   Yelling, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public
streets, at any time or place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort,
or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling , hotel, or other type
of residence or of any person in the vicinity.



      (5)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity.



      (6)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat, or motor
vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.



      (7)   The use of any motor vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary engine noise,
grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.



      (8)   The operation of any motor vehicle in such a manner as
to create excessive noise such as squealing of tires or other noise unrelated
to engine noise or normal operation and noise created by unnecessary
grinding, rattling, or other vehicle disrepair.



      (9)   The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or
electric hoist, or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or
unusual noise.



      (10)   The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes loud and
raucous noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the
noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.



      (11)   Any noise that exceeds a noise level of 83 dB(A) based
on a distance from the noise source of not less 15 feet or any noise that can
be heard more than 50 feet from its source and is inherently obnoxious or
patently offensive shall be prima facie evidence of a noise prohibited by
this section.  Noise that creates less decibels than 83 dB(A) from 15 feet
also constitutes noise prohibited by this section if such noise otherwise
constitutes a prohibited noise stated in this section. Further, there is not
any decibel measurement requirement to prove the existence of a noise
prohibited by this section.



   (C)   No person shall keep any animal, other than a service animal
lawfully used by a handicapped person to accommodate his/her handicap, which,
by causing frequent or long-continuing noise that is audible 50 feet or more
from its source when the animal is on public property or 50 feet or more
outside of a private property line when the animal is on private property,
does disturb the comfort or repose of any other person.



(Ord. 6187, passed 4-9-01)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Sounds emitted from authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Lawnmowers, weed blowers, garden tractors, construction and
repair equipment, go-carts and power tools, when properly muffled, between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only.



   (C)   Burglar alarms and other warning devices when properly
installed, providing the cause for such alarm or warning device sound is
investigated and turned off within a reasonable period of time.



   (D)   Parades, festivals, carnivals, fairs, celebrations, concert
performances, band and drum corps performances, and artistic performances, as
well as any rehearsals for same, and all other events authorized by the Board
of Public Works and Safety or other appropriate governmental entity.



   (E)   Attendant noise connected with the actual performance of
athletic or sporting events and practices related thereto.



   (F)   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency
construction, repair, or other work.



   (G)   Sounds associated with the use of legal fireworks.



   (H)   Sounds associated with the normal conduct of legally
established non-transient businesses, organizations, and governmental
entities, when such sounds are customary, incidental and within the normal
range appropriate for such use.



   (I)   Rubbish collection utilizing any mechanical equipment between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only.



(Ord. 6187, passed 4-9-01)



§ 132.99 PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than:



      First offense:  up to $250



      Second offense:  up to $500



      Third andsubsequent offenses:  up to $1,000



(Ord. 6187, passed 4-9-01)



CHAPTER 133: SMOKING PROHIBITED



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Application of chapter to Kokomo-owned facilities



   133.03   Smoking prohibited in public places



   133.04   Prohibition of smoking in places of employment



   133.05   Where smoking is not regulated



   133.06   Declaration of establishment as non-smoking



   133.07   Posting of signs



   133.08   Enforcement



   133.09   Non-retaliation



 



   133.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Smoking in City Hall, see § 130.07



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BAR."  Any establishment used primarily for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the sale of
food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages, including but
not limited to taverns, nightclubs, and cocktail lounges.



   "ENCLOSED AREA."  All space between a floor and ceiling that is
enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways),
which extend from the floor to the ceiling.



   "HEALTH CARE FACILITY."  An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including but not limited
to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight
control clinics, nursing homes, and homes for the aging or chronically ill.



   "PERSON."  Any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.



   "PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT."  Any enclosed areas under the control of a
public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the
course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, private
offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and class rooms, employee
cafeterias and hallways.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any enclosed area used by the general public,
including, but not limited to, retail stores and financial institutions,
department stores, banks, laundromats and beauty and barber shops, retail
food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments,
and other commercial establishments, regardless of whether a fee is charged
for admission to the place.



   "RESTAURANT."  Any enclosed building, structure or area used as or
held out to the public as having food available for payment to be consumed on
the premises, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, cafes,
and soda fountains. The term "RESTAURANT" shall include a bar area within the
restaurant.



   "RETAIL TOBACCO STORE."  Retail store utilized primarily for the sale
of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. The term does not include retail stores where food or
beverages are sold for consumption on the premises or where an areas has been
set aside on the premises for customers to consume food or beverages.



   "SMOKE" or "SMOKING."  The act of lighting, carrying, inhaling from,
or leaving a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind.



   "THEATER."  Any enclosed facility, open to the public, which is
primarily used for or designed for the purpose of exhibiting any motion
picture, stage drama, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar
performance.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.02  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO KOKOMO-OWNED FACILITIES.



   All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned,
leased, or operated by the City of Kokomo, shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.03  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the
City of Kokomo, including but not limited to, the following places:



   (A)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.



   (B)   Areas available to and customarily used by the general public
in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but
no limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels.



   (C)   Bars, unless deemed exempt under § 133.05(F) of this chapter.



   (D)   Bingo facilities.



   (E)   Convention facilities.



   (F)   Elevators.



   (G)   Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture,
stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance.



   (H)   Health care facilities.



   (I)   Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities.



   (J)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes,
and other multiple-unit residential facilities.



   (K)   Polling places.



   (L)   Public transportation facilities, including buses and
taxicabs, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots.



   (M)   Restaurants.



   (N)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other
common-use areas.



   (O)   Retail stores.



   (P)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly,
including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council of the City of Kokomo or political
subdivision of the state when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent
the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city.



   (Q)   Schools.



   (R)   Service lines.



   (S)   Shopping malls.



   (T)   Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.04  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of
employment.  This includes, but is not limited to, common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices,
elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges,
stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.05  WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.



   (A)   The prohibitions of § 133.03 shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Private residences, except when used as a licensed
childcare adult day care, or health care facility.



      (2)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided however, that not more than 25% of
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated.  The status
of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be changed, except to add
additional non-smoking rooms.



      (3)   Retail tobacco stores; provided that smoke from these
places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and
long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of
whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where
smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of
this chapter.



      (5)   Outdoor areas of places of employment.



      (6)   Any bar or tavern that:



         (a)   Holds a beer, liquor or wine retailer's permit
under the laws of the state;



         (b)   Allows no customer to enter at any time who's
under the age of 21;



         (c)   Employs no person under the age of 18;



         (d)   Is not physically located within a business
otherwise required to be smoke-free by this chapter;



         (e)   Has provided notice by sending such document to
the Howard County Health Department as part of its annual application for a
retail food establishment license; that it intends to allow smoking, intends
to serve only customers over the age of 21 and that it is otherwise entitled
to an exemption under this section, provided, however, that an election of
this exemption may be made no more than once in a calendar year.



      (7)   Any business that:



         (a)   Is exempt from federal income taxation under 26
U.S.C. § 501(c);



         (b)   Is a "club" as that term is defined by IC
7.1-3-20-1, or a "fraternal club" as that term is defined by IC 7.1-3-20-7;



         (c)   Holds a beer, liquor or wine retailer's permit
under the laws of this state; and



         (d)   Provides food or alcoholic beverages only to its
bona fide members and their guests.



   (B)   None of the areas in the preceding subsections shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter if the smoke from smoking enters any area
where smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter.



   (C)   Any business claiming an exemption pursuant to this section
shall provide any enforcement agency listed, within three business days of
the demand, adequate written proof that it qualifies for the exemption
claim.  Such written proof shall be certified under the penalties of perjury
by an authorized representative of the business.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.06  DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NON-SMOKING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner,
operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility,
or outdoor area may declare that an entire establishment, facility, or
outdoor area as a non-smoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place
in which a sign conforming to the requirements of § 133.07 is posted.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.07  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This chapter shall be enforced by the city or an authorized
designee.



   (B)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
chapter may initiate enforcement with the city.



   (C)   The Health Department, Fire Department, or other designee
shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections,
inspect for compliance of this chapter.



   (D)   An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment
regulated by this chapter shall inform persons violating this chapter of the
appropriate provisions thereof.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.09  NON-RETALIATION.



   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free
environment afforded by this chapter.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



§ 133.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable
by a fine not exceeding $50.



   (B)   A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation.



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within
one year.



      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation
within one year.



   (C)   Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. 6445, passed 8-28-06)



CHAPTER 134: FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS WITHIN CITY PROPERTY PROHIBITED 



Section



   134.01   Purpose



   134.02   Definitions



   134.03   Feeding of wild animals and waterfowl within city property
prohibited



   134.04   Enforcement



 



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  PURPOSE.



   It has been well established that the feeding of wild animals and
waterfowl is both detrimental to the animals and causes a public health
nuisance and safety hazard that is detrimental to the health and general
welfare of the public.



(Ord. 6509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 134.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   "PROPERTY."  Any real property.



   "WATERFOWL."  Any bird that frequents the water, or lives about
rivers, lakes, etc., or on or near the sea; an aquatic fowl, including but
not limited to ducks, geese, swans, heron, and egrets.



   "WILD ANIMAL."  Any animal, which is not normally domesticated in this
state, including but not limited to coyotes, deer, cats, foxes, groundhogs,
opossums, raccoons, skunks, and waterfowl.



(Ord. 6509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 134.03  FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS AND WATERFOWL WITHIN CITY PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall purposely or knowingly, feed, bait, or in any
manner provide access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl on property
owned and operated by the city.  This section shall not apply to the feeding
of farm animals.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to any person(s)
authorized by the Parks Department; or any person(s) fishing or hunting
pursuant to a valid fishing or hunting license, if necessary, or as
authorized by the necessary federal, state, or city governmental entities.



(Ord. 6509, passed 11-19-07)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of the Police Department and the Superintendent of the Parks
Department, or their designee, are hereby given full power and authority to
enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 6509, passed 11-19-07)



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for the first time
shall be liable to a fine not less than $25.  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day or part of each day during which a violation
occurs or continues.  Any subsequent violation of this chapter shall result
in a fine of not less than $50.



(Ord. 6509, passed 11-19-07)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



         150.   BUILDINGS



         151.   FAIR HOUSING



         152.   HOUSING



         153.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION



         154.   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



         155.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL



         156.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN



         157.   ZONING



         158.   RESERVED



         159.   FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



         160.   RENTAL HOUSING



         161.   STORMWATER EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDINGS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Adoption of rules by reference



   150.02   General building permit required



   150.03   Issuance



   150.04   Fees



   150.05   Inspections



   150.06   Certificate of occupancy required



   150.07   Certificate applications



   150.08   Prerequisites to certificate issuance



   150.09   Sidewalk protection



Administration and Appeals



   150.15   Enforcement



   150.16   Division of Building Standards



   150.17   Collection of fees and charges



   150.18   Right of appeal



Demolition of Buildings



   150.25   Permit required



   150.26   (Reserved)



   150.27   Bond



   150.28   Form of permit



   150.29   Effect of other permits



Mobile Homes



   150.35   Location



Enforcement of Building Standards



   150.45   Adoption of state law



   150.46   Definitions



   150.47   Declaration of public nuisance



   150.48   Powers of enforcement authority



   150.49   Limitations of powers



   150.50   Sealing of unsafe buildings



   150.51   Renovation standard



   150.52   Unsafe Building Fund



   150.53   Violations



Electrical Equipment Standards



   150.60   Adoption of state law



   150.61   Applicability of regulations; exceptions



   150.62   Definitions



   150.63   Establishment of standards



   150.64   Standards for installation of electrical equipment  conduit



   150.65   Powers of enforcement authority



   150.66   Permits required



   150.67   Inspections



   150.68   Revocation of permits



   150.69   Enforcement by corporation counsel



 



   150.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Blasting, see Ch. 91



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



   Housing, see Ch. 152



   Sewers and sewage disposal, see Ch. 50



   Subdivision, see Ch. 155



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate buildings and construction, see IC 36-7-2-3
through 36-7-2-5



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this
chapter and shall include later amendments of those Articles as the same are
published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein;



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes.



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards.



         (b)   Indiana Building Code.



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards.



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code.



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes.



         (a)   Council of American Building Officials One and Two
Family Dwelling Code.



         (b)   CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; Amendments.



         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes.



      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes.



         (a)   Indiana Plumbing Code.



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes.



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code.



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities.



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes.



         (a)   Indiana Mechanical Code.



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes.



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code.



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code.



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes.



         (a)   Indiana Swimming Pool Code.



      (8)   Article 22 - Fire Prevention Code.



         (a)   Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes, and standards are on
file in the office of the Department of Urban Development and Design.



(Am. Ord. 5630, passed 2-22-88; Am. Ord. 6264, passed 5-19-03)



§ 150.02  GENERAL BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or the lessee, if the lessee is
responsible for the work involved, to do, or allow to be done, any work on
his property involving new buildings, or additions to existing buildings,
alterations, or major repairs, or changes of use without a general building
permit issued by the City Civil Engineer.



('75 Code, § 5-1)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.03  ISSUANCE.



   The City Civil Engineer shall issue a building permit on written
application and after the applicant has submitted clear and understand- able
plans or specifications of work to be undertaken, provided that the plans
conform to all applicable building regulations and the construction will not
violate any other ordinance.  In addition, a copy of a design release,
issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to IC 22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before
issuance of a permit for construction covered by such design release.



('75 Code, § 5-2) (Am. Ord. 5630, passed 2-22-88)



§ 150.04  FEES.



   (A)   Applicability.



      (1)   The provisions in this section apply to all new
construction and all alterations, repairs, and remodeling. Building and
electrical permits are waived for non-profit organizations.



      (2)   No person, company or corporation shall perform or cause
to be performed any work on or within the city limits without obtaining in
advance a permit from the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection
Services.



      (3)   Anyone who fails to obtain a permit prior to
construction shall be subject to penalties in accordance with § 150.99.



      (4)   This section shall not be interpreted so as to relieve
any individual, group, or organization of any obligation to obtain permits,
request inspections, or carry out any work within the guidelines and
standards of any ordinance of the city or the state.



   (B)   Schedule of fees and charges. The Department of Engineering,
Traffic and Inspection Services is authorized to implement the following
schedule of fees and charges for services provided.



      (1)   Maps and prints.



         Item               Fee



         City maps            $2 per map



         Aerial blue prints         $2 per print



         Plat blue prints         $2 per print



         Detailed plan blue prints      $2 per page



         Photocopy plan prints         $1 per page



      (2)   Building permit fees.



         Construction cost         Permit charges



         $0 up to $15,000         $75



         $15,001 up to $50,000      $150



         $50,001 up to $100,000      $200



         $100,001 and over         $500



         $.50 per $1,000 thereafter



         Inspection and reinspection



            fees (each)         $25 per inspection



         Required number of inspections



         New house            4 inspections



         New garage            3 inspections



         New commercial         6 inspections



         New industrial            6 inspections



         Billboard            2 inspections



         Swimming pool/hot tub      2 inspections



         Remodeling            4 inspections



         Porch/carport            2 inspections



      (3)   Electrical permit fees. (Expires one year from date of
issuance.



         Class               Fee



         Temporary pole         $25



         Additional wiring         $50



         Complete rewire         $75



         Swimming pool/hot tub      $30



         Signs (lighted, monument)      $50



         New meter base         $50



         Upgrade            $50



         Move service panel         $50



         New service            $50 + $10 per meter



         New garage            $50



         New residence/pre fab home      $50



         New apartments (per building)   $65+



         Underground service         $50



      (4)   Commercial electrical.



         Item               Fee



         Underground services         $50



         Commercial repair         $75



         Commercial rewire         $100



         Additional commercial rewire   $75



         New commercial         $100



         New commercial



            (over 5,000 sq. ft.)      $250



      (5)   Miscellaneous permit fees.



         Item                  Fee



         Demolition permit



            (expires six months)         $200



            *Must have license and permit bond on file with city;



            Exception: property owner demolitions



         Newly paved roads   < 12 months      $300



                  12-24 months



                  24-36 months      $100



                  > 36 months      $50



         Sidewalk and driveway permit



            (expires six months)         $50



         Dumpster permit



            (expires 30 days)         $50



         Residential sewer tap fee         $1,250



         Temporary certificate of occupancy      $100



            *Expires at end of season



         Certificate of occupancy         $100



         Extension of permit            $25



         Inspection of commercial range hood      $25



         Sprinkler inspection            $25



         Plan and review            $100



('75 Code, § 5-3)(Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97;
Am. Ord. 6851, passed 12-12-16)



§ 150.05  INSPECTIONS.



   All inspections necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter
shall be made by the City Civil Engineer or his delegate.



('75 Code, § 5-4)



§ 150.06  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any struc- ture
within the scope of this chapter until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued for it by the City Civil Engineer.



('75 Code, § 5-5)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.07  CERTIFICATE APPLICATIONS.



   All applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in
writing to the City Civil Engineer.  ('75 Code, § 5-6)



§ 150.08  PREREQUISITES TO CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until after a final
inspection is made, nor shall it be issued for any building or structure
which does not comply with all applicable building stan- dards, such a
certificate shall be issued or denied within three days after the final
inspection of the building or structure.



('75 Code, § 5-7)



§ 150.09  SIDEWALK PROTECTION.



   (A)   Whenever any building within four feet of or abutting on the
street line is constructed, altered, or repaired to a height of more than one
story, a substantial temporary protecting cover over the sidewalk shall be
erected and maintained during such construction and repair.



   (B)   Such sidewalk cover shall not be less than five feet wide
unless otherwise permitted in writing by the city authorities.  The roof of
the protecting cover shall be of solid plank, not less than one inch thick
with a solid rail at the outer edge not less than 30 inches in height, all
rigidly supported on heavy timbers and posts, and of sufficient strength to
resist the force of falling materials. The roof of the protecting cover shall
be covered with regular roofing paper.



   (C)   The head room under such protecting cover shall be not less
than eight feet in the clear.  The passageway may be raised not more than
three feet above the adjoining sidewalk if it is provided with suitable steps
or an easy graded approach at each end with proper handrails which shall be
kept open and unobstructed by material, rubbish, or snow at all times.



   (D)   Temporary sheds for office purposes or for the storage of
tools and  materials  may  be  erected on  public  property  within 
the limits prescribed for materials in  the  building permit,  provided
that no such building or shed shall be built within 20 feet of street
intersections.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful to use the walls or any portion of the
temporary sheds or sidewalk cover or any fences built around building
operations for billposting or for any manner of advertising except such as
may pertain to the building itself.



('75 Code, § 5-8)  Penalty, see § 150.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 97



ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS



§ 150.15  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of §§ 150.01 through 150.09 of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the City Civil Engineer, with the assistance of
other city officers and employees.



('75 Code, § 5-21)



§ 150.16  DIVISION OF BUILDING STANDARDS.



   For provisions concerning the Division of Building Standards, see §
30.15(E).



§ 150.17  COLLECTION OF FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services
is authorized to collect the fees and charges set out in § 150.04.  Such
collections are to be accounted for in the manner prescribed by the Indiana
Law and deposited for use in the manner prescribed by the Common Council, up
to the maximum budget authority as established by the Common Council of the
city.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section notwithstanding, the proceeds
derived from application fees for economic revitalization area designation as
described in § 150.04(B)(4) shall be deposited for use in the account
designated for the Revolving Loan Fund.  These funds may be used for general
purposes as described in the Revolving Loan Fund Management Plan.



(Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97)



§ 150.18  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   (A)   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building
Commissioner's decision, first through the Board of Public Works and Safety
of the city, and then to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
of Indiana in accordance with the provisions of IC 22-13-2-7 and IC
4-21.5-3-7.  ('75 Code, § 5-26)



   (B)   Appeals of fees or charges assessed pursuant to § 150.04.



      (1)   Upon  the  determination  of  the  appropriate fee
or charge, any individual, group, or organization may, in writing, appeal the
determination of their status to the Board of Public Works and Safety.  Such
an appeal may include information concerning the tax exempt status of the
individual, group, or organization or the basis of the fee charged.



      (2)   This appeal must be delivered to the Director of the
Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services or his designee. 
Upon receiving a written appeal, the Director of the Department of
Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services will refer the matter to the
Board of Public Works and Safety.  During a review period not to exceed 30
days from the date of filing the appeal, the Board of Public Works and Safety
may conduct a public hearing to decide on the validity of the appeal. Whether
or not such a hearing is held the Board of Public Works and Safety may:



         (a)   Uphold the original determination; or



         (b)   Waive the fee, provided that the individual,
group, or organization can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of
Public Works and Safety that it qualifies for exclusion under § 150.04(A); or



         (c)   Reduce or waive the fee, provided that the
individual, group, or organization can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Board of Public Works and Safety that the proposed activity will enhance the
general welfare of the community and that the project will not proceed
without reduction or waiver of the fees and charges established in § 150.04.



      (3)   The decision of the Board of Public Works and Safety
shall be final.  Except that the decision may be reviewed and amended
pursuant to IC 34-4-17.5-1 et seq.



      (4)   No permit will be issued, and no service will be
undertaken while the fee is being appealed.  Upon the decision of the Board
of Public Works and Safety or upon withdrawal of the appeal and upon payment
of the fee, the city will issue the permit or provide the service.



(Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 5630, passed 2-22-88; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97)



DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.25  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a property owner or his agent or
representative, or of the lessee of the property if the lessee is responsible
for the work involved, to demolish any building or structure without a permit
from the Board of Public Works and Safety.



('75 Code, § 5-38)  (Ord. 4190, passed 6-25-73)  Penalty, see § 150.99



Cross-reference:



   Permit fee, see § 150.04



§ 150.26  (RESERVED).



§ 150.27  BOND.



   No demolition permit shall be issued unless the applicant for same
posts a bond or other surety in an amount sufficient to guarantee the
workmanlike completion of the demolition operation including the removal of
debris and the elimination of all health and safety hazards.  However, no
bond shall be required of the owner of a residential structure, or a
structure which is appurtenant to a residential structure who is performing
his own wrecking on that structure or appurtenant structure.



('75 Code, § 5-40)  (Ord. 4190, passed 6-25-73)



§ 150.28  FORM OF PERMIT.



   A demolition permit shall include the location of the structure to be
demolished, the owner of the real estate, and the name of the contractor or
wrecker to be employed to demolish a building or structure.  Other pertinent
information on it may be required by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



('75 Code, § 5-41)  (Ord. 4190, passed 6-25-73)



Cross-reference:



   Blasting regulations, see § 91.02



§ 150.29  EFFECT OF OTHER PERMITS.



   A demolition permit shall be required for the demolition of all
structures even though they may also be required to have a general building
or a blasting permit.



('75 Code, § 5-42)  (Ord. 4190, passed 6-25-73)



MOBILE HOMES



§ 150.35  LOCATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the jurisdiction of the Plan
Commission for any person to park any trailer or mobile home outside a
permitted or authorized mobile home park or on any street, alley, or other
public place, or on any tract or parcel of land owned by any person, except
as provided for in this section.



   (B)   Emergency or temporary stopping or parking shall be permitted
on any street, alley, or highway for not longer than 24 hours, if such
temporary stopping or parking is otherwise lawful.



   (C)   No person shall park or occupy any mobile home on any parcel
of land, provided that the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in an
accessory private garage building, or in a rear yard in any zoning district,
is permitted, provided no living quarters be maintained, no public utilities,
or sanitary utility be connected to such mobile home, or any business
practiced in the mobile home while it is so parked or stored, except as
provided in divisions (D) and (E) below.



   (D)   One mobile home may be maintained on the sales lot of a duly
qualified mobile home dealer for the purpose of use as an office.



   (E)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in any specific case, vary
the provisions of this section and permit a nonconforming use under the
zoning code, but only after public notice and hearing.



   (F)   A public notice of a hearing under this section shall mean one
insertion in a newspaper of general circulation, published at a place nearest
the location of the nonconforming applicant in the county at least seven days
previous to the time fixed for such hearing, of a notice setting out in
substance the proposed variance and stating when and where hearing shall be
held and that objections will be heard at such hearing.



('75 Code, § 5-54)  Penalty, see § 150.99



Cross-reference:



   Additional charge for shared meter, see § 50.36 (C)



ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING STANDARDS



§ 150.45  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The provisions of IC 36-7-9-l et seq., concerning enforcement of
building standards, are hereby adopted in their entirety, and as they may be
subsequently amended, and are made a part hereof by reference the same as if
fully set out herein.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84)



§ 150.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "DEPARTMENT."  The Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection
Services shall be the executive department authorized by this subchapter to
administer the provisions of IC 36-7-9-1 et seq.



   "ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY."  The chief administrative officer of the
Department, as heretofore defined, or his designee.



   "HEARING AUTHORITY."  That person or persons designated as such by the
Mayor under the authority of IC 36-7-9-2.  The hearing authority shall
perform those functions specified by state statute.



   "SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST."  The definitions of "substantial
property interest" set out in IC 36-7-9-2 is hereby specifically incorporated
by reference into this subchapter as if fully set forth herein.



   "UNSAFE BUILDING."  The description of an "UNSAFE BUILDING" contained
in IC  36-7-9-4  is  hereby  supplemented to  provide minimum standards
for building condition or maintenance in the city, by adding the following
definition:  Any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an "UNSAFE
BUILDING", provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that
life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered.



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.



      (2)   Whenever any building or structure has been constructed,
exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or
prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building
regulations of this city, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city
relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings.



      (3)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not
erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any
non-supporting part, member, or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member, or portion less than 66% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics, or weather- resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.



      (4)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be
used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangements, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the enforcement
authority to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a
condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.



      (5)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections, or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the
enforcement authority to be a fire hazard.



      (6)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.



      (7)   Whenever any commercial or industrial building or
structure, because of inadequate maintenance, weather or other damage,
contains a window(s) or a door(s) which is broken, missing, or covered by a
material that is not consistent with the exterior of the building or
structure. Whenever any commercial or industrial building or structure that
has historic significance, because of inadequate maintenance, weather or
other damage, contains a window(s) or a door(s) which is broken, missing, or
covered by a material that is not consistent with the original window(s) or
door(s).



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



§ 150.47  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   All  buildings  or  portions  thereof  within  the  city  which
are determined after  inspection by the  enforcement  authority  to 
be  unsafe as defined in this subchapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84)



§ 150.48  POWERS OF ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   The enforcement authority, as chief administrative officer of the
Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services, or their
designee, shall be authorized to administer and to proceed under the
provisions of said law in ordering the repair or removal of any buildings
found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified hereafter.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97)



§ 150.49  LIMITATIONS OF POWERS.



   Wherever in this subchapter, or under applicable state statute, it is
provided that anything must be done to the approval of, or subject to, the
discretion of the enforcement authority, or any other officer of the
Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services, this shall be
construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the
rules and standards established by ordinance or statute have been complied
with.  No such provisions shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what such regulations or standards shall be, power
to require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or statute, or to enforce
such provisions in an arbitrary or capricious manner.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97)



§ 150.50  SEALING OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS.



   Upon a finding by the enforcement authority that a building or
structure is "unsafe" and defined by IC 36-7-9-4, or this subchapter, then,
in addition to all other powers provided by law, the enforcement authority
may, pursuant to IC 36-7-9-5(a)(2), proceed to seal the unsafe building
against intrusion by unauthorized persons according to the administrative
procedures set out in IC 36-7-9-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84)



§ 150.51  RENOVATION STANDARD.



   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair, or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike
manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade.  The
provisions of the rules pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical, and one and two-family dwellings, promulgated by the State Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission, shall be considered standard and
acceptable practice for all matters covered by this subchapter or  orders
issued pursuant to this subchapter by the enforcement authority of the city,
or his designee.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.52  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   An Unsafe Building Fund is hereby established in the Department of
Engineering, Traffic, and Inspection Services in accordance with the
provisions of IC 36-7-9-14.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 5559, passed 10-28-86; Am. Ord. 6528,
passed 2-11-08)



§ 150.53  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner, lessee,
sublessee, or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or
premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any of the provisions of this subchapter or any order issued by the
enforcement authority.



   (B)   Any window or door which is broken, missing, or covered by a
material that is not consistent with the exterior of the building or
structure must be repaired to working condition within ten days of a notice
of violation. For a building or structure of historic significance, any
window or door which is broken or missing or covered by a material that is
not consistent with the original type of window or door must be repaired to
original condition within ten days of a notice of violation.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)  Penalty, see §
150.99



ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT STANDARDS



§ 150.60  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   The provisions of IC 36-7-9-l et seq., concerning enforcement of
building standards, heretofore adopted in their entirety, and as they may be
amended from time to time, by § 150.45 of this chapter, are incorporated
herein by reference the same as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. 5560, passed ll-3-86)



§ 150.61  APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Application.  The provisions of this subchapter shall apply
to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, appliances,
and fixtures, hereinafter referred to as "electrical equipment", within or on
private and public buildings and other structures unless hereinafter excepted.



   (B)   Other provisions of this subchapter notwithstanding, the
following exemptions shall be applicable:



      (1)   No permit shall be required to perform electrical work
on temporary wiring involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing,
altering, or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus.  This exemption
shall not apply to permanent wiring.  Wiring in excess of 14 days shall not
be considered temporary unless by written permission of the authority having
jurisdiction.



      (2)   No permit shall be required to perform electrical work
connected with the assembly, erection, and connection of electrical equipment
by the manufacturer of such equipment, but not including wiring between two
or more parts of such equipment.



      (3)   This subchapter does not apply to the following
installations:



         (a)   Installations listed in division (A) of this
section not of a substantial nature, for the purpose of normal maintenance.



         (b)   Installation in ships, watercraft other than
floating dwelling units, railway rolling stock, aircraft, or automotive.



         (c)   Installations underground in mines.



         (d)   Installations of railways for generation,
transformation, transmission, or distribution of power used exclusively for
operation of rolling stock or installations used exclusively for signaling
and communication purposes.



         (e)   Installations of communication equipment under the
exclusive control of communication utilities, located outdoors or in building
spaces, used exclusively for such equipment.



         (f)   Installations under the exclusive control of
electric utilities for the purpose of communication, or metering; or for the
generation, control, transformation, transmission, and distribution of
electric energy located in buildings used exclusively by utilities for such
purposes or located outdoors on property owned or leased by the utility or on
public highways, streets, roads, and the like, or outdoors by established
rights on private property.  This provision shall also apply to the
employees of the aforementioned entities only while such employees are
engaged within the scope of their employment for such entities.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.62  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in the rules, regulations, and
codes established in this subchapter, the following standards shall apply to
all work subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



   "CONTRACTOR."  One who contracts or holds one's self out to hire,
whether or not such agreement is in writing, and as defined in IC 22-11-3.1-1
et seq.



   "FINAL WIRING."  The completed electrical system including all
devices, fixtures, and the like, but not necessarily including the service
entrance equipment.



   "INDIVIDUAL."  One who is the legal owner, primary resident, or
designated by the owner as manager of the property on which the work is to be
accomplished.



   "ROUGH-IN SERVICE."  The service entrance equipment in order to obtain
power in its complete state with or without the connection of all branch
circuits.



   "ROUGH-IN WIRING."  The cable or wire as a complete system prior to
the installation of the devices or fixtures.



   "SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS."



      (1)   A building containing less than a 60 ampere 240V main
and range four circuit service;



      (2)   Less than one switched light or receptacle per room;



      (3)   Less than one receptacle per wall space;



      (4)   Less than one receptacle per kitchen counter space in
excess of 12 inches width;



      (5)   Service entrance equipment located in bathrooms;



      (6)   Conductors in a deteriorated, abused or improperly
installed condition.



      (7)   If any or all of the above violations exist the
structure in question may be considered an "unsafe building" for purposes of
IC 36-7-9-1 et seq. as adopted by § 150.45 et seq. of this chapter.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-87)



§ 150.63  ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.



   The following rules, regulations, and codes are adopted by reference in
§ 150.01.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 5630, passed 2-22-88) Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.64  STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT CONDUIT.



   In addition to the standards contained in the rules, regulations, and
codes, heretofore established, the following standards shall apply to all
work subject to the provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Flexible metal conduit:  Flexible metal conduit shall not be
exposed to weather, wet locations, or refrigerated areas unless it be of the
sealed-type or other non-corroding type raceway.



   (B)   Services.  The minimum electrical service on new habitable
buildings or in retrofit of an existing service shall be 100 amperes, 18
circuit capacity breaker type panel.  A 200 amp service shall be no less
than 32 circuit capacity.



   (C)   Grounding electrode conductor.  The minimum size grounding
electrode conductor shall be #4 bare solid copper or equivalent.



   (D)   Devices requiring maintenance.  Service entrance equipment,
distribution equipment, panel boards, motor controllers, or other electrical
equipment devices, and the like, requiring maintenance shall be provided with
adequate illumination.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.65  POWERS OF ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The enforcement authority, as chief administrative officer of
the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services, or their
designee, shall be authorized to administer and to proceed under the
provisions of this subchapter in ordering the compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Duties.



      (1)   The enforcement authority shall insure compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter and shall take all measures necessary to
provide enforcement of the provisions hereinafter set forth.



      (2)   The enforcement authority shall be responsible for the
preparation and issuance of all permits required under this subchapter and
shall keep complete records of all permits issued.



      (3)   The enforcement authority shall be responsible for all
inspections and reinspections hereinafter required and shall keep complete
records thereof.



      (4)   The enforcement authority shall perform such duties as
are prescribed by the Mayor and the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (5)   The enforcement authority may hold membership in a
nationally recognized professional electrical organization, and with the
consent of the Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services,
may serve on its committees or hold offices in those organizations to which
he or she may be elected or appointed.



      (6)   In the event the state mandates specific testing or
licensing requirements for electrical inspectors, the city will adopt the
state requirements in lieu of similar local requirements for the enforcement
authority.



      (7)   The powers and duties of the enforcement authority
concerning enforcement of electrical codes are hereby consolidated with the
Electrical Inspector, unless determined otherwise by the Director of the
Department of Engineering, Traffic and Inspection Services, or his or her
designee.



   (C)   Authority.



      (1)   The enforcement authority is the authority as that term
is defined in I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq. in all matters electrical, or pertaining
to electrical equipment, within the corporate limits of the city for the
purpose of enforcing provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq.



      (2)   When, in the course of carrying out the inspections
required in this subchapter, the enforcement authority finds electrical
equipment which, by reason of its application or installation, is in
noncompliance with the standards so established, he or she shall notify the
person, firm, or corporation responsible for the electrical equipment, in
writing, of the nature of the noncompliance. Such notification shall be by
means of certified mail or personal service.



      (3)   Should such changes or repairs not be made within ten
days of written notification, or any longer period specified in the
notification, the enforcement authority shall have the authority to order
disconnection of electrical service by the appropriate electrical utility.



      (4)   Division (C)(3) above notwithstanding, in cases of
emergency, or where necessary for safety of persons or property, or where
electrical equipment may interfere with fire or police personnel of the city,
the enforcement authority or the authorized agents or employees of the
appropriate electric utility shall have the authority to immediately
disconnect or cause the disconnection or reconnection of any electrical
equipment or service for a period of time coterminous with the period of the
emergency or until the safety hazard is corrected. Provided, however, that
should any person other than an authorized agent or employee of the
appropriate electric utility undertake to make a disconnection under cases of
emergency provided for in this division, then in that event, the appropriate
electric utility shall not be liable to such person for any damage or
injuries resulting from such undertaking. All reasonable efforts shall be
made to obtain the aid and assistance of authorized utility employees in such
emergency situations.



      (5)   Authority conferred upon the enforcement authority may
be delegated by him or her to such assistants as may, from time to time, be
employed by the city to aid the enforcement authority to carry out his or her
duties.



      (6)   The enforcement authority shall have the authority to
remove or cause to be removed, any obstructions which may prevent a complete
inspection of any electrical installation.



      (7)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of these rules, or whenever the enforcement authority or
his or her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code
violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or
hazardous, the enforcement authority or his or her authorized representative
may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the
same or to perform any duty imposed upon the enforcement authority by these
rules, provided that if such building or premises be occupied he or she shall
first present proper credentials and request entry; or if such building or
premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the enforcement
authority or his or her authorized representative shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.



      (8)   When the enforcement authority or his or her authorized
representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other
remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other
persons having charge, care, or control of any building or premises shall
fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly
permit entry therein by the enforcement authority or his or her authorized
representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to
these rules.



      (9)   Upon a finding by the enforcement authority that a
building or structure, or portion thereof, is "unsafe" as defined by I.C.
36-7-9-1 et seq., § 150.45, or in noncompliance with this subchapter, the
enforcement authority shall cause the issue of a stop work order which shall
cause all work to be stopped or cause the building, structure, or portion
thereof to be sealed against intrusion by unauthorized personnel pursuant to
the provisions and administrative procedures set out in I.C. 36-7-9-5 et seq.
Such a stop work order may be withdrawn by the enforcement authority when he
or she has cause to believe that the conditions constituting the
noncompliance have been properly repaired, removed, or corrected.



      (10)   Upon finding, by the enforcement authority, that a
project is in noncompliance with the applicable codes, the contractor in
accordance with I.C. 22-12-7-11 et seq. may appeal such a decision to the
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of the state for a
determination of variance of the rule applying to any commercial, industrial,
or multi-family structure.



      (11)   The enforcement authority or his or her designee shall
be the final authority on code in all electrical installations in or on
structures not identified in division (C)(10) of this section subject to the
procedures outlined in § 150.68.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 5630, passed 2-22-88; Am. Ord. 6073,
passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6477, passed 4-23-07)



§ 150.66  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   An electrical permit shall be required to install, modify, or
repair any electrical conductor, fitting, device, or equipment in or on any
structure, public or private, unless such structure shall be under complete
custody and control of an owner employing engineering staff and maintenance
staff for the purpose of maintaining the facility. In such a case normal
maintenance and repair of the facility by the staff under the direction of
the engineering group shall be permitted to be performed without obtaining a
permit. The exception does not, however, allow for such maintenance or repair
to be accomplished by an outside firm, nor does it allow for new
installations nor substantial modification of existing systems without
benefit of a permit and all other prescribed requirements of state law and
local ordinances.



   (B)   The enforcement authority shall prepare, and the Board of
Public Works and Safety shall approve, standard forms for application for
permits.



   (C)   Permit applications will be designed to provide for
description of the project to be undertaken, its location, the identity of
the contractor performing the work, and all other information required by the
enforcement authority.



   (D)   Should the enforcement authority approve the application, he
or she shall issue a permit for the project.



   (E)   The Director of the Department of Engineering, Traffic and
Inspection Services may appoint a qualified designee to assist the
enforcement authority.



   (F)   Should the enforcement authority deny the application, he or
she shall set out in writing the reasons for the denial. The enforcement
authority's denial may be appealed by the applicant to the Board of Public
Works and Safety for a hearing. The Board may affirm or overrule the decision
denying the permit.



   (G)   The decision of the Board affirming the denial may be reviewed
by a court of competent jurisdiction, in accordance with I.C. 34-4-17.5-1 et
seq.



   (H)   Permits shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the job
site.



   (I)   Charges for electrical permits will be established by
ordinance by the Common Council.



   (J)   It shall be the responsibility of the contractor, if one has
been engaged to perform the work or a portion thereof, to acquire the
required permits and to assure that he or she or they are properly recorded
on the permit as the party performing the work.



   (K)   If a contractor is not engaged to perform the electrical work
it shall be the responsibility of the individual to obtain the required
permits.



   (L)   It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to inform
the office of the enforcement authority of any change in the manner, method,
person, corporation, or any other such deviation from the criteria under
which the permit was issued.



   (M)   Failure to obtain a permit as required prior to the
institution of work or to obtain the proper inspections as required in this
section may be subject to a fine of up to $100 per occurrence. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate occurrence.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord. 6477,
passed 4-23-07)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.67  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Work in progress shall be subject to inspection by the
enforcement authority or his or her designate.



   (B)   There shall be a minimum of one inspection at each of the
following stages of work:



      (1)   Rough-in service.



      (2)   Rough-in wiring.



      (3)   Final inspection.



   (C)   Additional inspections may be made as deemed necessary by the
enforcement authority.



   (D)   Following the rough-in inspection, the enforcement authority
shall inspect the meter base for the purpose of informing the appropriate
utility that the installation has received approval for hook-up of electrical
service. The enforcement authority shall notify the appropriate utility
within 72 business hours of approval. Provided, however, this provision shall
not be construed in any way as granting the enforcement authority the
authority to order the appropriate utility to hookup electrical service to
any installation.



   (E)   Charges for electrical inspections will be established by
ordinance by the Common Council.



   (F)   Inspections shall be made within two working days of request
except Saturday, Sunday, and holidays.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 6477, passed 4-23-07)  Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.68  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Should the enforcement authority have reason to believe that a
contractor or individual is refusing to abide by the standards set out
herein, the enforcement authority may prepare a written report specifying the
charges and shall forward this report to the Board of Public Works and
Safety; or the enforcement authority may issue an immediate stop work order,
in which case all work shall cease on or about the premise, and the
enforcement authority may seal off the structure or any portion thereof
against any intrusion as set out in § 150.65(C).



   (B)   Within five working days of the action taken under division
(A) of this section the enforcement authority will present a written report
to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The Board shall examine this report
and, should they be of the opinion that probable cause exists to believe the
truth of the allegations, they shall schedule a public hearing at or before
the next regular Board meeting on the matter which shall be presided over by
the Corporation Counsel.



   (C)   The enforcement authority shall present the case against the
contractor or individual. In this presentation, he or she will have all
procedural rights granted by state law for administrative hearings generally.



   (D)   The contractor or individual shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and shall be given the right to disprove the
allegations made utilizing all procedural rights granted by state law for
administrative hearings generally.



   (E)   Both the enforcement authority and the contractor or
individual shall have the right to present witnesses and examine and
cross-examine the witnesses.



   (F)   Upon hearing all the evidence, the Board shall deliberate and
reach a decision on the truth of the allegations. They shall enter findings
supporting their decision.



   (G)   Should the Board determine that the allegations be true, they
shall have the right to:



      (1)   Revoke the permit, or



      (2)   Order the permit holder to make the necessary changes
and to reappear before the Board of Public Works and Safety along with the
enforcement authority to report on a specified day that such changes have
been made. During the time specified by the Board the only electrical work
that may continue at property is that which is directly related to correcting
the unsafe condition as determined by the Board.



   (H)   A report to the Board of Public Works and Safety may be
retracted or rescinded at any point at which the enforcement authority feels
the infraction has been or will be resolved.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 6477, passed 4-23-07)



§ 150.69  ENFORCEMENT BY CORPORATION COUNSEL.



   In addition to any other enforcement provisions contained herein, the
Office of the Corporation Counsel may commence appropriate legal action or
prosecute to assure compliance with this subchapter in accordance with IC
36-7-9-1 et seq., § 150.45 et seq. of this chapter, or this subchapter.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $2,500.  A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation
occurs or continues.



(Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 150.45 through
150.53 shall be fined not more than $2,500. Each day a violation continues
shall be treated as a separate occurrence. Any person in violation of the
provisions of §§ 150.45 through 150.53 may be assessed a civil penalty
and/or infraction as designated by IC 36-7-9 et seq.



(Ord. 5425, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



   (C)   Violations of the provisions of §§ 150.60 through 150.69, in
addition to any other penalties contained therein, shall be punishable by
fines not to exceed $2,500 per occurrence. Each day a violation continues
shall be treated as a separate occurrence. Any person in violation of the
provisions of §§ 150.60 through 150.69 may be assessed a civil penalty
and/or infraction as designated by IC 36-7-9 et seq.



(Ord. 5560, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 6720, passed 5-13-13)



CHAPTER 151:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Exemptions



   151.04   Administrative provisions



   151.05   Discrimination prohibited



   151.06   Administrative enforcement



   151.07   Enforcement by private persons



   151.08   Prevailing party; attorney's fees and court costs



   151.09   Enforcement by Commission



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   The purposes of this chapter are the following:



   (A)   To provide for fair housing practices within the city.



   (B)   To create a procedure for investigating and conciliating
complaints of discriminatory housing practices.



   (C)   To provide rights and remedies substantially equivalent to
those granted under state and federal laws.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   "AGGRIEVED PERSON." Any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that the person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   "APPRAISER."  Any person who, for a fee or in relation to his
employment or usual occupation, establishes a value for a housing unit.



   "COMMISSION." Refers to the Kokomo Human Rights Commission.



   "COMPLAINANT." A person, including the Commission, who files a
complaint under this chapter.



   "CONCILIATION." The attempted resolution of issues raised by a
complaint or by the investigation of a complaint, through informal
negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the
Commission.



   "CONCILIATION AGREEMENT." A written agreement setting forth the
resolution of the issues in conciliation.



   "DIRECTOR." The director of the Kokomo Human Rights Commission.



   “DISABLED” or “DISABILITY.”  With respect to an individual:



      (1)   A physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits at least one of the major life activities of the individual;



      (2)   A record of an impairment described in division (1); or



      (3)   Being regarded as having an impairment described in
division (1).



   The term does not include current illegal use of or addiction to a
controlled substance (as defined in § 102 of the controlled Substances Act
(21 U.S.C. § 802)).



   "DISCRIMINATE" or "DISCRIMINATION." The denial of equal access to or
any differences of treatment in the sale, lease, rental, or financing of
housing units based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry,
disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital
status, familial status, or age and shall include segregation, except that it
shall not be discrimination for any religious or denominational institution
to prefer members of its own religion or denomination for purposes of
employment or religion.



   "DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE." An act prohibited by § 151.05 of
this chapter.



   "DWELLING."



      (1)   Any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residency by one or more families; or



      (2)   Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building
or structure described by division (1).



   "FAMILIAL STATUS." One or more individuals (who have not attained the
age of 18 years) being domiciled with:



      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of such
individual or individuals; or



      (2)   The designee of such parent or other person having such
custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person.



   The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of
familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the
process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the
age of 18 years.



   "FAMILY." Includes a single individual.



   "GENDER IDENTITY." An individual having or being perceived as having a
gender-related self-identity, self-image, appearance, expression or behavior,
regardless of whether it is the same or different from those characteristics
traditionally associated with the individual's assigned sex at birth.



   "HOUSING UNIT."  A single room or a suite of rooms, or an apartment or
dwelling, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, by
an individual, by a family or by a group of individuals living together, or a
parcel of real property or a lot available for the construction of a housing
unit.



   "LENDING INSTITUTION."  Any person regularly engaged in the business
of lending money or guaranteeing loans.



   "MARITAL STATUS." A person's state of being single, married, separated,
divorced, or widowed.



   "OWNER."  An owner, including the lessee, sublessee, assignee,
managing agent, or other person having the right to ownership or possession,
or the right to sell, rent, or lease any housing unit.



   "OWNER-OCCUPANT." Any person residing in a home who occupies that home
as his own personal residence.



   "PERSON." One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees under Title 11, receivers, and fiduciaries.



   "PERSON IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING OR RENTING DWELLINGS."  A person
who:



      (1)   Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



      (3)   Is the owner of any dwelling designed for occupancy by,
or occupied by, five or more families.



   "PROTECTED CLASS."  Those characteristics of a person that cannot be
targeted for discrimination and include race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
veteran status, marital status, familial status, and age.



   "REAL ESTATE BROKER." Any person who, for a fee or other valuable
consideration, sells, purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates, or offers
or attempts to negotiate, the sale, purchase, exchange, or rental of the real
property of another, or holds himself out as engaged in the business of
selling, purchasing, exchanging, or renting the real property of another, or
collects rental for the use of real property of another.



   "REAL ESTATE SALESMEN"  or  "REAL ESTATE AGENT."  Any person
employed by a real estate broker to perform or assist in the performance of
any or all the functions of a real estate broker.



   "RESPONDENT."



      (1)   The person accused in a complaint of discriminatory
housing practice; or



      (2)   Any person identified as an additional or a substitute
respondent under I.C. 22-9.5-6-4 or an agent of an additional or a substitute
respondent.



   "SEXUAL ORIENTATION."  An individual's actual or perceived identity or
practice as a lesbian woman, gay man, bisexual person or heterosexual person.



   "TO RENT." Includes to lease, to sublease, to let, or to otherwise
grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the
occupant.



   "VETERAN STATUS.”



      (1)   A veteran of the armed forces of the United States;



      (2)   A member of the Indiana National Guard; or



      (3)   A member of a reserve component.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6252,
passed 1-13-03; Am. Ord. 6829, passed 6-27-16)



§ 151.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Sale or rental of single-family houses, rooms or units in
certain dwellings.



      (1)   Subject to subdivision (2), § 151.05 (B) does not apply
to the following:



         (a)   The sale or rental of a single-family house sold
or rented by an owner if:



            1.   The owner does not:



               a.   Own more than three single-family
houses at any one time; or



               b.   Own any interest in, nor is there owned
or reserved on the owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement,
title to, or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of
more than three single-family houses at any one time; and



            2.   The house was sold or rented without:



               a.   The use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker,
an agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any
such broker, agent, salesman, or person.; or



               b.   The publication, posting, or mailing of
a notice, a statement, or an advertisement prohibited by § 151.05 (C).



         (b)   The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling
containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more
than four families living independently of each other if the owner maintains
and occupies one of the living quarters as the owner's residence.



      (2)   The exemption in subdivision (2)(a) applies to only one
sale or rental in a 24 month period if the owner was not the most recent
resident of the house at the time of the sale or rental.



   (B)   This division does not prohibit a religious organization, an
association, or a society or a nonprofit institution or an organization
operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious
organization, an association, or a society from:



      (1)   Limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings
that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of
the same religion; or



      (2)   Giving preference to person of the same religion unless
membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color, sex,
national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity,
Veteran status, marital status, familial status, or age.



   (C)   This division does not prohibit a private club not open to the
public that, as an incident to the club's primary purpose, provides lodging
that the club owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from
limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to the members or from
giving preference to the members, unless membership in the club is restricted
because of race, color, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial
status, or age.



   (D)   Housing for older persons.



      (1)   As used in this division, "housing for older persons"
means housing:



         (a)   That the Commission determines is specifically
designed and operated to assist elderly persons under federal or state
program, provided that, any such determination shall be consistent with
determinations made by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
concerning the same subject matter;



         (b)   Intended for and solely occupied by persons at
least 62 years of age; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person at least 55 years of age, subject to regulations developed by the
Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
under Section 807(b)(2)(C) of the federal Fair Housing Act.



      (2)   The provisions of § 151.05 (A) relating to familial
status do not apply to housing for older persons.



   (E)   Appraisal of property. This division does not prohibit a
person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from
taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity,
Veteran status, marital status, familial status, or age and shall include
segregation, except that it shall not be discrimination for any religious or
denominational institution to prefer members of its own religion or
denomination for purposes of employment and housing.



   (F)   Health or safety restrictions; other laws not affected.



      (1)   This division does not affect a reasonable local, or
state restriction on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling or restriction relating to health or safety standards provided that
such restrictions are themselves reasonable and do not discriminate on any
basis prohibited by this chapter.



      (2)   This division does not affect a requirement of
nondiscrimination in any other local, state or federal law.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6829,
passed 6-7-16)



§ 151.04  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Delegation of powers and duties to executive director.  The
Commission may, by resolution, authorize the executive director of the
Commission to exercise the Commission's powers and perform the Commission's
duties under this chapter.



   (B)   Cooperation with other entities.  The Commission shall
cooperate with and, as appropriate, may provide technical and other
assistance to federal, state, local, and other public or private entities
that are formulating or operating programs to prevent or eliminate
discriminatory housing practices.



   (C)   Acceptance of gifts and grants.  The Commission may accept
gifts and grants from any public or private source for the purpose of
administering this section.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94)



§ 151.05  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Under this section, a discriminatory act is committed because
of familial status if the act is committed because a person who is the
subject of discrimination is:



      (1)   Pregnant;



      (2)   Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of
age in regard to whom the person:



         (a)   Is the parent or legal custodian; or



         (b)   Has the written permission of the parent or legal
custodian for domicile with that person; or



         (c)   In the process of obtaining legal custody of an
individual younger than 18 years of age.



   (B)   Discrimination in connection with sale or rental of dwellings
prohibited; exception as to persons convicted of illegal manufacture or
distribution of controlled substance.



      (1)   A person may not refuse to sell or to rent after the
making of a bonafide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or
otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial
status, or age.



      (2)   A person may not discriminate against any person in the
terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in
providing services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial
status, or age.



      (3)   This section does not prohibit discrimination against a
person because the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of
any state of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled
substance.



   (C)   Notices, statements, or advertising. A person may not make,
print, publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice,
statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling
that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial
status, or age, or an intention to make such a preference, limitation, or
discrimination.



   (D)   Representations regarding availability of dwelling for
inspections. A person may not represent to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation,
gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial status, or age that
a dwelling is not available for inspection, for sale, or rental when such
dwelling is so available.



   (E)   Representations regarding entry of certain persons into
neighborhood. A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce a
person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual
orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial
status, or age.



   (F)   Disabled persons.



      (1)   A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental, or
to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter
because of a disability of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter.



      (2)   A person may not discriminate against any person in the
terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rectal of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a disability of:



         (a)   That person; or



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after the dwelling is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with the person.



      (3)   For the purpose of this subsection only, discrimination
includes the following:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to
be occupied by such person if the modifications may be necessary to afford
such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of a
rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission
for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the
premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable
wear and tear excepted.



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered family multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991
a failure to design and construct those dwellings in a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons;



            2.   All the doors are designed to allow passage
into and within all premises within the dwellings and are sufficiently wide
to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   At least one building entrance shall be
on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so as provided at
section 100.205 of the Department's regulations.



               b.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to
allow later installations of grab bars; and



               d.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms so, that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (4)   As used in subdivision (3), "covered multifamily
dwellings" means:



         (a)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if the
buildings have one or more elevators; and



         (b)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting
of four or more units.



      (5)   Compliance with the rules of the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission that incorporate by reference the appropriate
requirements of the American National standard for buildings and facilities
providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people (ANSI
A117.1) satisfies the requirements of subdivision (3) (a) 3.



      (6)   This section does not require that a dwelling be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others.



   (G)   Loans or financial assistance.



      (1)   As used in this section, "residential real estate
related transaction" means:



         (a)   Making or purchasing loans or providing other
financial assistance:



            1.   To purchase, construct, improve, repair, or
maintain a dwelling; or



            2.   To secure residential real estate.



         (b)   Selling, brokering, or appraising residential real
property.



      (2)   A person whose business includes engaging in residential
real estate related transactions may not discriminate against a person in
making a real estate related transaction available or in the terms of
conditions of a real estate related transaction because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability, sexual orientation,
gender identity, Veteran status, marital status, familial status, or age.



   (H)   Brokers' organization, services or facilities. A person may
not deny any person access to, or membership participation in, a multiple
listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of
access, membership or participation in such an organization, service, or
facility because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry,
disability, sexual orientation, gender identity, Veteran status, marital
status, familial status, or age.



   (I)   Coercion, intimidation, threats or interference.  A person
may not coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any other person:



      (1)   In the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or
protected by this section; or



      (2)   Because the person has exercised or enjoyed, or has
encouraged or aided another person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right
granted or protected by this section.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99; Am. Ord. 6829,
passed 6-27-15)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.06  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Duty of Commission to investigate discriminatory housing
practices; filing of complaint; amendment; notice.



      (1)   The Commission shall inform the complainant who is
alleging a discriminatory housing practice of the option to elect to file a
complaint at either the state or local level and of the possibility that a
referral may be made from one level of government to another.



      (2)   The Commission shall investigate alleged discriminatory
housing practices.



      (3)   A complaint concerning an alleged discriminatory housing
practice must be:



         (a)   In writing;



         (b)   Under oath; and



         (c)   In the form prescribed by the Commission.



      (4)   An aggrieved person may, not later than one year after
an  alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated,
whichever is later, file a complaint with the Commission alleging the
discriminatory housing practice.



      (5)   Not later than one year after an alleged discriminatory
housing practice has occurred or terminated, whichever is later, the
Commission may file the Commission's own complaint.



      (6)   A complaint under this section may be amended at any
time.



      (7)   When a complaint is filed under this section, the
Commission shall do the following:



         (a)   Give the aggrieved person notice that the
complaint has been received.



         (b)   Advise the aggrieved person of the time limits and
choice of forums under this section.



         (c)   Not later than 20 days after filing of the
complaint or the identification of an additional respondent under division
(D) of this section, serve on each respondent:



            1.   A notice identifying the alleged
discriminatory practice and advising the respondent of the procedural rights
and obligations of a respondent under thin section; and



            2.   A copy of the original complaint.



            3.   Notice may be served on a respondent by any
means authorized under the Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure.



   (B)   Answer to complaint.



      (1)   Not later than ten days after receipt of notice and a
copy of the complaint under division (A)(7), a respondent shall file an
answer to the complaint.



      (2)   An answer must be:



         (a)   In writing; and



         (b)   In the form prescribed by the Commission.



      (3)   An answer may be amended at any time.



      (4)   An answer does not inhibit the investigation of a
complaint.



   (C)   Investigation of complaints referred by federal or state
government; completion of investigation.



      (1)   If the federal or state government has referred a
complaint to the Commission or has deferred jurisdiction over the subject
matter of the complaint to the Commission, the Commission shall promptly
investigate the allegations set forth in the complaint.



      (2)   The Commission shall investigate all complaints, filed
under this section and except as provided by subdivision (3), shall complete
an investigation not later than 100 days after the date the complaint is
filed, or if the Commission is unable to complete the investigation within
the 100 day period, shall dispose of all administrative proceedings related
to the investigation not later than one year after the date the complaint is
filed.



      (3)   If the Commission is unable to complete an investigation
within the time periods prescribed by subdivision (2), the Commission shall
notify the complainant and the respondent in writing of the reasons for the
delay.



   (D)   Joinder of additional or substitute respondents.



      (1)   The Commission may join a person not named in the
complaint as an additional or substitute respondent if in the course of the
investigation the Commission determines that the person should be accused of
a discriminatory housing practice.



      (2)   In addition to the information required in the notice
under division (A)(6)(c) of this section, the Commission shall include in a
notice to a respondent joined under this section an explanation of the basis
for determination that the person is properly joined as respondent.



   (E)   Conciliation agreements.



      (1)   The Commission shall, during the period beginning with
the filing of a complaint, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation
with respect to the complaint.



      (2)   A conciliation agreement is an agreement between, a
respondent and the complainant and is subject to Commission approval.



      (3)   A conciliation agreement may provide for binding
arbitration or other methods of dispute resolution. Dispute resolution that
results from a conciliation agreement may authorize appropriate relief,
including monetary relief.



      (4)   A conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the
complainant and the respondent otherwise agree and the Commission concurs
that disclosure is not required.



      (5)   Nothing said or done in the course of conciliation may
be made public, except when authorized and as subject to the provisions of
Indiana law concerning public records or open door requirements, or used as
evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this section without the written
consent of the persons concerned.



      (6)   After completion of the Commission's investigation, the
Commission  shall make  available  to  the  aggrieved  person  and 
the respondent, information derived from the investigation and the final
investigation report relating to that investigation.



   (F)   Action for temporary or preliminary relief.



      (1)   If the Commission concludes at any time following the
filing of a complaint that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out
the purposes of this section, the Commission may file a civil action for
appropriate temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the
complaint in a circuit or superior court that is located in Howard County.



      (2)   A temporary restraining order or other order granting
temporary or preliminary relief under this section is governed by the Indiana
Rules of Trial Procedure.



      (3)   The filing of a civil action under this section does not
affect the initiation or continuation of administrative proceedings under
division (N).



   (G)   Final investigative report.



      (1)   The Commission shall prepare a final investigative
report showing the following:



         (a)   The names and dates of contacts with witnesses.



         (b)   A summary of correspondence and other contacts
with the aggrieved person and the respondent showing the dates of the
correspondence and contacts.



         (c)   A summary description of other pertinent records.



         (d)   A summary of witness statements.



         (e)   Answers to interrogatories.



      (2)   A final report under this section may be amended if
additional evidence is discovered.



   (H)   Determination of reasonable cause.



      (1)   The Commission shall determine based on the facts
whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing
practice has occurred or is about to occur.



      (2)   The Commission shall make the determination under
subdivision (1) not later than 100 days after the date a complaint is filed
unless:



         (a)   Is as impracticable to make the determination; or



         (b)   The Commission has approved a conciliation
agreement relating to the complaint.



      (3)   If it is impracticable to make the determination within
the time period provided by subdivision (2), the Commission shall notify the
complainant and respondent in writing of the reasons for the delay.



      (4)   If the Commission determines that reasonable cause
exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the Commission shall immediately issue a finding of
reasonable cause on behalf of the aggrieved person.



   (I)   Finding of reasonable cause; contents.



      (1)   A finding of reasonable cause issued under division (H):



         (a)   Must consist of a concise statement on which the
Commission has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur;



         (b)   Must be based on the final investigative report;
and



         (c)   Need not be limited to the facts or grounds
alleged in the complaint.



      (2)   Not later than 20 days after the Commission issues a
finding of reasonable cause, the Commission shall send a copy of the finding
of reasonable cause with information concerning the election under division
(L) to the following:



         (a)   Each respondent, together with a notice of the
opportunity for a hearing provided by division (N).



         (b)   Each aggrieved person on whose behalf the
complaint was filed.



   (J)   Dismissal of complaint.



      (1)   If the Commission determines that no reasonable cause
exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is
about to occur, the Commission shall promptly dismiss the complaint.



      (2)   The Commission shall make available for public
disclosure each dismissal under this section.



   (K)   Finding of reasonable cause precluded after commencement of
civil actions.  The Commission may not issue a finding of reasonable cause
under this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing practice after
the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party
under federal or state law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory
housing practice.



   (L)   Election to have claims decided in civil action.



      (1)   A complainant, a respondent, or an aggrieved person on
whose behalf the complaint was filed may elect to have the claims asserted in
a finding of reasonable cause decided in civil action as provided by division
(M).



      (2)   The election must be made not later than 20 days after
the date of receipt by the electing person of service under section division
(I)(2) or, in the case of the Commission, not later than 20 days after the
date the finding of probable cause was issued.



      (3)   The person making the election shall give notice to the
Commission and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the finding
of probable cause relates.



   (M)   Filing of civil action; intervention by aggrieved persons;
granting of relief.



      (1)   If a timely election is made under division (L), the
Commission shall, not later than 30 days after the election is made, file a
civil action on behalf of the aggrieved person seeking relief under this
section in a circuit or superior court that is located in Howard County.



      (2)   An aggrieved person may intervene in the action.



      (3)   If the court finds that a discriminatory practice has
occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant as relief any relief that
a court may grant in a civil action including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Monetary damages.



         (b)   Reasonable attorney fees.



         (c)   Court costs.



         (d)   Injunctive or other equitable relief.



      (4)   If monetary relief is sought for the benefit of an
aggrieved person who does not intervene in the civil action, the court may
not award the monetary relief if that aggrieved person has not complied with
discovery orders entered by the court.



   (N)   Enforcement through administrative procedure.



      (1)   Discriminatory practices prohibited by this chapter are
declared to be actions harmful to the land and the use thereof.



      (2)   In addition to any other enforcement proceedings, the
provisions of this chapter may be enforced through proceedings before the
Commission acting as an administrative body as provided at I.C. 36-1-6-9.



      (3)   In a proceeding before the Commission to enforce the
provisions of this chapter:



         (a)   A violation of this chapter must be proven by a
preponderance of the evidence; and



         (b)   The Commission may order relief or impose 
penalties provided for in I.C. 22-9.5-6-15.



      (4)   A person who receives a penalty under subdivision (3)
may appeal the order imposing the penalty to a court of record in Howard
County, Indiana.



      (5)   An appeal under subdivision (4) from an order imposing a
penalty must be filed not more than 60 days after the day on which the order
is entered.



   (O)   Administrative hearing before Commission.



      (1)   If a timely election is not made under division (L), the
Commission shall provide for a hearing on the finding of reasonable cause.



      (2)   At any such hearing, the Commission as a whole shall sit
as an administrative hearing body. The complainant shall be represented by
the Corporation Counsel; by counsel of their choice; or the complainant may
represent themselves without counsel. The respondent may be represented by
counsel of their choice, or the respondent may represent themselves without
counsel.



      (3)   The parties are entitled to examine and cross-examine
witnesses.



      (4)   The parties are entitled to present and require the
production of evidence.



      (5)   The parties are entitled to present arguments.



      (6)   Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Commission shall
render a decision upon whether or not a violation of the chapter has
occurred. The Commission may order relief or impose  penalties as provided
in I.C. 22-9.5-6-15.



      (7)   A hearing under this section is subject to the
provisions of § 151.07 (C) of this chapter.



      (8)   A hearing under this section may not continue regarding
any alleged discriminatory housing practice after the beginning of the trial
of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved person under federal or state
law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing practice. In
such an event, the result of the civil action shall be dispositive of the
matter before the Commission which shall be bound by the decision in the
civil action.



   (P)   Certain contracts, sales, encumbrances or leases unaffected by
order.  A Commission order does not affect a contract, a sale, an
encumbrance, or a lease that:



      (1)   Was consummated before the Commission issued the order;
and



      (2)   Involved a bona fide purchaser, an encumbrancer, or a
tenant who did not have actual notice of the finding of reasonable cause
filed under this section.



   (Q)   Respondents subject to licensing or regulation by governmental
agencies; forwarding of findings, orders and recommendations to agencies. 
If the Commission issues an order with respect to a discriminatory housing
practice that occurred in the course of a business subject to licensing or
regulation by a governmental agency, the Commission shall, not later than 30
days after the date of the issuance of the order:



      (1)   Send copies of the findings and the order to the
governmental agency; and



      (2)   Recommend to the governmental agency appropriate
disciplinary action.



   (R)   Issuance of subsequent orders to same respondent; forwarding
of copies to attorney general.  If the Commission issues an order against a
respondent against whom another order was issued within the preceding five
years, the Commission shall bend a copy of each order issued under that
section to the Attorney General.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99)



§ 151.07  ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as affecting the
right of the aggrieved person to file a civil action alleging discriminatory
practices as provided at I.C. 22-9.5-7-I, subject to the restrictions set out
therein concerning the filing of such actions.



   (B)   Certain contracts, sales, encumbrances or leases unaffected by
relief granted.  Relief granted under this section does not affect a
contract, a sale, an encumbrance, or a lease that:



      (1)   Was consummated before the granting of the relief; and



      (2)   Involved a bona fide purchaser, an encumbrancer, or a
tenant who did not have actual notice of the filing of a complaint or a civil
action under this section.



   (C)   Intervention by the Commission.



      (1)   The Commission may intervene in an action under this
section if the Commission determines that the case is of general public
importance.



      (2)   The Commission may obtain the same relief available
under division (B).



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99)



§ 151.08  PREVAILING PARTY; ATTORNEY'S FEES AND COURT COSTS.



   A court in a civil action brought under this chapter may award
reasonable attorney's fees to the prevailing party and assess court costs
against the nonprevailing party.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94)



§ 151.09  ENFORCEMENT BY COMMISSION.



   (A)   Filing of civil action.  The Commission may file a civil
action for appropriate relief if the Commission has reasonable cause to
believe that:



      (1)   A person has engaged in a pattern or practice of
resistance to the full enjoyment of any right granted by this chapter; or



      (2)   A person has been denied any right granted by this
chapter and that denial raises an issue of general public importance.



   An action under this section may be filed in a circuit or superior
court located in Howard County.



   (B)   Award of relief.  In an action filed under this section, the
court may do the following:



      (1)   Award preventive relief, including a permanent or
temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order against the person
responsible for a violation of this chapter as necessary to ensure the full
enjoyment of the rights granted by this chapter.



      (2)   Award other appropriate relief, including fines up to
the maximum allowed by I.C. 22-9.5-6-15, reasonable attorney fees, and court
costs.



   (C)   A person may intervene in an action filed under this section
if the person is:



      (1)   An aggrieved person to the discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   A party to a conciliation agreement concerning the
discriminatory housing practice.



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94; Am. Ord. 6128, passed 7-12-99)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter for which no other penalties are specified
shall be subject to a fine of not more than the maximum amount allowable
under I.C. 36-1-3-8(10).



(Ord. 5924, passed 7-25-94)



CHAPTER 152:  HOUSING



Section



General Provisions



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Responsibilities of owners and occupants



   152.03   Duties of trustees and agents



   152.04   Entry powers for inspection purposes



   152.05   Notice of violations; contents and service



   152.06   Hearing before Review Board



   152.07   Record of hearing



   152.08   Enforcement order; revocation of permits



   152.09   Appeal from decision of Board of Health



   152.10   Compliance with orders required



   152.11   Emergency action by Review Board



   152.12   Emergency suspension



Maintenance Requirements



   152.15   Compliance



   152.16   Safe and effective construction or installation



   152.17   Fitness for occupancy



   152.18   Discontinuance of facilities



   152.19   Health or safety hazards



   152.20   Rat harborage



   152.21   Foundation and frame



   152.22   Exterior openings



   152.23   Stairs and porches



   152.24   Bathroom floors



   152.25   Gutters and downspouts



   152.26   Plumbing fixtures



Minimum Space, Use, and Location Requirements



   152.30   Compliance



   152.31   Use of basement as dwelling unit



   152.32   Living space



   152.33   Sleeping space



   152.34   Access of sleeping rooms to bathrooms



   152.35   Method of computing floor area



   152.36   Ceiling height



Minimum Basic Equipment and Facilities



   152.40   Compliance



   152.41   Kitchen sink



   152.42   Toilet and bath facilities



   152.43   Shared toilet facilities



   152.44   Rubbish storage facilities



   152.45   Private sewage disposal systems



   152.46   Garbage disposal



   152.47   Exits



   152.48   Water supply



   152.49   Water heaters



   152.50   Hot and cold waterlines



Minimum Standards for Light, Ventilation, and Heating



   152.55   Compliance



   152.56   Windows



   152.57   Ventilation



   152.58   Bathroom lighting and ventilation



   152.59   Minimum heat



   152.60   Heating facilities



   152.61   Lighting halls and stairways



   152.62   Screens



   152.63   Rodent protection



   152.64   Electrical outlets



Rooming Houses and Hotels



   152.70   Compliance



   152.71   Application to hotels



   152.72   Plumbing facilities



   152.73   Bed linen and towels



   152.74   Sleeping area



   152.75   Sanitary condition and maintenance



   152.76   Violations



Unfit Dwellings



   152.80   Definition



   152.81   Condemnation and placarding



   152.82   Vacating condemned building



   152.83   Reuse of condemned structure



   152.84   Removal of placard



   152.85   Hearing before Review Board



 



   152.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see Ch. 150



   Fire prevention, see Ch. 94



   Garbage and trash, see §§ 95.05 through 95.09



   Mobile homes, see § 150.35



   Rental housing, see Ch. 159



   Sewers and sewage disposal, see Ch. 50



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 155



   Water, see Ch. 51



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate the condition and maintenance of structures,
see IC 36-7-2-2 through 36-7-2-5



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BASEMENT."  A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than two-thirds of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.



   "CELLAR."  A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, and having two-thirds of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   "DWELLING."  A building which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary
housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   "DWELLING UNITS."  Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling forming a single habitable unit when those units possess facilities
which are used, or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating, or any mobile home.



   "ENFORCEMENT OFFICER."  The Health Officer or the Building Inspector
or their duly authorized agents.



   "EXTERMINATION."  The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the enforcement officer.



   "GARBAGE."  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   "HABITABLE ROOM."  A room of enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or
communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.



   "HEALTH OFFICER."  The person employed by the County Board of Health
as its chief administrative officer.



   "INFESTATION."  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests.



   "MOBILE HOME."  Any vehicle which is construed to permit its being
used as a conveyance on the public streets and highways, and which is
designed and constructed to permit its occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping
place for one or more persons and which has no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, skirting, or other temporary support.



   "MULTIPLE DWELLING."  Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



   "OCCUPANT."  Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   "OPERATOR."  Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   "ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS." The temperature 15°F. above the
lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten year period.



   "OWNER."  Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, provided, that when- ever the
dwelling or dwelling unit is subject to conditional sale contract, lease with
option to purchase, or any other form of written contract under the terms of
which any person is entitled to a conveyance of legal title on payment of a
specified sum, the term owner shall mean the person who has such contractual
right, rather than the person holding legal title, or has charge, care or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as executor, executrix, trustees,
receiver, or guardian of the owner.



   "PLUMBING."  All gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes,
garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.



   "REVIEW BOARD."  The County Board of Health when the decision under
review involves the Health Officer acting in the capacity of Enforcement
Officer or the Board of Public Works and Safety when the decision under
review involves the Building Inspector acting in the capacity of the
Enforcement Officer.



   "ROOMING HOUSE."  Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling con-
taining one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owners or
operator to five or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   "ROOMING UNIT."  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   "RUBBISH."  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust.



   "SUPPLIED."  Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control
of the owner or operator.



   "TEMPORARY HOUSING."  Any tent, mobile home, or other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 days.



('75 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 3918, passed 10-9-67)



§ 152.02  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Every owner of a dwelling containing more than four dwelling
units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a
clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and
premises thereof which he occupies and controls.



   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of
all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in a rubbish
container.



   (D)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of
all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for
rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or in garbage storage containers.  It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling con- taining more than four dwelling units and
for all dwelling units located on premises where more than four dwelling
units share the same premises.  In all other cases it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.



   (E)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
responsible for hanging all screens whenever the same are required under this
chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where
the owner has agreed to supply such service.



   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit
shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other
pests therein or on the premises; every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provision whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably
insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in
any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two
or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public
parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (G)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing
fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible
for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.



('75 Code, § 13-2)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.03  DUTIES OF TRUSTEES AND AGENTS.



   Any person who has charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit as executor, executrix, trustees, receiver, or guardian of an owner
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if he
were the owner.  Any person acting as agent of the owner shall not be
construed to be an owner within the terms of this chapter, but shall be bound
to notify the owner, by means of a registered letter addressed to the owner
at his last known address, of any order or notice issued by the Enforcement
Officer relating to the property of the owner.



('75 Code, § 13-3)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.04  ENTRY POWERS FOR INSPECTION PURPOSES.



   The Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter all premises at all
reasonable hours in order to make all inspections or tests that are
reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 13-4)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to inspect structures, see IC 36-7-2-3



§ 152.05  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; CONTENTS AND SERVICE.



   (A)   Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter which affects the health of the occupants of any
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit or the health of the general public,
he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible
therefor, and to any known agent of such person, as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Such notice shall be in writing, include a statement of the
reasons why it is being issued and allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires.



   (C)   The notice required by this section shall be served on the
owner or his agent, or the occupant, on the premises in violation as the case
may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
on such owner or agent, or on such occupant, if a copy thereof is served on
him personally, or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last
known address, or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this
state.



('75 Code, § 13-5)



§ 152.06  HEARING BEFORE REVIEW BOARD.



   Any person affected by a notice issued by the Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 152.05 may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Review Board, provided that such person has filed in the
office of the Enforcement Officer, within ten days after service of that
notice, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor.  On receipt of such petition the
Enforcement Officer shall arrange a time and place for such hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. Such hearing shall be held as
soon as practicable after the receipt of request therefor.  At such hearing
the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause
why such notice should not be complied with.



('75 Code, § 13-6)



§ 152.07  RECORD OF HEARING.



   The proceedings at all hearings conducted pursuant to § 152.06,
including the findings and decision of the County Board of Health, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing, and entered as a matter of public record in
the office of the Board.  Such record shall also include a copy of every
notice or order issued in connection with the matter.



('75 Code, § 13-7)



§ 152.08  ENFORCEMENT ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   After the hearing required by § 152.06, the Review Board
shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice promulgated pursuant to§
152.05, depending on its findings as to whether the provisions of this
chapter have been complied with.



   (B)   If the Board shall sustain or modify such notice, it shall be
deemed to be an order.  Any notice served pursuant to this section shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Enforcement Officer within ten days after such
notice is served.



   (C)   After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any
permit required by this chapter, when such notice has been sustained by the
Board, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked.  Any such permit
which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if a petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Enforcement Officer within ten days after such notice has been served.



('75 Code, § 13-8)



§ 152.09  APPEAL FROM DECISION OF BOARD OF HEALTH.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Review Board may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction in the manner
provided by law.



('75 Code, § 13-9)



§ 152.10  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS REQUIRED.



   Subject to the appeal provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any person to disobey any order of the Enforcement Officer or Review
Board which is promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 13-10)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.11  EMERGENCY ACTION BY REVIEW BOARD.



   Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency exists with
reference to the provisions of this chapter which requires immediate action
in order to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing,
issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that
such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency, and such
order shall be effective immediately.  Any person to whom such an order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but on petition to the
Enforcement Officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, in the
manner provided in this chapter.  After the hearing, depending on the
finding as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with,
the Review Board shall continue the order in effect, modify it, or revoke it.



('75 Code, § 13-11)



§ 152.12  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION.



   The Enforcement Officer is empowered to suspend the operation of §§
152.32, 152.33, and 152.74 by special or general order in writing when he
deems that an emergency exists which in his discretion warrants such a
suspension.  However, no such general or special order shall be of a
duration longer than ten days.



('75 Code, § 13-12)



MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.15  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter.



('75 Code, § 13-24)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.16  SAFE AND EFFECTIVE CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION.



   Every facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under
this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satis- factory working
condition.



('75 Code, § 13-25)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.17  FITNESS FOR OCCUPANCY.



   No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy.



('75 Code, § 13-26)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.18  DISCONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES.



   No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service facility,
equipment, or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed from
or shut-off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him, except for temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual
repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies or
when discontinuance of service is approved by the Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-27)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.19  HEALTH OR SAFETY HAZARDS.



   No building, vehicle, structure, receptacle, yard, lot, premises, or
part thereof, shall be constructed, made, used, maintained, or operated in
any manner causing or producing any health or safety hazard.



('75 Code, § 13-28)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.20  RAT HARBORAGE.



   No dwelling, dwelling unit, structure, yard, lot, premises, or part
thereof shall be maintained as, or permitted to become a rat harborage or
maintained so as to be conducive, or permitted to become conducive to rat
harborage.



('75 Code, § 13-29)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Rodent protection, see § 152.63



§ 152.21  FOUNDATION AND FRAME.



   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be capable of affording
privacy and kept in good repair.



('75 Code, § 13-30)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.22  EXTERIOR OPENINGS.



   Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof, and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.



('75 Code, § 13-31)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.23  STAIRS AND PORCHES.



   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appur- tenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.



('75 Code, § 13-32)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.24  BATHROOM FLOORS.



   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface
shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.



('75 Code, § 13-33)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.25  GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS.



   Every roof of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be equipped with
adequate gutters and downspouts capable of carrying off normal rain- fall and
be connected to a storm sewer where available, and such gutters and
downspouts shall be kept in good repair and free from obstruction.



('75 Code, § 13-34)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.26  PLUMBING FIXTURES.



   Every plumbing fixture and water waste pipe shall be properly installed
and maintained in good sanitary working condition, and be free from defects,
leaks, and obstructions.



('75 Code, § 13-35)  Penalty, see § 152.99



MINIMUM SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.30  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with
the requirements of this subchapter.



('75 Code, § 13-47)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.31  USE OF BASEMENT AS DWELLING UNIT.



   No basement shall be used as a dwelling unit unless:



   (A)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of under-ground
and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.



   (B)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 152.56.



   (C)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at
least the minimum as required under § 152.57 except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Enforcement Officer.



   (D)   Every window which is below the grade of the ground adjoining
such window shall have a lightwell or area way extending at least 30 inches
out from the window the entire depth and width of the window.



('75 Code, § 13-48)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.32  LIVING SPACE.



   Every dwelling unit with the exception of a mobile home shall contain
at least 700 square feet of floor space.  This amount of space may not be
occupied by more than six occupants.  At least 100 square feet of additional
floor space must be added for each additional occupant.



('75 Code, § 13-49)  (Ord. 3848, passed 10-25-65)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.33  SLEEPING SPACE.



   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each
occupant thereof over 12 years of age and at least 30 square feet for each
occupant thereof under 12 years of age.



('75 Code, § 13-50)  (Ord. 3848, passed 10-25-65)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.34  ACCESS OF SLEEPING ROOMS TO BATHROOMS.



   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can
be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall room
arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going
through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.



('75 Code, § 13-51)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.35  METHOD OF COMPUTING FLOOR AREA.



   The floor area of any room where the ceiling height is less than five
feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total
floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof under the provisions of this subchapter.



('75 Code, § 13-52)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.36  CEILING HEIGHT.



   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room other than
in a mobile home shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet.  The
minimum ceiling height in a mobile home shall be six feet.



('75 Code, § 13-53)  Penalty, see § 152.99



MINIMUM BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES



§ 152.40  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating therein, which does not comply with the provisions of this subchapter.



('75 Code, § 13-65)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.41  KITCHEN SINK.



   Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by
either the State Board of Health, the Enforcement Officer, or Building
Commissioner.



('75 Code, § 13-66)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.42  TOILET AND BATH FACILITIES.



   Every dwelling unit except as otherwise permitted in this subchapter
shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within that room which
is equipped with a fresh water closet and a lavatory basin, bathtub, or
shower, in good working condition and properly connected to water and sewer
systems approved by either the State Board of Health, the Enforcement
Officer, or the Building Commissioner.



('75 Code, § 13-67)  (Ord. 3848, passed 10-25-65)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.43  SHARED TOILET FACILITIES.



   The occupants of two or more dwelling units, except mobile homes, but
not to exceed ten persons in total number, may share a single flush water
closet, a single lavatory basin, and a single bathtub or shower.



('75 Code, § 13-68)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.44  RUBBISH STORAGE FACILITIES.



   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities.



('75 Code, § 13-69)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Use of containers required, see § 95.07



§ 152.45  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.



   (A)   The provisions of §§ 152.41 through 152.43 shall not apply
in cases where sewer and water facilities are not available within a distance
of 250 feet of the lot on which the dwelling is located.



   (B)   Where sewer facilities are not available within 250 feet of
the lot on which such a dwelling unit is located, septic tanks or private
sewage disposal systems are required.  They shall be of a sanitary type
construction and operate in conformity with the stan- dards of the State
Board of Health.



('75 Code, § 13-70)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Sewers and sewage disposal, see Ch. 50



§ 152.46  GARBAGE DISPOSAL.



   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facili- ties
or garbage storage containers.



('75 Code, § 13-71)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and trash, see §§ 95.07 through 95.09



§ 152.47  EXITS.



   Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by state law.



('75 Code, § 13-72)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.48  WATER SUPPLY.



   Every dwelling unit shall have a water supply available on the lot on
which such dwelling is located.  Such water supply shall be subject to the
approval of the Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-73)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Water, see Ch. 51



§ 152.49  WATER HEATERS.



   (A)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities
which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working
condition, are properly connected with the hot waterlines required under the
provisions of § 152.84 and are capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required kitchen sink, lavatory, basin, bath- tub, or shower at a temperature
of not less than 120°F.



   (B)   Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of
meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit's
required heating facilities are not in operation.



('75 Code, § 13-74)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.50  HOT AND COLD WATERLINES.



   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of this subchapter shall be properly connected with both
hot and cold waterlines.



('75 Code, § 13-131)  Penalty, see § 152.99



MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING



§ 152.55  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not comply with the requirements of this sub- chapter.



('75 Code, § 13-86)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.56  WINDOWS.



   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors.  The minimum total glass area for every habitable
room shall be 7% of the floor area of such room.



('75 Code, § 13-87)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.57  VENTILATION.



   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room.  The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in this section except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-88)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.58  BATHROOM LIGHTING AND VENTILATION.



   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light
and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in this
subchapter, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately
ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a
ventilation system approved by the Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-89)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.59  MINIMUM HEAT.



   Except as may be otherwise provided by the Federal Energy
Administration, every owner or operator of a dwelling containing three or
more dwelling units, in which all habitable rooms, including bathrooms, are
heated by facilities maintained or operated by the owner or operator of the
dwelling, shall maintain such rooms at a minimum dry bulb temperature of
68°F., at a distance of three feet above the floor level whenever the
outside dry bulb temperature is below 55°F.



('75 Code, § 13-90)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.60  HEATING FACILITIES.



   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 70°F., at a distance of three feet above floor
level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions.



('75 Code, § 13-9l)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.61  LIGHTING HALLS AND STAIRWAYS.



   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted in conformity with the rules of the Administrative
Building Council.



('75 Code, § 13-92)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.62  SCREENS.



   (A)   During that portion of each year when the Enforcement Officer
deems it necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other
insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space
shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device, and every window or
other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens.



   (B)   Such screens are not required during such period in rooms
deemed by the Enforcement Officer to be located high enough in the upper
stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and in rooms located in
areas which are deemed by him to have so few insects as to render screens
unnecessary.



('75 Code, § 13-93)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.63  RODENT PROTECTION.



   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an
entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as
will effectively prevent their entrance.



('75 Code, § 13-94)  Penalty, see § 152.99



Cross-reference:



   Rat harborage, see § 152.20



§ 152.64  ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.



   (A)   Where there is electric service available from power lines
which are not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habit-able room
of such dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor-or wall-type
electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electric light fixture, and every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least
one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture.



   (B)   Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed,
shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.



('75 Code, § 13-95)  (Ord. 3848, passed 10-25-65)  Penalty, see § 152.99



ROOMING HOUSES AND HOTELS



§ 152.70  COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter except the provisions of §§
152.40 through 152.49 and 152.02.



('75 Code, § 13-107)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.71  APPLICATION TO HOTELS.



   Every provision of this subchapter which applies to rooming houses
shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may
be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the regulations of
any state board or agency.



('75 Code, § 13-108)



§ 152.72  PLUMBING FACILITIES.



   At least one flushable water closet, one lavatory basin, and bathtub,
or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Enforcement Officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each
ten persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
the members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of those
facilities.  In a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush
urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the required number
of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling
as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all
persons sharing such facilities.  Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot water at all times.  No such facilities shall be
located in a basement except by written approval of the Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-109)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.73  BED LINEN AND TOWELS.



   The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and
towels there at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to
any occupant.  The operator shall be respon- sible for the maintenance of
all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.  ('75 Code, §
13-110)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.74  SLEEPING AREA.



   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 60 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 40 square feet of
floor space for each occupant thereof over 12 years of age and at least 30
square feet for each occupant therein under 12 years of age, as computed in
accordance with § 152.36.



('75 Code, § 13-111)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.75  SANITARY CONDITION AND MAINTENANCE.



   The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance
of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house.  He shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the
entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator.



('75 Code, § 13-112)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.76  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever on inspection of any rooming house, the Enforcement
Officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of
any applicable provision of this chapter, the Enforcement Officer shall give
notice in writing that unless such conditions or practices are corrected
within a reasonable period, to be determined by the Enforcement Officer, the
operation of such premises as such rooming house shall be discontinued, and,
if such rooming house operation is licensed by any governmental agency, a
recommendation that such license be revoked, for the protection of public
health, shall be given to such licensing governmental body or agency by the
Enforcement Officer.  At the end of such period the Enforcement Officer
shall reinspect such rooming house, and if he finds that such conditions or
practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the
operator that such operation shall cease, and, if such rooming house
operation is licensed by any governmental agency, the Enforcement Officer
shall recommend the immediate revocation of such license by such issuing
agency.



   (B)   On receipt of such notice from the Enforcement Officer, the
operator shall immediately cease operating of the rooming house, and no
person shall occupy, for sleeping or living purposes, any rooming unit
therein.



   (C)   Any person who has received notice from the Enforcement
Officer to cease operation of a rooming house, unless existing conditions or
practices at the rooming house are corrected, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Review Board under the procedure
provided by §§ 152.02 through 152.12.  If no petition for such hearing is
filed within ten days following the day on which such operation was ordered
discontinued, such order requiring correction of conditions or practices at
such rooming house and cessation of operations as a rooming house shall be
deemed to have become the final order of the Board ordering such cessation of
operations.



('75 Code, § 13-113)  Penalty, see § 152.99



UNFIT DWELLINGS



§ 152.80  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter "DWELLING" or "DWELLING UNIT" shall
mean any of the following defects which shall be considered unfit for human
habitation:



      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insani-
tary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health of the occupants or of the public;



      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitary
facilities adequate to protect the health of the occupants or of the public;
or



      (3)   One which because of its general condition or location
is insanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health of occupants or the public.



('75 Code, § 13-125)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.81  CONDEMNATION AND PLACARDING.



   The Enforcement Officer shall condemn and placard as such any dwellings
or dwelling units which are unfit for human habitation.



('75 Code, § 13-126)



§ 152.82  VACATING CONDEMNED BUILDING.



   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation,
and so designated and placarded by the Enforcement Officer shall be vacated
within 60 days as ordered by him.



('75 Code, § 13-127)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.83  REUSE OF CONDEMNED STRUCTURE.



   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until
written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the
Enforcement Officer.



('75 Code, § 13-128)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.84  REMOVAL OF PLACARD.



   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall remove a placard from a
condemned dwelling or dwelling unit when the defects on which the
condemnation was based have been eliminated.



   (B)   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling
or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
placarded as such, except as provided in this section.



('75 Code, § 13-129)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.85  HEARING BEFORE REVIEW BOARD.



   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Review
Board in the manner set forth in §§ 152.02 through 152.12.



('75 Code, § 13-130)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $1,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 153:  HISTORIC PRESERVATION



Section



   153.01   Definitions; establishment of Kokomo Historic Review Board



   153.02   Powers and duties



   153.03   Approval by Council required



   153.04   Surveying and mapping



   153.05   Relationship to zoning districts



   153.06   Certificate of appropriateness



   153.07   Application



   153.08   Action on application



   153.09   Development standards



      Appendix:  Statement of intent



   153.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Historic sites, T.S.O. V



Statutory reference:



   General powers regarding planning and development, see IC 36-7-2-l et
seq.



§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS; ESTABLISHMENT OF KOKOMO HISTORIC REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      (1)   "GOVERNING BODY."  The Common Council of the City of
Kokomo, Indiana.



      (2)   "GOVERNMENTAL UNIT."  The City of Kokomo, Indiana.



   (B)   Board of Review established.



      (1)   There is hereby established the Historic Review Board of
the city.  The Board of Review shall consist of not less than three voting
members.  The voting members shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city,
subject to the approval of the Common Council.  Voting members shall serve
for a term of three years; however, the initial terms of members shall be for
one year, two years, and three years in order for the terms to be
staggered.  A vacancy shall be filled for the duration of the term of the
member who is being replaced.  Voting members shall be residents of the city
who are interested in the preservation and development of historic areas.



      (2)   The Mayor may, with the approval of the Common Council,
appoint such advisory members as the Common Council deems appropriate.



      (3)   The Historic Review Board shall act without the services
of an administrator.



      (4)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation
but may be paid for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their
duty.



      (5)   The Board shall elect from its membership a Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson, and a Secretary who shall serve for one year and who may be
re-elected.  The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
not inconsistent with this chapter.  The rules must include the time and
place of regular meetings and a procedure for the calling of special
meetings.  All meetings of the board must be open to the public and a public
record shall be kept of the Board's resolutions, proceedings, and actions.



      (6)   The Board shall hold regular meetings at least monthly,
except when it has no business pending whatsoever.  The Board shall submit
annually to the Common Council, a written report of its activities for the
prior year.  Such reports shall be made on or before January 31 of each year.



      (7)   Each official of the city who has responsibility for
building inspection, building permits, planning or zoning shall provide such
technical, administrative, and clerical assistance as may be requested by the
Board.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80; Am. Ord. 5154, passed 1-25-82)



§ 153.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Board shall be concerned with those elements of
development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and preservation that affect
visual quality in a Historic District.  The Board may not consider details
of design, interior arrangements, or building features, if those details,
arrangements, or features, are not subject to public view.  It is intended
that the Board not make any requirement except for the purpose of preventing
development, alteration, or demolition in the Historic District obviously
incongruous with the Historic District.



   (B)   The Board shall conduct a survey to identify historic
buildings, structures, and places located within the city.  However, neither
the survey nor any other action of the Board shall affect any property not
located within the city limits.



   (C)   Based on its survey, at the request of, or with the consent
of, the individual property owners affected, from time to time, the Board
shall submit to the Common Council a map describing the boundaries of a
historic district or historic districts.  A district may be limited to the
boundaries of a property containing a single building, structure, or site.



   (D)   The Board of Review shall also classify and designate on the
map all buildings and structures within each Historic District described on
the map.  Such buildings and structures shall be divided into two classes:



      (1)   Historic.  Those buildings classified as historic must
possess identified historic or architectural merit of a degree warranting
their preservation.



         (a)   They may be further classified as:



            1.   Exceptional.



            2.   Excellent.



            3.   Notable.



            4.   Of value as part of the scene.



         (b)   In lieu of the further classifications set forth
in divisions (a) (l) through (a) (4), the Board may devise its own system of
further classification of historic buildings.



      (2)   Nonhistoric.  Those buildings and structures not
classified on the map as historic.



   (E)   (1)   Any individual who wishes to apply for historic
district designation for an individual building or site owned by the
individual shall apply to the Historic Review Board for the designation and
the Board shall investigate such requests, applying the criteria set out in
this chapter.



      (2)   Based on such a review the Board will periodically
submit to the Common Council a list of those individual properties that have
been approved for historic district designation, together with the signed
application of the individual property owner requesting historic district
designation.  (See application form for statement of intent in Appendix).



      (3)   It is the intent of this section that historic districts
be limited to the boundaries of individual properties whose owners have
requested or consented to historic designation.



   (F)   (l)  On application of any individual requesting historic
district designation, the Board shall explain to him all aspects of purpose,
control, and intent of the Board.  The Board shall supply applicant with a
copy of applicable development standards, guide-lines, and other regulations
that affect him for his study.



      (2)   After studying the above, the applicant shall sign a
form, (See Appendix), that he understands his election of designation.



      (3)   The Board on the same form shall confirm that they have
supplied the applicant with all current information that is applicable to him.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80; Am. Ord. 5154, passed l-25-82)



§ 153.03  APPROVAL BY COUNCIL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No Historical District may be established nor any building
classifications effective, until the map setting forth the Historic District
boundaries and building classifications are submitted to, and approved in an
ordinance by, the Common Council.



   (B)   Such approval by ordinance shall be subject to repeal on
application by the property owner affected.  Such request for repeal shall
be first submitted to the Historic Review Board.  The Board shall submit the
request for repeal to the Common Council with its recommendations.



   (C)   It at anytime any part of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with existing state statute regarding historic districts this
chapter will become null and void.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80; Am. Ord. 5154, passed l-25-82)



§ 153.04  SURVEYING AND MAPPING.



   The Board may conduct such surveys, and draw and submit for approval of
the governing body such maps from time to time as it deems appropriate.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80)



§ 153.05  RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING DISTRICTS.



   The Historic District regulation as provided in this chapter is
intended to preserve and protect the historic architecturally worthy
buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, squares, and
neighborhoods of the Historic Districts.  In all zoning districts lying
within the boundaries of the Historic District the regulations for both the
zoning district and the Historic District shall apply. Whenever there is a
conflict between the requirements of the zoning district and the requirements
of the Historic District, the more restrictive shall apply.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80)



Cross-reference:



   Zoning, see Ch. 157



§ 153.06  CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Historic Review Board
for the city shall be required before a permit is issued for, or alterations
begin, on any of the following:



   (A)   Within all areas of the Historic District:



      (1)   Demolition of a historic building;



      (2)   Moving a historic building;



      (3)   Conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of
existing buildings classified as historic by additions, reconstruc- tion,
alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change;



      (4)   Any new construction of a principal building or
accessory building or structure subject to view from a public street; and



   (B)   Within a primary area:



      (1)   Change existing walls and fences for construction of new
walls and fences, if along public streets rights-of-way; or



   (2)   Conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of existing
nonhistoric buildings by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or
maintenance involving exterior color change, if subject to view from a public
street.



   (C)   Guidelines.



      (1)   Guidelines shall be established to assure that
development standards and certificates of appropriateness are applied
equitably to all historical districts.



      (2)   Initial guidelines, and any future major change to them
shall be approved by the Common Council.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80; Am. Ord. 5154, passed l-25-82)



§ 153.07  APPLICATION.



   Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made in the
office of the Board on forms provided therefore, obtainable at the office. 
Detailed drawings, plans, or specifications shall not be required but each
application should be accompanied by such sketches, drawings, photographs,
descriptions, or other information showing the proposed exterior alterations,
additions, changes or new construction as are reasonable for the Historic
Review Board to make a decision.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80)



§ 153.08  ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   The Historic Review Board shall act on the application within 30 days
after the filing thereof; otherwise, the application shall be deemed to be
approved and a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued.  Nothing in
this chapter shall prohibit an extension of time when mutual agreement has
been made and the Historic Review Board may advise the applicant and make
recommendations in regards to the certificate of appropriateness.  If the
Historic Review Board approves the application, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued.  If the certificate of appropriateness is
issued, the applicant may then proceed with application for a building permit
or a demolition permit if the same is otherwise required, and otherwise,
alteration may proceed.  If the Historic Review Board disapproves the
application, a certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued.  The
Historic Review Board shall state its reasons in writing, and shall advise
the applicant and alteration may not proceed.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80)



§ 153.09  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Preservation of historic buildings within all areas in
Historic District.  A building or structure, classified as historic, or any
part thereof, or any appurtenance related thereto including but not limited
to stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, and signs shall only
be moved, reconstructed, altered or maintained, in a manner that will
preserve the historical and architectural character of the building,
structure, or appurtenance thereto.



   (B)   Demolition of historic building.  Whenever a property owner
shows that a building classified as historic is incapable of earning an
economical return on its value, as appraised by a qualified real estate
appraiser, and the Historic Review Board fails to issue the certificate of
appropriateness, such building may be demolished. However, before a
demolition permit is issued or demolition proceeds, notice or proposed
demolition shall be given for a period fixed by the Board based on the
Board's classification on the approved map but not less than 60 days nor more
than one year.  Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or
structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the
street.  In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
local circulation at least three times prior to demolition, the final notice
of which shall be not less than 15 days prior to the date of the permit, and
the first notice of which shall be published no more than 15 days after the
application of a permit to demolish is filed.  The purpose of this chapter
is to preserve historic buildings which are important to the education,
culture, tradition, and the economic values of the governmental unit, and to
afford the governmental unit, interested persons, historical societies, or
organizations, the opportunity to acquire or arrange for the preservation of
such buildings.  The Historic Review Board may at any time during such stay
approve a certificate of appropriate- ness in which event a permit will be
issued without further delay and demolition may proceed.



Cross-reference:



   Demolition of buildings, see §§ 150.25 through 150.29



   (C)   Relocation of historic buildings.  A historic building shall
not be relocated on another site unless it is shown that the preservation on
its existing site is not consistent with the purpose of division (A).



   (D)   Protective maintenance of historic buildings.  Historic
buildings shall be maintained to meet the applicable requirements established
pursuant to statute for buildings generally.



   (E)   Nonhistoric buildings, primary area.  The construction of a
new building or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major
maintenance, or repair involving a color change conspicuously affecting the
external appearance of any existing nonhistoric building, structure, or
appurtenance thereof, within the primary area shall be generally of such
design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture,
color, and location on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in
the historic district and particularly with buildings designated as historic
and with squares and places to which it is visually related.



   (F)   Visual Compatibility Factors.  Within the primary area, new
construction and existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof
which are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or changed in
color shall be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which they are visually related generally in terms of the following factors.



      (1)   Height.  The height of proposed buildings shall be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.



      (2)   Proportion of buildings front facade.  The relationship
of the width of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be
visually compatible to buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually
related.



      (3)   Proportion of openings within the facility. Relationship
of width of the windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which the building
is visually related.



      (4)   Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades.  The
relationship of solids to voids in the front facades of a building shall be
visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.



      (5)   Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets.  The
relationship of a building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings shall be visually compatible to the buildings, squares, and places
to which it is visually related.



      (6)   Rhythm of entrance and porch projection.  The
relationship of entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of the building
shall be visually compatible to the buildings, squares, and places to which
it is visually related.



      (7)   Relationship of materials, texture, and color.  The
relationship of materials, texture, and color of the facade of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominate material used in the
buildings to which it is visually related.



      (8)   Roof shapes.  The roof shape of a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related.



      (9)   Walls of continuity.  Appurtenances of a building such
as walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, and building
facades, shall, if necessary, form cohesive walls of enclosure along the
street, to ensure visually compatibility of the building, the buildings,
squares, and places to which it is visually related.



      (10)   Scale of a building.  The size of a building, the
building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door
openings, porches, and balconies shall be visually compatible with the
buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually related.



      (11)   Directional expression of front elevation.  A building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings, squares, and places to which
it is visually related in its directional character, whether this be vertical
character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character.



   (G)   As the art and science of historic preservation change,
development standards, visual compatibility factors, and guidelines are also
subject to change.



(Ord. 4924, passed 3-10-80; Am. Ord. 5154, passed l-25-82)  Penalty, see §
153.99



Cross-reference:



   Buildings, see Ch. 150



   Housing, see Ch. 152



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be fined not more than $l,000.  A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.



APPENDIX:  STATEMENT OF INTENT



   STATEMENT OF INTENT



   HISTORICAL DESIGNATION



   I/WE as owners of property located at                      
      , Kokomo, Indiana hereby request that such property be designated as
a Historical District/Home/Structure/Area/Site.



   I/WE understand the intent, scope, and application of development
standards, guidelines, and other regulations pertaining to this designation
as are applied under the direction of the Kokomo Historical Review Board. 
I/WE understand that as the art and science of historic preservation change,
so these standards, guidelines, and regulations are also subject to change.



   I/WE agree to inform any future potential purchaser of this property of
its designation, and what his options are relating to said property.  This
we will do prior to sale of said property.



Property owner signature (s)           Date signed



                                  .             .



                                  .             .



                                  .             .



   Historical Review Board Action:



   The Historical Review Board has evaluated this property located at



                            , Kokomo, Indiana.  It DOES/DOES
NOT meet our established criteria for historical designation.  This property
WILL/WILL NOT be submitted to the Kokomo Common Council for designation as a
Historical District/Home/Structure/Area/Site.



   We, the board, have explained to the owner the complete purpose, goals,
responsibilities and powers of the Board.  He (the owner) understands his
and our rights under this designation and his options to remove himself from
this designation.



   Review Board Comments:                               
             



Signature H.R.B. President            Date Signed



CHAPTER 154:  PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT



Section



Department of Redevelopment



   154.01   Established



Plan Commission



   154.05   Established; composition



   154.06   Citizen members



   154.07   Certification of members



   154.08   Terms of members



   154.09   Vacancies among citizen members



   154.10   Vacancies among Council or Park Commission membership



   154.11   Regular meetings



   154.12   Special meetings



   154.13   Quorum



   154.14   Officers



   154.15   Secretary and employees



   154.16   Powers and duties



   154.17   Fees



Development Commission



   154.25   Terms of Commissioners



   154.26   Composition



   154.27   Bylaws and rules



   154.28   Quorum; majority vote required



   154.29   Meetings



   154.30   Oath of Commissioners



   154.31   Officers



Tax Abatement



   154.40   Procedural requirements



   154.41   Administrative procedures as to application



Business Assistance Programs



   154.50   Definitions



   154.51   Forgivable Marketing Loan Program



   154.52   Working Capital Loan Program



   154.53   Green Practice Incentive Grant



   154.54   Downtown Facade Improvement Loan



   154.55   One-Step Up Grant Program



   154.56   Sunset Provision



Cross-reference:



   Department of Economic Development, see § 30.19



   Department of Planning, Development, and Engineering Services, see §
30.15



Statutory reference:



   Development generally, see IC 36-7-12-1 et seq.



   Powers concerning planning and development, see IC 36-7-2-1 et seq.



   Tax abatement for rehabilitation or redevelopment, see IC 6-1.1-12.1-1
- 6-1.1-12.1-5



DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT



§ 154.01  ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Establishment. The Common Council of the city, pursuant to the
provisions of IC 36-7-14-1 et seq., and as that statute may be amended in the
future, hereby establishes a Department of Redevelopment of the city. The
Department shall be controlled by a board of five members. Said board shall
be known as the Kokomo Redevelopment Commission. All Commission members shall
be at least 18 years of age and shall be a resident of the city.



   (B)   Powers and duties.  Said commission shall have the powers and
duties set out in IC 36-7-14-1 et seq., and IC 36-7-25-1 et seq.



   (C)   Taxing.  All of the territory within the corporate boundaries
of the city will be a taxing district to be known as the Kokomo Redevelopment
District for the purpose of levying and collecting special benefit taxes for
redevelopment and economic development purposes as provided in IC 36-7-14-1
et seq.  The Common Council finds and determines that all of the taxable
property within this special taxing district will be considered to be
benefitted by the redevelopment projects and economic development projects
carried out.



   (D)   Appointment.  As provided in IC 36-7-14-6.1, the Mayor shall
appoint three of the five members of the Kokomo Redevelopment Commission. 
Two members shall be appointed by the Common Council.



   (E)   Terms of office.  The term of office of appointees to the
Kokomo Redevelopment Commission shall commence on the first day of January
after the appointment is made and until a successor is appointed and has
qualified.



(Ord. 6142, passed 10-25-99)



PLAN COMMISSION



§ 154.05  ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.



   Except as may be otherwise provided pursuant to the provisions of state
law, the Plan Commission shall be composed of nine members who are selected
as follows:



   (A)   One member selected by the Common Council from among its
membership.



   (B)   One member selected by the Board of Park Commissioners from
among its membership.



   (C)   One member of the Board of Public Works and Safety, or its
designated representative.



   (D)   The City Civil Engineer.



   (E)   Five citizen members appointed by the Mayor, with not more
than three of them being members of the same political party.



('75 Code, § 18-16)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of Plan Commission, see IC 36-7-4-201 et seq.



§ 154.06  CITIZEN MEMBERS.



   The citizen members of the Plan Commission shall be qualified by
knowledge and experience in matters pertaining to the development of the
city, shall hold no other office in the city government, and shall be
residents of the city.



('75 Code, § 18-17)



§ 154.07  CERTIFICATION OF MEMBERS.



   The Clerk of the Common Council and the secretary of the Board of Park
Commissioners shall certify members appointed to the Plan Commission by their
respective bodies.  The certificates shall be sent to and become a part of
the records of the Plan Commission.  The Mayor shall make similar
certification for the appointment of citizen members.



('75 Code, § 18-18)



§ 154.08  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The term of the members of the Plan Commission who are
appointed by the Board of Park Commissioners or the Common Council shall be
coextensive with the term of office to which such member has been elected or
appointed unless the Common Council or the Board of Park Commissioners on its
first regular meeting of each year appoints another to serve as its
representative.



   (B)   The citizen members of the Plan Commission shall be appointed
for a period of four years.



('75 Code, § 18-l9)



Statutory reference:



   Terms of members, see IC 36-7-4-217 and 36-7-4-218



§ 154.09  VACANCIES AMONG CITIZEN MEMBERS.



   If a vacancy occurs by resignation or otherwise, among the citi- zen
members of the Plan Commission, the Mayor shall appoint a member for the
unexpired term.



('75 Code, § 18-20)



Statutory reference:



   Vacancies, see IC 36-7-4-220



§ 154.10  VACANCIES AMONG COUNCIL OR PARK COMMISSION MEMBERSHIP.



   The Common Council or Board of Park Commissioners shall fill any
vacancy occurring in its respective membership on the Plan Commission.



('75 Code, § 18-21)



Statutory reference:



   Vacancies, see IC 36-7-4-220



§ 154.11  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Plan Commission shall fix the time for holding regular meetings,
but it shall meet at least once in the months of January, April, July, and
October.



('75 Code, § 18-22)



Statutory reference:



   Public meetings, see IC 36-7-4-306



§ 154.12  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Plan Commission may be called by its
president or by two members on written request to its secretary. The
secretary shall send to all the members, at least three days in advance of a
special meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place of the meeting.



   (B)   Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the
time of the special meeting has been fixed in a regular meeting, or if all
members are present at the special meeting.



('75 Code, § 18-23)



Statutory reference:



   Special meetings, see IC 36-7-4-307



§ 154.13  QUORUM.



   A majority of members qualified to vote, shall constitute a quorum of
the Plan Commission.  No action of the Commission is official, however,
unless authorized by a majority of the Commission at a regular or properly
called special meeting.



('75 Code, § 18-24)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum, see IC 36-7-4-301



§ 154.14  OFFICERS.



   At its first regular meeting in each year the Plan Commission shall
elect from its members a president and vice-president.  The vice- president
shall have authority to act as president of the Commission during the absence
or disability of the president.



('75 Code, § 18-25)



Statutory reference:



   Election of president and vice-president, see IC 36-7-4-303



§ 154.15  SECRETARY AND EMPLOYEES.



   The Plan Commission may appoint and prescribe the duties and fix the
compensation of a secretary, and such employees as are necessary for the
discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Commis- sion.  All such
compensation, however, shall be in conformity to and in compliance with
salaries and compensation theretofore fixed by the Common Council.



('75 Code, § 18-26)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment of secretary, see IC 36-7-4-304



§ 154.16  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plan Commission shall have the powers and duties provided by state
law.



('75 Code, § 18-27)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties of Commission, see IC 36-7-4-401 et seq.



§ 154.17  FEES.



   The following schedule of fees and charges is authorized and
established for the Plan Commission of the city:



 

Item
 
Type
 
Fee




A.
 
Permits
 


1
 
Improvement Location Permit1
 
$1 per $1,000 estimated or contract cost, with a minimum fee of $15 and a
maximum fee of $1,000


2
 
Certificate of Occupancy Inspection Fee2
 
$50 for signs or one- or two-family residences5

$75 for non-residential structures6


3
 
“After the Fact” Permit Surcharge3
 
$10 per $1,000 estimated cost


B.
 
Applications
 


1
 
Plan Commission Applications
 


a.
 
Zoning Ordinance Amendment
 
$600


b.
 
Major Subdivision Approval:
 


 
(1)   Primary Approval
 
$500 plus $10 per lot


 
(2)   Final Approval
 
$250 plus $10 per lot


c.
 
Minor Subdivision Approval
 
$350 plus $10 per lot


d.
 
Development Plan Approval
 
$450


e.
 
Planned Development Approval4
 
$600 plus $25 per acre


f.
 
Additional Fees:
 


 
(1)   Continuances where approval does not require Advisory Technical
Committee review7
 
$50


 
(2)   Continuances where approval does require Advisory Technical
Committee review7
 
$100


2
 
Board of Zoning Appeals Applications
 


a.
 
Development Standard Variance
 
$250 plus $50 for each additional variance request


b.
 
Administrative Appeal
 
$250


c.
 
Questionable Land Use Appeal
 
$250


d.
 
Special Exception
 
$250 plus $25 per acre


f.
 
Additional Fees:  Continuances7
 
$50


C.
 
Maps and Books
 


1
 
Diazo Print of Map or Aerial Photograph, per sheet
 
$10


2
 
Ordinance Book
 
$15


3
 
Comprehensive Plan Book
 
$10




 



Footnotes



(Ord. 5254, passed l-24-83; Am. Ord. 6229, passed 5-21-02; Am. Ord. 6388,
passed 8-29-05; Am. Ord. 6464, passed 4-9-07)



DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 154.25  TERMS OF COMMISSIONERS.



   (A)   The terms of the members of the Development Commission shall
be as follows:



      (1)   Member appointed by the Mayor, three years.



      (2)   Member appointed by the Common Council, two years.



      (3)   Member appointed by the Board of County Commissioners,
three years.



   (B)   On the expiration of said initial terms all subsequent
appointments shall be for a term as set forth in state law.



('75 Code, § 18-46)



Cross-reference:



   Economic Development Target Areas, see T.S.O. VII



Statutory reference:



   Term of office, see IC 36-7-12-5



§ 154.26  COMPOSITION.



   The Development Commission shall be composed of three members, one of
which is appointed by the Mayor, one of which is appointed by the Common
Council, and one of which is appointed by the Board of County Commissioners.



('75 Code, § 18-47)



Statutory reference:



   Composition of Commission, see IC 36-7-12-5



§ 154.27  BYLAWS AND RULES.



   The Development Commission is authorized to adopt such bylaws, rules,
and regulations as it may deem necessary.



('75 Code, § 18-48)



Statutory reference:



   Bylaws and rules, see IC 36-7-12-13



§ 154.28  QUORUM; MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED.



   A majority of the Development Commission shall constitute a quorum, and
the concurrence of a majority of the Commission at a meeting or a unanimous
consent signed by each Commissioner shall be sufficient to authorize any
action.



('75 Code, § 18-49)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum; majority vote required, see IC 36-7-12-13



§ 154.29  MEETINGS.



   Regular or special meetings of the Development Commission shall be held
at such times as it may determine and on such notice as it may fix, either by
resolution or in accordance with the provisions of its bylaws, rules, or
regulations.



('75 Code, § 18-50)



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see IC 36-7-12-13



§ 154.30  OATH OF COMMISSIONERS.



   Each member of the Development Commission before entering on his duties
shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the usual form, to be indorsed
on his certificate of appointment.



('75 Code, § 18-51)



Statutory reference:



   Oath, see IC 36-7-12-11



§ 154.31  OFFICERS.



   The Development Commission shall elect one of its members as president,
one as vice-president, and one as secretary; each of such officers shall
serve from the date of his election until January 31 next following his
election and until his successor is elected and qualified.



('75 Code, § 18-52)



Statutory reference:



   Officers, see IC 36-7-12-12



TAX ABATEMENT



§ 154.40  PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.



   An owner of property located within the city shall petition the Common
Council for tax abatement consideration by preparing an application in
writing, such application to include the following information:



   (A)   The name or names and addresses of the property owners and any
other persons intending to lease or having an option to buy such property;



   (B)   The legal description and commonly known address of the
property for which tax abatement is being petitioned;



   (C)   A map designating the area in question for consideration;



   (D)   The assessed value of the improvement before rehabilitation or
redevelopment and the estimated value after improvement together with a
description of the intended improvement;



   (E)   Pictures of the area in question taken at least two weeks
within the filing of the petition;



   (F)   A statement verifying that on the area in question conditions
exist which cannot be corrected by regulatory process, or by the ordinary
operations of private enterprise, without resorting to tax abatement; or



   (G)   That the development of the area in question is consistent
with the Economic Development Plan as presented by the Department of
Development to the Common Council which accepted and approved such plan.



   (H)   A statement describing how the public health and welfare will
be benefitted by this particular rehabilitation or redevelopment;



   (I)   A statement verifying that the area in question has become
undesirable for or impossible for normal development, has experienced a
cessation of growth, deterioration of improvements or character of occupancy,
age, obsolescence, sub-standard buildings, and other factors which have
impaired values and prevent a normal development of the property or property
use;



   (J)   A statement estimating the number of new permanent full-time
and part-time jobs which will be created by this project or retained as a
result of this project;



   (K)   A statement that the application is made in good faith and
that the information presented is accurate and represents the conditions that
exists or are anticipated at the time of filing the application.



(Ord. 5036, passed 1-26-81)



§ 154.41  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AS TO APPLICATION.



   (A)   All applications shall be filed with the Department of
Development, signed by the applicant, and shall contain all applicable
information required by the application, together with a filing fee as
follows:



   $50 for construction or rehabilitation of projects where the
construction or rehabilitation cost is $25,000 or less;



   $150 for projects where the construction or rehabilitation cost is more
than $25,000 but not more than $75,000;



   $300 for projects where the construction or rehabilitation cost is more
than $75,000 but not more than $500,000;



   $500 for projects where the construction or rehabilitation cost is more
than $500,000.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for the designation of an urban
development area, the Department of Development shall review the application
and the proposed rehabilitation or redevelopment projects with regards to:



      (1)   Compliance with statutory criteria.



      (2)   Furtherance of city developmental objective.



      (3)   Creation of employment opportunities.



      (4)   Effective utilization of by-passed or underutilized land.



      (5)   Rehabilitation or replacement of obsolete or
deteriorated structures.



      (6)   Preservation of historic structures.



      (7)   Expansion of property tax base.



      (8)   Efficient utilization and conservation of energy.



      (9)   Conservation and stabilization of viable residential
areas.



      (10)   Stabilization of property values.



      (11)   Past performance of petitioners business operation
including policies, practices, viability and credibility.



   (C)   Upon completion of its review, the Department of Development
shall forward copies of the application, with all supporting data, to each of
the following:



      (1)   Kokomo-Howard County Planning Commission.



      (2)   City Controller.



      (3)   Legal Department.



      (4)   Mayor's Office.



      (5)   Members of the City Council.



   (D)   Each department will review the application for the following
information:



      (1)   Planning Department - consider conformity of the
proposed rehabilitation or redevelopment project to the Master Plan.



      (2)   Controller - preparation of a financial impact study
projecting amount of projected property tax abatement and the cost of
provision of city services and facilities for the area to be rehabilitated or
redeveloped.



      (3)   Legal Department - preparation of all necessary
resolutions and public notices.



      (4)   Mayor's Office - overall comment, distribution to any
other city department which the Mayor deems necessary and presentation to the
City Council of all comments from the department heads and written response
by citizens.



   (E)   Within 30 days following the completion of the review process,
the Mayor's office will forward all information including the responses,
reviews, applications, and resolution to the City Council.



   (F)   Immediately preceding the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Council, a public hearing will be held wherein the Council shall receive
and hear remonstrances and objections from persons interested in or affected
by said proceedings.  The Council shall then consider the resolution at the
regularly scheduled meeting.



   (G)   All other procedures for filing for tax abatement shall be
consistent with IC 6-1.1-12.1-1 through 6-1.1-12.1-6, as it may be amended
from time to time.



(Ord. 5036, passed 1-26-81; Am. Ord. 6073, passed 12-8-97)



BUSINESS ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS



§ 154.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BOARD."  The Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.



   "CITY."  The City of Kokomo, Indiana.



   "DEPARTMENT."  The Department of Development of the city.



   "DOWNTOWN."  As used in this subchapter, means the following
geographic areas:



      (1)   The area bound by Jefferson Street to the north,
Apperson Way to the east, Wildcat Creek to the south and Washington Street to
the west; or



      (2)   The area bound by Wildcat Creek to the north, Union
Street to the east, Markland Avenue to the south and Main Street to the west.



   "ELIGIBLE ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE."  As used in this subchapter, means:



      (1)   Monies owed to an existing primary sector business;



      (2)   Which are outstanding for at least 60 days; and



      (3)   Are owed by an entity that has been consistent in its
payments to the applying existing primary business over a course of two years.



   "LOCAL COMPANY."  As used in this subchapter, means:



      (1)   Any corporation, limited liability company, limited
liability partnership, sole proprietor or any other business organization
licensed to do business in the State of Indiana; and



      (2)   Which is located within the corporate boundaries of the
city.



   "LOCALLY OWNED COMPANY."  As used in this subchapter, means:



      (1)   Any entity fitting the definition of a “LOCAL
COMPANY” as prescribed in this subchapter; and



      (2)   Which is owned or controlled by an individual who
resides within the boundaries of Howard County, Indiana.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.51  FORGIVABLE MARKETING LOAN PROGRAM.



   (A)   There is established the Forgivable Marketing Loan Program
which may be utilized by local companies to assist with marketing campaigns
and strategy.



   (B)   The Forgivable Marketing Loan Program shall be administered by
the Department. In the course of the administration, the Department shall:



      (1)   Provide outreach to local companies, pre-screen
applications and provide technical assistance to applicants;



      (2)   Make available to local companies an application which
can be analyzed in a quantitative manner by the Department to determine
eligibility and merit for a loan;



      (3)   Review such applications and present recommendations to
the Board for approval or denial of Forgivable Marketing Loans; and



      (4)   Maintain all records including, but not limited to,
applications for assistance, metrics necessary to describe the program's
responsiveness, the number and size of local companies assisted and the
amount of monies distributed.



   (C)   Local businesses that are successful in their application
under the Forgivable Loan Marketing Program shall be eligible for a loan of
$1,000 for each employee with a maximum loan amount of $3,000.



   (D)   Monies distributed under this program shall be used for
marketing purposes. “MARKETING” shall include, but not be limited to,
trade show registration, travel expenses associated with business development
activities, advertising and development of marketing strategies.



   (E)   Repayment of monies distributed under the Forgivable Marketing
Loan Program shall be required only if the local company:



      (1)   Relocates its principal operations outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city within five years of receiving a
disbursement under this Program; or



      (2)   Ceases operation within five years after receiving a
disbursement under this Program.



   (F)   If monies are required to be repaid as a result of division
(E) above, then the Department shall place the local company on an
amortization schedule. Such monies shall be repaid in a term not to exceed
one year with a fixed interest rate set at prime, as quoted in the Wall
Street Journal on the day the local company relocates or ceases operations.
If the Department is unable to determine the exact date of relocation or
ceasing of operations, then the rate shall be fixed on the day the Department
becomes aware of such activity by the local company.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.52  WORKING CAPITAL LOAN PROGRAM.



   (A)   There is established the Working Capital Loan Program which
may be utilized by existing primary sector businesses to provide short term
loans using a businesses' inventory and accounts receivable as collateral.



   (B)   The Working Capital Loan Program shall be administered by the
Department. In the course of the administration, the Department shall:



      (1)   Provide outreach to existing primary sector businesses,
pre-screen applications and provide technical assistance to applicants;



      (2)   Make available to existing primary sector businesses an
application which can be analyzed in a quantitative manner by the Department
to determine eligibility and merit for a loan;



      (3)   Review such applications and present recommendations to
the Board for approval or denial of Working Capital Loans;



      (4)   Maintain all records including, but not limited to,
applications for assistance, metrics necessary to describe the program's
responsiveness, the number and size of local businesses assisted and the
amount of monies distributed; and



      (5)   Perform monthly reviews of successful applicants which
shall track the number of employees, status of inventory, income and expense,
aging accounts receivable and any change in financial position.



   (C)   Existing primary sector businesses that are successful in
their application under the Working Capital Loan Program shall be eligible
for a loan which equals the lesser of $1,000 for each employee or 70% of
eligible accounts receivable. At no time shall the maximum loan amount exceed
$25,000.



   (D)   Monies provided under the Working Capital Loan Program may not
be used for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To pay any type of personal debt;



      (2)   To pay delinquent taxes of any kind;



      (3)   To purchase real property; or



      (4)   To purchase stocks, bonds or similar investments.



   (E)   Repayment of monies disbursed under the Working Capital Loan
Program shall occur immediately after the existing primary sector business
receives payment on its eligible accounts receivable. In the event that such
payments towards eligible accounts receivable are not received, then the
Department shall provide to the existing primary sector business a repayment
plan.



   (F)   The Department reserves the right to fix an interest rate on
monies during the repayment period. Such rate shall not exceed two percentage
points below prime; however, if prime falls below 4% then the maximum
interest rate allowable shall be 2%.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.53  GREEN PRACTICE INCENTIVE GRANT.



   (A)   There is established the Green Practice Incentive Grant which
may be utilized by locally owned businesses to assist in establishing more
environmentally friendly business practices.



   (B)   The Green Practice Incentive Grant shall be administered by
the Department. In the course of the administration, the Department shall:



      (1)   Provide outreach to local companies, pre-screen
applications and provide technical assistance to applicants;



      (2)   Make available to local companies an application which
can be analyzed in a quantitative manner by the Department to determine
eligibility and merit for a loan;



      (3)   Review such applications and present recommendations to
the Board for approval or denial of Green Practice Incentive Grants; and



      (4)   Maintain all records including, but not limited to,
applications for assistance, metrics necessary to describe the program's
responsiveness, the number and size of local companies assisted and the
amount of monies distributed.



   (C)   A local company that is successful in their application for a
Green Practice Incentive Grant shall be eligible for a grant of up to $5,000.
The recipient must provide match funds awarded through this grant program to
be eligible.



   (D)   Grant funds provided to successful applicants must be used to
promote environmentally friendly business practices. Acceptable expenditures
of grant funds include, but are not limited to, design, construction or
installation of energy saving technology such as solar panels, wind turbines
or geothermal devices.



   (E)   Grant funds shall be disbursed to successful applicants in
arrears, after an invoice or bill of lading illustrating the purchase of
services or products that conform to division (D) above.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.54  DOWNTOWN FACADE IMPROVEMENT LOAN.



   (A)   There is established the Downtown Facade Improvement Loan
which may be utilized by locally-owned companies to enhance the facade of
existing buildings within the confines of the Downtown.



   (B)   The Downtown Facade Improvement Loan shall be administered by
the Department. In the course of the administration, the Department shall:



      (1)   Provide outreach to local companies, pre-screen
applications and provide technical assistance to applicants;



      (2)   Make available to local companies an application which
can be analyzed in a quantitative manner by the Department to determine
eligibility and merit for a loan;



      (3)   Review such applications and present recommendations to
the Board for approval or denial of Downtown Facade Improvement Loans; and



      (4)   Maintain all records including, but not limited to,
applications for assistance, metrics necessary to describe the program's
responsiveness, the number and size of local companies assisted and the
amount of monies distributed.



   (C)   A local company that is successful in their application for a
Downtown Facade Improvement Loan shall be eligible for a loan of up to $5,000.



   (D)   Loans provided under the Downtown Facade Improvement Loan
Program shall be used for improvements to the exterior of real property. Such
uses shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Repair of masonry;



      (2)   Repair or replacement of cornices;



      (3)   Replacement or repair of doors, windows or awnings;



      (4)   Landscaping; or



      (5)   Painting of the structures.



   (E)   Repayment of monies disbursed under the Downtown Facade
Improvement Loan Program shall be required only if the local company:



      (1)   Relocates its principal operations outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city within five years of receiving a
disbursement under this Program; or



      (2)   Ceases operation within five years after receiving a
disbursement under this Program.



   (F)   If monies are required to be repaid as a result of division
(E) above, then the Department shall place the local company on an
amortization schedule. Such monies shall be repaid in a term not to exceed
one year with a fixed interest rate set at prime, as quoted in the Wall
Street Journal on the day the local company relocates or ceases operations.
If the Department is unable to determine the exact date of relocation or
ceasing of operations, then the rate shall be fixed on the day the Department
becomes aware of such activity by the local company.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.55  ONE-STEP UP GRANT PROGRAM.



   (A)   There is established the One-Step Up Grant Program which may
be utilized by businesses, non-profit agencies, governmental agencies,
quasi-governmental agencies and educational institutions to raise the
educational level and workforce readiness of the Kokomo community. All
entities seeking grant funding under this Program shall have a physical
presence within the corporate boundaries of the city.



   (B)   The One-Step Up Grant Program shall be administered by the
Department. In the course of the administration, the Department shall:



      (1)   Provide outreach to businesses, agencies and
institutions, pre-screen applications and provide technical assistance to
applicants;



      (2)   Make available to businesses, agencies and institutions
an application which can be analyzed in a quantitative manner by the
Department to determine eligibility and merit for a loan;



      (3)   Review such applications and present recommendations to
the Board for approval or denial of One-Step Up Grants; and



      (4)   Maintain all records including, but not limited to,
applications for assistance, metrics necessary to describe the program's
responsiveness, the number and size of existing primary sector businesses
assisted and the amount of monies distributed.



   (C)   A business, agency or institution that is successful in their
application for a One-Step Up Grant shall be eligible for a grant of up to
$5,000.



   (D)   Monies awarded under the One-Step Up Grant Program shall be
used to increase the educational level of unemployed Kokomo residents and/or
employees of local businesses.



      (1)   Job training applicable to the employee’s present
position;



      (2)   ISO 9000 assistance;



      (3)   High school equivalency courses; or



      (4)   Training designed to allow employees to fulfill other
job responsibilities with their employer.



   (E)   Grant funds shall be disbursed to successful applicants in
arrears, after presenting proof that the applicant has successfully completed
the program outlined in the application for the grant monies, or that an
eligible city resident or employee of a local business has successfully
completed the program outlined in the application for the grant monies.
Disbursements under this Program may be made on a semester by semester basis,
yearly, quarterly or at the discretion of the Department.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



§ 154.56  SUNSET PROVISION.



   All sections contained in this subchapter, with the exception of
Section VII, shall sunset and be automatically repealed within five years
from the date of its passage. The Common Council shall retain full authority
to extend the life of all sections included herein.



(Ord. 6578, passed 4-27-09)



CHAPTER 155:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   155.01   Title



   155.02   Definitions



   155.03   Authority



   155.04   Purpose



   155.05   Applicability



   155.06   Interpretation



   155.07   Subdivision chapter jurisdiction



   155.08   Conflicting regulatory documents



   155.09   Actions pending



   155.10   Repealer



   155.11   Transition rules



   155.12   Administrative officer



   155.13   Exemptions



   155.14   Replats



   155.15   Waivers



   155.16   Schedule of fees



   155.17   Plan Commission certification



Subdivision Types and Processes



   155.25   Types of subdivision



   155.26   Application for minor subdivision plats



   155.27   Minor plat procedure



   155.28   Public hearing (minor subdivision plats)



   155.29   Action of Plan Commission regarding public hearing



   155.30   Application process for major subdivision plats



   155.31   Application requirements for a major subdivision plat



   155.32   Pre-application conference



   155.33   Primary major subdivision plan data



   155.34   Drainage review



   155.35   Department head approval



   155.36   Advisory Technical Committee



   155.37   Public hearing (major subdivision plats)



   155.38   Action of Plan Commission regarding public hearing



   155.39   Review



   155.40   Application requirements for a final major subdivision plat



   155.41   Final major subdivision plans data



   155.42   Surety



   155.43   Off-site improvements



   155.44   Final major subdivision plat approval



   155.45   Recording of final major subdivision plat



   155.46   Release of performance bond/issuance of maintenance bond



   155.47   Certificate of occupancy



   155.48   Vested rights



Design Standards



   155.65   Design standards introduction



   155.66   Purpose



   155.67   General standards



   155.68   Lot standards



   155.69   Street location and arrangement standards



   155.70   Alley standards



   155.71   Block standards



   155.72   Street standards



   155.73   Private street standards



   155.74   Curb standards



   155.75   Sidewalk standards



   155.76   Street lighting standards



   155.77   Subdivision and street name standards



   155.78   Easement standards



   155.79   Public sites and open space standards



   155.80   Grading - excavation and fill drainage standards



   155.81   Drainage and storm water management standards



   155.82   Storm water, floodplain and subsurface drainage standards



   155.83   Sewer standards



   155.84   Water supply standards



   155.85   Miscellaneous utility standards



   155.86   Erosion control standards



   155.87   Monument and marker standards



   155.88   Street signage standards



   155.89   Conservation standards



   Appendix A:  Primary certificate



   Appendix B:  Final certificate



   Appendix C:  Land surveyor certificate



   Appendix D:  Deed of dedication certificate



   Appendix E:  Drainage certificate



   Appendix F:  Flood hazard certificate



Statutory reference:



   Plats and additions generally, see IC 36-7-3-1- et seq.



   Power of city to provide for planning, platting and zoning, see IC
36-7-2-2



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 155.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be formally known as the "Kokomo Subdivision Control
Chapter," and it may be cited and referred to as the "Subdivision Control
Chapter" or "Subdivision Chapter."



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   (B)   The definitions contained in this section shall be observed
and applied in the interpretation of all sections in this chapter, except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall
include the plural and the plural the singular; words used in the masculine
gender shall include the feminine.



   (C)   Undefined words in this section may be found in the Kokomo
Zoning Ordinance.



      "ABANDONMENT."  The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property for a continuous period of one year by the owner with
the intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner
nor of resuming the use of the property.



      "ADMINISTRATOR." See "Plan Director".



      "ADVISORY PLAN COMMISSION."  A Planning Commission serving a
single local government jurisdiction established as defined under the IC
36-7-1-2 (1983) as amended. The Kokomo Plan Commission is an "ADVISORY PLAN
COMMISSION".



      "ALLEY."  A public right-of-way, other than a street, road,
crosswalk, or easement, that provides secondary access for the special
accommodation of the abutting property.



      "APPLICANT."  "See Petitioner".



      "ARTERIAL STREET."  See "Street, Arterial".



      "AASHTO."  The American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials.



      "BERM."  A man-made, formed, earth mound of definite height and
width used for landscaping and obscuring purposes, the intent of which is to
provide a transition between uses of differing intensity.



      "BLOCK."  Property abutting on one side of a street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, intersecting
railroad, intersecting waterway, or the end of a dead end street.



      "BOARD."  See "Board of Zoning Appeals".



      "BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS."  The Kokomo Board of Zoning Appeals
or any division thereof.



      "BOND."  See "Surety."



      "BUILDING."  A structure having a root supported by columns or
walls, for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, property, or
animals; and when separated by division walls from the ground up and without
openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate
building.



      "BUILDING AREA."  The horizontal area of the buildings on a lot,
measured from the outside exterior walls, excluding open areas or terraces,
unenclosed porches or decks, and architectural features that project no more
than two feet.



      "BUILDING ENVELOPE."  The setback lines that establishes an area
on a lot in which building can occur.



      "BZA."  See "Board of Zoning Appeals".



      "CENTRAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM."  A sewer system including collection
and treatment facilities owned and maintained by a municipality, private
company or other agency who provides these facilities to the general public.



      "CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM."  A community water supply system
including existing and new wells and/or surface water sources and intakes,
treatment facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above
facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or
commercial/industrial development.



      "CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY."  A certificate(s) stating that the
occupancy and use of a building or structure complies with the provisions of
the Indiana Building Code and the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.



      "CITY."  The Municipal Corporation of Kokomo, Indiana, and the
area within its corporate boundary.



      "CITY ENGINEER."  The City Engineer of the City of Kokomo.



      "COLLECTOR STREET."  See "Street, Collector."



      "COMMISSION."  See "Advisory Plan Commission".



      "COMPREHENSIVE PLAN."  Refers to the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
The plan includes goals, objectives and strategies for land use, growth
management, transportation/thoroughfares, community facilities and services,
environment concerns, infrastructure, aesthetics and identity, and parks and
recreation.  The plan was developed and adopted by the Commission pursuant
to IC 36-7-4-500 and includes any part and/or policies separately adopted and
any amendment to such plan and/or policies, or parts thereof.



      "CONSTRUCTION PLAN."  See "Improvement Plan".



      "COUNTY."  The Municipal Corporation of Howard County and the
area within its corporate boundary.



      "COUNCIL."  The Common Council of the City of Kokomo.



      "COVENANTS."  A list of conditions set out by the owner at the
time of platting which shall run with the land and bind each owner to every
other owner of land in the plat to the terms of said condition. All covenants
shall be approved by the Commission, shall be recorded in the plat book as a
part of the plat, and may be enforced by the owners of lots in the
subdivision and not by the Commission.



      "CUL-DE-SAC."  A short street having one end open to traffic and
being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.



      "DEDICATION."  The setting apart of land or interests in land
for use by the municipality or public by ordinance, resolution, or entry in
the official minutes as by the recording of a plat.



      "DIRECTOR." See "Planning Director".



      "DISTRICT."  See "Zoning District".



      "DRAINAGE BOARD."  The Drainage Board of the County.



      "DRIVES, PRIVATE."  See "Street, Private".



      "EASEMENT."  A grant by a property owner to specific persons,
the general public, corporations, utilities, or others, for specified
purposes.



      "EXECUTIVE SECRETARY."  The Executive Secretary for the
Commission.



      "EXEMPT SUBDIVISION."  See "Subdivision, Exempt".



      "FINAL PLAT."  See "Plat, Final".



      "FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE."  The elevation of the lowest point
around the perimeter of a building at which a 100-year flood may enter any
finished floor area.



      "FRONTAGE."  See "Lot Frontage".



      "HIGHWAY ENGINEER."  The engineer employed by the county and
assigned the responsibility for the highways, roads and bridges.



      "IMPERVIOUS SURFACE."  Any material that prevents absorption of
stormwater into the ground.



      "IMPROVEMENT(S)."  Street grading, street surfacing and paving,
curb and gutter, sidewalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, drainage
facilities, culverts, bridges, utilities, and the like.



      "IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT."  A permit issued under the Zoning
Ordinance prior to receiving a building permit, permitting a person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure within its
jurisdiction, or the pursuit of changes to the condition of the land.



      "IMPROVEMENT PLAN(S)."  A set of drawings and specifications
prepared first in preliminary form with sufficient information to show that
the technical requirements for a development such as grading, drainage,
sewage, traffic, parking and utility service can be accomplished; and in
final form, a set of drawings that show in sufficient clarity and detail to
serve as construction documents to accomplish the improvement in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter as a condition of the approval of the
plat.



      "INTERESTED PARTY."  Interested parties shall include, but are
not limited to, all properties adjacent to the subject site boundaries.



      "LOCAL STREET."  See "Street, Local".



      "LOT."  A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land
intended as a unit for transfer of title or interest therein, or for
development, and must front on an improved street or place.



      "LOT, BUILDABLE."  See "Lot, Improved".



      "LOT, DEVELOPED."  A lot with buildings or structures.



      "LOT FRONTAGE."  The length of the front lot line bordering upon
a public right-of-way.  The lot frontage is determined by measuring the
total distance in which the front lot line touches a public right-of-way.



      "LOT, IMPROVED."  A lot upon which a structure or building can
be constructed and occupied.  The lot shall have frontage on and access to
an improved street, meet minimal setbacks, and have all necessary utilities
available to the lot such as sewer, water, electricity and the like.



      "LOT OF RECORD."  A lot which is a part of a subdivision
recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a parcel or lot described
by metes and bounds, and a description of what has been so recorded.



      "MAJOR PLAT."  See "Subdivision".



      "MAJOR SUBDIVISION."  See "Subdivision".



      "MARKER (SURVEY)."  A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other
object which is not intended to be a permanent point for record purposes.



      "MASTER PLAN."  See "Comprehensive Plan".



      "MINOR ARTERIAL."  See "Street, Minor Arterial".



      "MINOR SUBDIVISION."  See "Subdivision, Minor".



      "MONUMENT (SURVEY)."  A permanent physical structure which marks
the location of a corner or other survey point.



      "OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS."  Any premises not located within the
area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership
of the applicant for subdivision approval, upon which is located improvements
required by or related to the property to be subdivided.



      "OPEN SPACE."  An area of land not covered by buildings, parking
structures, or accessory uses except for recreational structures.  "OPEN
SPACE" may include nature areas; streams and floodplains; meadows or open
fields containing baseball, football, and soccer fields, golf courses,
swimming pools, bicycle paths and the like.  "OPEN SPACE" does not include
street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private yard, patio areas, or land
scheduled for future development.



      "PARENT TRACT."  A parent tract's actual location, shape, and
size is determined by the official record of the last transfer of ownership
transacted prior to the adoption of this chapter, or by its last conditional
transfer of ownership by recorded contract transacted before this chapter was
enacted.



      "PETITIONER."  Any person or group of persons, developer or
developers, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal
entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be subdivided under these regulations, or their legal
representative. Consent of all involved property owners must be demonstrate
prior to making applications for development approval.



      "PLACE."  A right-of-way permanently reserved in a plat which
affords the principle means of access to abutting property, is not dedicated
to nor maintained by the public but does grant the right to governmental
agencies to use said place to provide law enforcement, mail delivery, and
fire protection.  A lot fronting on a place is eligible for address
assignment and building permit issuance.



      "PLAN."  See "Comprehensive Plan".



      "PLAN COMMISSION."  See "Advisory Plan Commission".



      "PLANNING DIRECTOR."  The officer appointed by and/or delegated
the responsibility for the administration of this chapter's regulations by
the Plan Commission.



      "PLANNING JURISDICTION."  All land within the corporate limits
of Kokomo, Indiana as set out on the Official Zoning Map.



      "PLAT."  A map or chart that shows a division of land and is
intended to be filed for record.



      "PLAT PRIMARY."  The primary plat, pursuant to IC 36-7-4-700, is
the plat and plans upon which the approval of a proposed subdivision are
based.  The Primary Plat and plans shall be subject to public notice and
public hearing according to law and according to Plan Commission rules.
(Under former state statutes, the primary plat was referred to as a
"preliminary" plat.)



      "PLAT, FINAL."  The final plat, pursuant to IC 36-7-4-700, is
the final plat document in recordable form. A final plat shall substantially
conform with the preceding primary plat, or section thereof.  The final plat
and plans are not subject to public notices and public hearings.  Final plat
approval is an administrative function to be carried out in the manner
prescribed by this chapter.



      "PRIMARY PLAT."  See "Plat, Primary".



      "PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE."  The building or structure in
which the principal use of the lot or premises is located or conducted, with
respect to residential uses, the principal building or structure shall be the
main dwelling.



      "PRINCIPAL USE."  The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from an accessory use.  A "PRINCIPAL USE" may be either a
permitted use or a special exception.



      "PRIVATE DRAIN SYSTEM."  All storm water conveyances not
accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety or other public body for
maintenance.  Systems may include pipes, swales, ditches, open water,
retention ponds, detention ponds, structures, and curbs.



      "PRIVATE STREET."  See "Street, Private".



      "PROPERTY OWNER OF RECORD."  The person(s) identified as the
property owner on the most recent list prepared and maintained by the Howard
County Auditor's Office.



      "PUBLIC UTILITY."  Any person, firm, or corporation duly
authorized to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity,
gas, steam, telephone, fiber optics, transportation, water, or sewerage
systems.



      "REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR."  A land surveyor properly licensed
and registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of
Indiana.



      "REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER."  An engineer properly
licensed and registered or through reciprocity permitted to practice in the
State of Indiana.



      "REGULATORY FLOOD."  A flood having a peak discharge which can
be equaled or exceeded on the average of once in a 100-year period, as
calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved by
the Indiana Natural Resources Commission; further, this flood is equivalent
to a flood having a 1% probability of occurrence in any given year.



      "REGULATORY FLOODWAY."  The channel of a river or stream and
those portions of the flood plains adjoining the channel which are reasonably
required to efficiently carry and discharge peak flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream and, is that area covered by floodwaters in
significant downstream motion or covered by significant volumes of stored
water during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.



      "REPLAT."  Any change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map,
area reserved thereon for public use, any lot line, or if it affects any map
or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivisions.



      "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  A strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other special
public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established.



      "ROW."  See "Right-of-Way".



      "SECONDARY PLAT."  See "Plat, Final".



      "SITE PLAN." A drawing showing the physical features and
improvements, both existing and proposed, of a building site.



      "STREET."  Any vehicular way that: (1) is an existing state,
county, or municipal roadway; (2) is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to
law; (3) is approved by other official action; or (4) is shown on a plat duly
filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board to review plats;
includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.



      "STREET, COLLECTOR."  A street designed to facilitate the
collection of traffic from local streets and to provide circulation within
neighborhood areas and convenient ways to reach arterial streets, as depicted
by the thoroughfare plan element within the comprehensive plan.



      "STREET, LOCAL."  A street designed primarily to provide access
to abutting properties and discourage through traffic, as depicted by the
thoroughfare plan element within the comprehensive plan.



      "STREET, PRIMARY ARTERIAL."  A street with access control,
restricted parking, and that collects and distributes traffic to and from
minor arterials, as depicted by the transportation plan element within the
comprehensive plan.



      "STREET, SECONDARY ARTERIAL."  A street with signals at
important intersections and stop signs on side streets, and that collects and
distributes traffic to and from collector streets, as depicted by the
transportation plan element within the comprehensive plan.



      "STREET, PUBLIC."  A right-of-way, dedicated to public use,
which affords the principle means of access to abutting property.  A street
may be designed as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road, avenue,
lane, drive, court, or other appropriate name.  A street may be classified
according to type of use, set out in the thoroughfare plan.



      "STRUCTURE."  Anything constructed or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the
ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, detached garages,
mobile homes, manufactured homes, above-ground storage tanks, free-standing
signs and other similar items.



      "SUBDIVIDER."  See "Petitioner".



      "SUBDIVISION."  The division of a parent tract or other piece of
land into at least two smaller lots or the combination of two or more smaller
lots into one lot so that, either now or in the future, the subdivider can
transfer ownership, construct buildings, or establish a use other than
vacant, or create new building sites for leasehold, and as further defined in
this chapter.



      "SUBDIVISION, MINOR."  The division or partition of any parcel
of land into less than six lots which does not require any new street, place
or easement of access.



      "SURETY."  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety
bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      "THOROUGHFARE PLAN."  That part of the Comprehensive Plan which
sets forth the approximate location, alignment, dimension, identification
improvement, and classification of existing and proposed public streets,
highways, and other thoroughfares; and may include rights-of-way or
improvements for pedestrians, equestrians or cyclists.



      "TRANSPORTATION PLAN."  See "Thoroughfare Plan".



      "ZONING ADMINISTRATOR."  See "Planning Director".



      "ZONING DISTRICT."  Areas within the City of Kokomo for which
uniform zoning regulations governing use, height, area, size, intensity of
use of buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are established
by this chapter.  Zoning districts are drawn on the Official Zoning Map.



      "ZONING MAP."  The official zoning map of the Kokomo, Indiana,
denoting zoning districts.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.03  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted by the city pursuant to its authority under the
laws of IC 36-7-4 et seq.  Whenever codes cited in this chapter refer to
Indiana Code which has been amended or superseded, this chapter shall be
deemed amended in reference to the new or revised code.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.04  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is intended to guide the growth and development of the
city in accordance with the goals, objectives, and strategies stated within
the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan and for the following purposes:



   (A)   Provide guidance of future growth and development in
accordance with the comprehensive plan and applicable ordinances.



   (B)   Establish reasonable standards and procedures for subdivisions
and re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land.



   (C)   Protect the character and social and economic stability of all
parts of the jurisdiction.



   (D)   Encourage orderly and beneficial development of all parts of
the jurisdiction.



   (E)   Protect and conserve the value of land, buildings and other
improvements to land.



   (F)   Avoid scattered, illogical, and uncontrolled subdivisions of
land that would result in the imposition of an excessive expenditure of
public funds for the distribution or supply of infrastructure and/or services.



   (G)   Ensure proper legal descriptions, legal recording, and
monumenting of subdivided land.



   (H)   Prevent the pollution of air, water and soil.



   (I)   Ensure the provision of drainage facilities, safeguarding of
the water table, and protection from flooding or causing increased risk of
flooding.



   (J)   Encourage the protection of natural resources in order to
preserve the integrity, stability, natural beauty, topography, and the value
of land.



   (K)   Plan for a balance between land uses, natural resources, open
spaces, recreation, and public ways that is beneficial to the community as a
whole, both current and in the future.



   (L)   Cause the cost of design and installation of improvements in
new, platted subdivisions to be borne by the persons purchasing the lots, and
to avoid any direct or indirect burden placed upon adjacent subdivision(s) or
the community as a whole.



   (M)   Cause the petitioner to bear all costs associated with the
approval process, development process, and inspection process.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.05  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This chapter applies to:



      (1)   Any lot that is being divided; and



      (2)   Any new lot being recorded.



   (B)   Only after being in full compliance with all provisions of
this chapter and the permits required by this chapter having lawfully been
issued, may a development proceed.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.06  INTERPRETATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements
necessary for the protection of the health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience, and general welfare of the people at large.  The provisions are
also designed to establish and maintain reasonable community standards for
the physical environment. If two or more provisions within this chapter are
in conflict or are inconsistent with one another, then the provision which is
most restrictive shall control.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.07  SUBDIVISION CHAPTER JURISDICTION.



   This chapter applies to all land within the corporate limits of the
City of Kokomo, Indiana.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.08  CONFLICTING REGULATORY DOCUMENTS.



   When this chapter conflicts with private covenants, private contracts,
commitments, permits, agreements, state laws, federal laws or other
regulations that apply to a structure or parcel of land, the most restrictive
provision shall control.  However, the Kokomo Plan Commission can only
enforce this chapter and commitments made to the Plan Commission.  It is not
the responsibility of the Plan Commission to seek out the most restrictive
regulations, and the Plan Commission may issue permits based the city's
ordinances and rules of procedure.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.09  ACTIONS PENDING.



   This chapter shall not be construed as eliminating or reducing any
action now pending under, or by virtue of, an existing law or previous
subdivision ordinance.  Also, this chapter shall not be construed as
discontinuing, reducing, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about
to accrue.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-060



§ 155.10  REPEALER.



   The Subdivision Control Ordinance, No. 4152, is hereby repealed. This
chapter shall replace the repealed ordinance as of the adoption and effective
date.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.11  TRANSITION RULES.



   (A)   Any subdivision plat that was created prior to any subdivision
regulations in the city that has not been significantly altered or used
contrary to the original intent of the subdivision shall be deemed legally
nonconforming (grandfathered), thus not subject to the current subdivision
regulations.  Otherwise the current subdivision control ordinance
regulations and procedures shall apply and be enforced.



   (B)   Any subdivision plat that: (1) was legally platted under the
provisions of a previous subdivision ordinance; (2) and was fully in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance that regulated its platting as of
the effective date of this chapter and (3) does not meet this chapter's
regulations; shall be legally nonconforming (grandfathered).



   (C)   The petitioner for a major subdivision plat for an annexed
area may request final plat approval from the Kokomo Plan Commission if:



      (1)   The major subdivision plat had received preliminary plat
approval from the Howard County Plan Commission;



      (2)   Had not received final plat approval from the Howard
County Plan Commission prior to annexation;



      (3)   The preliminary plat approved by the Howard County Plan
Commission was reviewed by and given a favorable recommendation by the Kokomo
Plan Commission before the Howard County approval; and



      (4)   The City Engineer determines the subdivision plans meet
City of Kokomo development standards.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.12  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.



   The Plan Director will have the primary responsibility for
administration and enforcement (or coordination of enforcement) of this
chapter within the city's planning jurisdiction.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.13  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following subdivisions of land are exempt from the
regulations of this chapter.



      (1)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts
to correct errors in an existing legal description, provided that no
additional building sites are created by the division.



      (2)   A division of land for federal, state, or local
government to acquire right-of-way.



      (3)   A division of land for the transfer of a tract or tracts
between adjoining lots provided that no additional building sites are created
by the division.



   (B)   All exempt subdivisions must still be recorded at the Office
of the Howard County Recorder.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.14  REPLATS.



   For any change to a previous approved or recorded subdivision plat,
such change must be approved by the Plan Commission by the procedures, rules,
and regulations of this chapter.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.15  WAIVERS.



   (A)   When the Plan Commission finds that a better design is
achieved, and the intent of these regulations may be served to a greater
extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a waiver from standards set
forth in this chapter so that the public interest is served, provided that
such waiver does not lessen the intent and purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   The Plan Commission has sole jurisdiction of waivers to this
chapter.



   (C)   The Plan Commission shall not approve waivers unless it makes
written findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case such that:



      (1)   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to
the public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property;



      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for waiver is
based are unique to the property for which a waiver is sought and are not
applicable generally to other properties;



      (3)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape
or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a hardship to
the owner would result if the strict letter of these regulations were carried
out.  A hardship is distinguished from a mere inconvenience; and



      (4)   The waiver will not contradict the intent of the Kokomo
Zoning Ordinance or comprehensive plan.



   (D)   If the waiver impacts the design, construction or maintenance
of public facilities, the appropriate public agency shall review the proposed
waiver and provide input to the Plan Commission.



   (E)   Procedure for review of waiver requests is as follows:



      (1)   At the time of filing a subdivision plat, the petitioner
must submit a detailed written statement of all waivers of this chapter
sought which shall fully state the grounds for the request and file detailed
written findings of fact in support of such waiver request.



      (2)   Only those standards specifically described in the
request may be waived by the Plan Commission.



      (3)   Waivers may only be granted in a public hearing process.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.16  SCHEDULE OF FEES.



   (A)   The Common Council shall maintain an official fees schedule
for primary plat approval, final plat approval, and waivers outlined in this
chapter.  The official fees schedule shall be available to the public in the
Kokomo - Howard County Plan Commission office.  The official fees schedule
may only be amended by the Common Council by resolution.



   (B)   Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been
paid in full, no final action shall be taken on any permit application,
appeal, or petition.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.17  PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATION.



   This chapter was certified for adoption on November 8, 2005 by the
Kokomo Planning Commission after holding a legally announced public
hearing.  This chapter was certified by a seven to zero vote.  This
certification is validated by the following Planning Commission members.



      Richard Murphy, President



      David Wallace, Vice President



      Lisa Rink, Secretary



      Gregory Sheline



      Lynne Bolinger



      Tyler Moore



      Reverend Robert Lee (absent)



      Cary Stranahan



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



SUBDIVISION TYPES AND PROCESSES



§ 155.25  TYPES OF SUBDIVISION.



   This chapter recognizes two types of subdivision plats; minor
subdivision plats and major subdivision plats.



   (A)   The city will allow minor subdivision plat process and
regulations (see § 155.27) to be used when all of the following conditions
exist:



      (1)   No more than five lots are being created from a parent
tract.  No additional phases where more lots are created will be permitted.



      (2)   The subdivision will not require creating a new public
right-of-way, new private or public streets, or improvements to an existing
public or private street.



      (3)   All new lots and surrounding lots will have adequate
ingress and egress.



      (4)   Adequate utilities necessary for development on the new
lots are available.



      (5)   The lots are not completely or partially in a floodplain.



      (6)   The parent tract has adequate storm water drainage.



      (7)   If by reason of topography, natural or man-made
features, or other conditions relating to the property to be subdivided,
better access can be provided through construction of a new street, the
petition shall be considered as a major subdivision.



      (8)   All newly created lots will have driveway locations
which will provide at least 100 feet of visibility in both directions along
the street that the driveway connects.



      (9)   All newly created lots will be suitable building sites
for the purposes for which the land is to be used.



   (B)   All other subdivision requests shall be subject to the major
subdivision plat process and regulations (see § 155.29).



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.26  APPLICATION FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.



   (A)   Any subdivision which meets the requirements set forth in §
155.25 may be processed under an abbreviated procedure which meets ordinance
and statutory requirements but eliminates procedural steps not pertaining
thereto.



   (B)   The subdivider should consult informally with the Plan
Director for advice and assistance before filing the application for a minor
subdivision plat.  At this meeting, the developer should convey a conceptual
layout of the plat for review.



   (C)   No application for minor subdivision plat shall be accepted
until it is determined that the proposed subdivision qualifies for a minor
subdivision plat (see § 155.25).



   (D)   No application for minor subdivision plat shall be accepted
until the application form is deemed complete and all of the necessary
information (attachments) has been submitted by the petitioner.



   (E)   The petitioner shall submit one copy of the application and 14
copies of the proposed plat and all attachments to the Plan Director along
with the application fee payment.  At that time the Plan Director will issue
a docket number and schedule the minor subdivision plat to be heard at a
regularly scheduled Plan Commission meeting.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.27  MINOR PLAT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   An application for minor plat approval, complete with the
proposed "notice of public hearing" and "notice to adjacent owners", a
combined location map, site map and preliminary plat and a separate final
plat will be accepted by the Plan Director when, in his or her judgment, the
application and exhibits are complete.  Following this determination, the
Plan Director shall authorize, on behalf of the Commission, the applicant to
publish the notice of public hearing and notify adjacent owners, utility
companies, and governmental units.



   (B)   The plat shall be drawn at a scale which is legible and fits
on one sheet.  Sheets shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size.



   (C)   The plat shall be prepared and certified by a licensed,
professional land surveyor or engineer, registered to practice in the State
of Indiana.



   (D)   The plat shall comply with the standards of "Rule 12" and
include:



      (1)   The name and legal description of the proposed minor
subdivision plat.



      (2)   The names and addresses of the parent tract owner,
subdivider, persons with vested interest, and any consultants involved in the
subdivision of the land (such as consulting engineer, land surveyor, and/ or
planning firm).



      (3)   Denote dimensions, bearings, angles, and references to
section, township, range lines or corners, and existing bench marks.



      (4)   Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, north
point, and date.



      (5)   Primary and final approval certificate language (from
Appendix A and B).



      (6)   Lot numbers, location of monuments, and lot area for
each lot.  All lots shall meet the minimum requirement for area, width, and
frontage as required by the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.



      (7)   Existing and proposed easements including the location,
width, and purpose of each easement.



   (E)   In addition to the plat the petitioner shall submit the
following:



      (1)   Map of location of the proposed subdivision within the
community.



      (2)   A dimensional drawing showing existing subdivisions and
parcels of land adjacent the proposed subdivision.



      (3)   A dimensional drawing showing all existing and proposed
public thoroughfares/rights-of-way within 100 feet of the site.



      (4)   A dimensional drawing noting the location(s) of any
existing building(s) on the site, water courses, marshes, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees, and other structures or significant features.



      (5)   Topographic contours at vertical intervals of one-foot
if the general slope of the site and adjacent roadways is less than 10%. 
Topographic contours at vertical intervals of two feet will be permitted
where the general slope is too steep to show one-foot contour lines.



      (6)   Existing streets and rights-of-way fronting and/or
adjoining the proposed subdivision site, showing the names, roadway widths,
approximate gradients, types and widths of pavements, and curbs. 
Additionally, show existing drives, alleys or streets on the same and
opposite side of the street within 100 feet of the site property.



      (7)   List any variances or different development standards to
be approved by the Plan Commission or approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (8)   Any proposed covenants, proposed provisions for
maintenance of common areas and any other legal documents.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.28  PUBLIC HEARING (MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS).



   (A)   Upon receipt of one final application and 14 copies of all
applicable attachments including proof of drainage approval by the City
Engineer, the Plan Director shall set a date for public hearing before the
Plan Commission.  Said information must be submitted at least 20 days prior
to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Plan Commission.



   (B)   The Plan Director shall have prepared a notice of public
hearing to the two most widely distributed newspapers in the city which shall
run one time only.  The legal notice shall appear in the newspaper ten days
prior to the date of the public hearing, and the cost of the notice shall be
borne by the petitioner.  A proof of publication shall be retained by the
Plan Director.



   (C)   A notice of public hearing shall be sent by the petitioner at
the petitioner's expense.



      (1)   The notice of public hearing shall be sent to all
properties adjoining the subject site, excluding roads, streams and the like
(i.e. includes properties across the street or on the other side of a stream).



      (2)   Names and addresses of these property owners shall be
submitted at the time of filing for a subdivision plat.



      (3)   The notices shall be sent at least ten days before the
date of the public hearing.  The property owners shall be notified by
certified mail with return receipts requested.



      (4)   Proofs of publication, receipts of mailing, or proofs of
mailing shall be submitted to the Plan Director three days prior to the date
of the public hearing.



   (D)   Legal notices shall include the following:



      (1)   The general location of the proposed subdivision and a
legal description of the land contained therein.



      (2)   That the project plans are available for examination at
the office of the Kokomo Plan Commission.



      (3)   That a public hearing will be held giving the date,
place, and hour of the hearing.



      (4)   Written comments on the plat will be accepted prior to
the public hearing and may be submitted to the Plan Director for the Plan
Commission.



   (E)   In addition, a public hearing notice shall be posted by the
petitioner in a conspicuous place on the subject property at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing.  Notice signs will be provided by the City.



   (F)   Legal notices shall comply with IC 5-3-1.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.29  ACTION OF PLAN COMMISSION REGARDING PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   After the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions, continue, or deny the minor subdivision plat
application.



   (B)   The Plan Director shall return one copy of the plat
application and plat to the petitioner with the date of approval, conditional
approval, continuance, or denial and the reasons therefore, in writing, not
more than ten days following the regular monthly meeting at which the minor
subdivision plat was considered.  The Plan Director shall maintain one file
copy of the plat application and plat.



   (C)   If the Plan Commission requires any additions, changes,
corrections or information necessary for compliance with this chapter for
approval of the minor plat, they shall so advise the petitioner in writing
not more than ten days following the regular monthly meeting at which the
minor plat was considered. The petitioner may resubmit the application for
minor plat without payment of additional fee, for approval of Plan Commission.



   (D)   If the application is disapproved, fees on a resubmitted plat
shall be the same as if it were an original submittal.



   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to file the
approved and signed final minor subdivision plat with the Howard County
Recorder within one year from the date of approval.  Simultaneously, the
petitioner shall record covenants and any agreements of dedication together
with any other legal documents as shall be required to be recorded by Plan
Commission or other applicable governmental agency. The filing and recording
of a plat is without legal effect unless approved by the Plan Commission.



   (F)   If the minor plat is not recorded within one year from the
date of approval, the approval shall become null and void.  No notice of
expiration will be given.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.30  APPLICATION PROCESS FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS.



   (A)   The comprehensive plan should be reviewed to determine how the
proposed plan will fit into the comprehensive plan.  Requirements of the
thoroughfare plan, school and recreational sites, shopping centers, community
facilities, sanitation, water supply and drainage, and relationship to other
existing and proposed developments in the vicinity should be determined in
advance of the preparation of the subdivision.



   (B)   The petitioner shall submit one copy of the primary plat
application and all applicable attachments to the Plan Director.  All
applicable fees must be paid at this time as well.



   (C)   The petitioner shall correspond with all applicable regulatory
agencies for all other permits necessary.



   (D)   The Plan Director shall refer the petitioner to the City
Engineer for drainage, traffic, sanitary and other preliminary review.



   (E)   The Plan Director shall have prepared the public hearing
notice for the Plan Commission public hearing.  The petitioner is
responsible for notices to adjacent property owners as stated in § 155.37.



   (F)   Prior to public hearing the proposed plat shall be reviewed by
all relevant department heads.



   (G)   The petitioner or representative shall attend the Plan
Commission public hearing for approval of the primary plat.



   (H)   If conditions were attached to the primary plat approval, the
petitioner must meet all conditions (if any) prior to final major subdivision
plat application and approval.



   (I)   Sureties are executed, if applicable and the final plat
approval is completed by the Plan Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting.



   (J)   The final major subdivision plat is recorded by the petitioner
in the office of the Howard County Recorder.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.31  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   No application shall be processed until the application is
filled out correctly and all applicable attachments are presented to the Plan
Director.  Also, no application shall be accepted until all applicable fees
have been paid for the application.



   (B)   Primary major subdivision plat.  The petitioner shall submit
one copy of the application and 14 copies of all applicable attachments to
the Plan Director.



   (C)   Final major subdivision plat.  One copy of the application
and eight copies of all applicable attachments must be submitted to the Plan
Director.



   (D)   Once a completed application package has been submitted, the
Plan Director shall assign a docket number and refer the application and
attachments to the Plan Commission staff and the Technical Review Committee
for review for conformity with ordinance standards.  Within 30 days after
receipt of the application, the Plan Director shall set the date for public
hearing before the Planning Commission.  The date for the public hearing may
not be sooner than 20 days from the application date due to processing and
publication times.



   (E)   In accordance with IC 36-7-4-705, the Plan Director shall
announce the date of a hearing before the Plan Commission within 30 days
after receipt of a final application.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.32  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   (A)   Any petitioner may submit a sketch plan to the Plan Commission
for an informal conference to discuss the existing conditions of the site and
the proposed development thereof.



   (B)   No later than 21 days after the Plan Director has received the
sketch plan and other data, it shall return a copy of the sketch plan to the
petitioner with recommendations as to the design and planning for the
subdivision.



(ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.33  PRIMARY MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAN DATA.



   (A)   The plan shall be prepared and certified by a licensed,
professional land surveyor or engineer, registered to practice in the State
of Indiana.



   (B)   The plans shall be drawn at a scale which is legible and fits
on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches.



   (C)   The following items shall be included on the plans submitted
for the primary plat approval:



      (1)   Description:



         (a)   Proposed name and legal description of the
subdivision.



         (b)   Name and address of the petitioner, land owner,
developer and/or any other partners in the endeavor.



         (c)   Name and address of land surveyor and engineer, if
applicable.



         (d)   Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, north
point, and date.



         (e)   Review/approval checklist for the Fire Department,
City Engineer and Wastewater Superintendent.



         (f)   Plan Commission primary approval certificate (from
Appendix B).



         (g)   List any variances or different development
standards to be approved by the Plan Commission or approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.



      (2)   Existing conditions:



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by
a solid heavy line.



         (b)   Location, width and names of all existing or prior
platted streets or other public ways; railroad and utility rights-of-way, and
parks and other public open spaces.



         (c)   In case of a replat, all descriptive lines of the
original plat being vacated shall be shown by dotted lines in their proper
position in relation to the new arrangement of the plat, the new plat being
clearly shown in solid lines.



         (d)   Location of natural streams, regulated drains,
100-year flood plains, floodway, water courses, marshes, wooded areas,
isolated preservable trees, wetlands, historic features, existing structures,
dry wells, utility lines, fire hydrants and any other significant feature(s)
that may influence the design of the subdivision.



         (e)   Location, width and type of existing easements.



         (f)   Location and pipe size of sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water mains and natural gas mains. Invert elevations and direction of
flow shall be noted for sanitary sewers and storm sewers. If water mains,
sanitary sewers or storm sewers are not located on or adjacent to the tract,
the direction, distance to and size of off-site lines shall be shown.



         (g)   Topographic contours at vertical intervals of
one-foot if the general slope of the site and adjacent roadways is less than
10%.  Topographic contours at vertical intervals of two feet will be
permitted where the general slope is too steep to show one-foot contour
lines.  Contour lines should be shown of adjacent property to within 100
feet of the subject site.



      (3)   Proposed conditions:



         (a)   Layouts of proposed streets and alleys, their
names, right-of-way widths, approximate gradients, types and widths of
pavements, curbs, sidewalks, bikeways, jogging paths and other recreational
ways.  The names of streets shall conform so far as practicable to the names
of streets on the same approximate alignment existing in the vicinity of the
subdivision.



         (b)   Lot boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings,
angles, and references to section, township, range lines or corners, and
existing bench marks.



         (c)   Lot numbers, location of monuments, and area for
each lot (square footage).  All lots shall meet the minimum requirement for
area, width, and frontage of the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.



         (d)   A list of all applicable county, state or federal
approvals such as IDNR, IDEM and the like which are required prior to start
of construction.



         (e)   Location, width, and purpose of proposed easements.



         (f)   Location, size, material and invert elevation of
proposed utilities including storm and sanitary sewers; water mains; street
lights; fire hydrants; and such other utilities as may be appropriate. 
NOTE:  all proposed utility services must be underground.



         (g)   Minimum building lines.



         (h)   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use or set aside for use of properties in the
subdivision.  Land dedicated or reserved for parks or other public uses
shall be set forth and described in the articles of dedication or reservation
and shall also be shown on the plat with the appropriate heading, such as
"park land" or "out lot for public use".



         (i)   Proposed sidewalks and pedestrian trails.



         (j)   A description of protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the plat.



         (k)   If the primary plat is to be divided into sections
or phases of development, the boundaries and numbers of such sections shall
be shown, and a conceptual plan for the entire subdivision shall be submitted
as a "phasing schedule."



         (l)   Whenever the primary plat covers only a part of a
petitioner's contiguous holdings, the petitioner shall submit, at the scale
of no more than one-inch equals 200 feet, a sketch of the entire holding,
including the proposed subdivisions area, showing an indication of the
probable future street and drainage systems, for the remaining portion of the
tract.



         (m)   A drainage plan, showing the preliminary layout of
how surface drainage will be collected, conveyed, stored and/or controlled.



      (4)   Maintenance standards within covenants.



         (a)   Draft covenants;



         (b)   Provisions for maintenance of common areas with
standards of maintenance and with assignment of responsibility for said
maintenance to the property owners, which may delegate responsibility to a
neighborhood association or similar ongoing organization.



   (D)   In addition to the primary plat, a location map must be
submitted showing the following information:



      (1)   Location of the proposed subdivision within the planning
jurisdiction.



      (2)   Subdivision name and location.



      (3)   All public thoroughfares/rights-of-way within 100 feet
of the site.



      (4)   Depiction of how streets and alleys in the proposed
subdivision may connect with existing and proposed streets in the contiguous
subdivisions or undeveloped property to produce the most advantageous
development of the entire neighborhood.



      (5)   Title, scale, north arrow and date.



   (E)   Names and addresses of owners of all properties adjacent to
the subject site boundaries, excluding roads, rivers and the like (i.e.
includes properties across the street or on the other side of a river). The
Plan Director shall have prepared a proposed "notice of public hearing" and
"notice to adjacent owners" with plat application.



   (F)   Traffic impact study as follows:



      (1)   The type of traffic impact study required will vary
depending on the size and type of proposed development and at the direction
of the City Engineer.



         (a)   Traffic impact assessment will be required for
smaller scale projects which will have impacts at the site access points, but
are not anticipated to have a significant impact on the overall
transportation system.  The analysis for this type of study focuses on the
proposed driveways.



         (b)   Traffic impact statement is a more traditional
type of traffic impact study and will evaluate impacts at the site access
points as well as appropriate nearby intersections.  This type of study will
be required for moderate and large developments.



         (c)   Regional traffic analysis studies will be required
for very large regional developments such as large shopping malls/centers,
arenas, and residential developments. This study evaluates the impacts on the
local streets and the regional transportation facilities such as freeways and
major through arterials.



      (2)   Trip generation thresholds shall be provided, with
estimates for the proposed development, acceptable thresholds and
determination of which type of traffic study, if any, shall be required
according to the above parameters.



      (3)   The City Engineer may elect to perform the traffic
impact assessment for developments meeting division (F)(1)(a) above.  If the
City Engineer elects not to perform the traffic impact assessment, the
assessment must be performed by an engineer licensed in the State of Indiana
at the developer's expense.



      (4)   Preparer of the traffic impact statement or regional
traffic analysis shall be qualified as follows:



         (a)   Minimum of three years of recent experience in the
preparation of traffic impact studies, provide evidence of ongoing experience
and familiarity with the Highway Capacity Manual and other traffic evaluation
techniques.



         (b)   An associate (or higher) member of one or more
transportation related organizations, and be either a register professional
engineer (PE) or certified Professional Traffic Operations Engineer (PTOE),
or a planner with AICP or PCP certification.



      (5)   The required contents of the traffic impact study report
can be obtained at the office of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.34  DRAINAGE REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon receiving notice of a primary plat application, the Plan
Director shall advise the City Engineer of the project.  The petitioner
shall then transfer two copies of the plans to the City Engineer for the
purpose of reviewing the drainage plan for the project.  If a legal drain is
located upon or adjacent to the subdivision property, the petitioner shall
also transfer two copies of the plans to the Howard County Drainage Board for
review.



   (B)   The City Engineer shall review the drainage plan for said
project and shall identify any problems or deficiencies in the plan. The City
Engineer shall notify the Plan Director and petitioner of any such problems,
thereby allowing appropriate time for adjustments and modifications to be
made to the drainage plan for the project.



   (C)   After final review of the drainage plan and upon approval by
the City Engineer and Howard County Drainage Board if appropriate, the plan
can be presented to the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.35  DEPARTMENT HEAD APPROVAL.



   Prior to public hearing the proposed plat shall be reviewed by all
relevant department heads which includes but is not limited to: City Engineer
and Wastewater Superintendent.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.36  ADVISORY TECHNICAL COMMITTEE.



   Prior to public hearing the proposed plat shall be reviewed by the
Technical Review Committee composed of representatives of the Plan
Commission, City Engineer office, Plan Commission staff, wastewater utility,
and/or Storm Water Management Agency designated by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  The Technical Review Committee shall review the proposed plat
and identify any changes and additional information required for approval. 
They shall make a recommendation to the Plan Director on the readiness of the
proposed plat for public hearing.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.37  PUBLIC HEARING (MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS).



   (A)   Upon receipt of one final application and 14 copies of all
applicable attachments, and with a positive recommendation from the Advisory
Technical Committee, the Plan Director shall set a date for public hearing
before the Plan Commission.  Said application information must be submitted
at least 20 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Plan
Commission.



   (B)   The Plan Director shall prepare a "notice of public hearing"
legal notice, which the petitioner shall submit for publication in the two
most widely distributed newspapers in the city.  The legal notice shall run
one time only, appearing in the newspaper at least ten days prior to the date
of the public hearing, with the cost of such notice being borne by the
petitioner.  Proof of publication of legal notice shall be retained by the
Plan Director.



   (C)   The Plan Director shall prepare a "notice of public hearing"
notice and affidavit(s) of notice for the adjoining property owners. The
"notice of public hearing" shall be sent by the petitioner, at the
petitioner's expense, as follows:



      (1)   The notice shall be sent to all properties adjacent to
the subject site, excluding roads, rivers and the like (i.e. includes
properties across the street or on the other side of a river or drainage way).



      (2)   A list of all names and addresses sent the legal notice
shall be submitted at the time of filing for a subdivision plat.



      (3)   The notice shall be sent at least ten days prior to the
date of the public hearing.  The property owners shall be sent the notice by
certified mail with return receipts requested.



      (4)   Proofs of publication, receipts of mailing, completed
affidavit(s) of notice and/or proofs of mailing shall be submitted to the
Plan Director three days prior to the date of the public hearing.



   (D)   Legal notices and notices to adjoining property owners shall
include a statement or indication of the following:



      (1)   The general location of the proposed subdivision and
legal description of the land contained therein.



      (2)   The project plans are available for examination at the
office of the Plan Commission.



      (3)   The date, place and time of the public hearing to be
held.



      (4)   Comments on the proposed plat will be accepted prior to
the public hearing, and may be submitted to the Plan Director for the Plan
Commission.



   (E)   Notice of a public hearing shall be posted by the petitioner
in a conspicuous place on the subject property at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing. Notice signs will be provided by the Plan Commission.



   (F)   All legal notices shall comply with IC 5-3-1.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.38  ACTION OF PLAN COMMISSION REGARDING PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   After the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall approve,
approve with conditions, continue, table, or deny the major subdivision plat
application.



   (B)   The Plan Director shall return one copy of the plat
application and plat to the petitioner with the date of approval, conditional
approval, continuance, or denial and the reasons therefore, in writing, not
more than ten days following the regular monthly meeting at which the primary
plat was considered.  The Plan Director shall maintain one file copy of the
plat application and plat.



   (C)   If the Plan Commission requires any additions, changes,
corrections or information necessary for compliance with this chapter for
approval of the primary plat, they shall so advise the petitioner in writing
not more than ten days following the regular monthly meeting at which the
primary plat was considered.  The petitioner may resubmit the application
for primary plat without payment of additional fee, for approval of Plan
Commission.



   (D)   Within three months after the primary plat has been approved
by the Plan Commission the petitioner shall submit the primary plat and
related materials for signature by the Secretary and President of the Plan
Commission.



   (E)   Approval of a primary plat by Plan Commission is strictly
tentative, involving merely the general acceptability of the layout and the
improvement proposals submitted; however, Plan Commission may require
additions and changes for approval of the final major subdivision plat and
improvement plans.



   (F)   Approval of a primary plat shall be effective for a maximum
period of one year unless, upon application of the petitioner, Plan
Commission grants an extension.  If the final major subdivision plat, or a
section thereof, comprising not less than ten lots, or a comparable area, has
not been recorded within that time, the primary plat must be resubmitted for
approval.



   (G)   If the application is disapproved, fees on a resubmitted plat
shall be the same as if it were an original submittal.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.39  REVIEW.



   In reviewing applications for primary plat approval, Plan Commission
shall consider the following criteria.



   (A)   The degree to which the application and plat meets the
criteria for plat approval set forth in this chapter and as determined by the
reports of the Plan Director and City Engineer.



   (B)   Consistency with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan.



   (C)   Consistency with the intent of the zoning district in which it
is located.



   (D)   The presence or absence of any exceptions to the development
standards for the zoning district in which it is located, any general
development standards, site design and improvement standards; as evidenced by
the listing of any exceptions in the primary plat application.



   (E)   The presence or absence of any protective covenant for the
subdivision which would alter its impact from what would typically be
permitted in the zoning district in which it is located; as evidenced by the
inclusion of any covenants in the primary plat application.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.40  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   After approval of the primary plat by the Plan Commission and
fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter, the petitioner shall submit
an application for final major subdivision approval and 14 reproductions of
the final major subdivision plat of the subdivision to the Plan Director.



   (B)   All final major subdivision plats shall be shown at a scale
between 50 feet to one inch or 100 feet to one inch, whichever provides more
detail and fits on one sheet.  Sheets shall not exceed 18 inches by 24
inches in size.



   (C)   The final major subdivision plat shall include the following:



      (1)   Plat sheet(s) showing:



         (a)   Accurate metes and bounds legal description of the
tract boundary.



         (b)   Proof of ownership or permission from property
owner(s).



         (c)   Name of subdivision followed by the words "final
plat".



         (d)   Name, address, and phone number of the petitioner.



         (e)   North arrow/point, numeric and graphic scale and
date.



         (f)   Primary certificate(s) blocks for the Plan
Commission approval (see Appendices A and B).



         (g)   Fully executed land surveyor certificate (See
Appendix C).



         (h)   Fully executed dedication certificate (See
Appendix D).



         (i)   Drainage certificate and flood hazard certificate
(Appendices E and F)



         (j)   The final major subdivision plat may include all
or only a part of the primary plat which has received approval.  If the
final major subdivision plat does not contain all of the land approved on the
primary plat, it shall be designated by a section number in a numerical order.



      (2)   Proposed conditions:



         (a)   Accurate boundary lines with bearings and
dimensions, and a reference to a legal survey per state statute.



         (b)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest
official monument.  Reference corners shall be accurately described on the
plat.



         (c)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting the boundaries of the tract.



         (d)   Street names.



         (e)   Complete curve data table(s) for all curves
included on the plat.



         (f)   Street center lines and right-of-way lines with
accurate dimensions to hundredths of feet, with angles to street, alley, and
lot lines.  Radii, points of curvatures, tangent bearings, and lengths of
all arcs of street center lines and right-of-way lines shall be provided.



         (g)   Lot numbers and dimensions including the square
footage of each lot.



         (h)   Accurate locations and dimensions of easements,
description of their use and any limitations on such semi-public or community
use.



         (i)   Accurate dimensions for any property to be
dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public, or community use, including
sidewalks, bikeways, and other recreational ways.



         (j)   Building lines and setback dimensions throughout
the subdivision.



         (k)   Location, type, material, and size of all
monuments and markers set or to be set per "Rule 12".



         (l)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the
land and become covenants in the deeds for lots.



         (m)   The boundary of the floodway, the 100-year
floodplain or flood insurance rate map special flood hazard area and the base
flood elevation where available.



         (n)   Final covenant language which includes appropriate
maintenance and responsibility language.



         (o)   Any other information or data requested by Plan
Commission necessary to clarify conditions and terms of primary plat approval.



      (3)   An agreement in the form of surety bonds executed by the
petitioner(s) and approved by the City of Kokomo to construct and install all
improvements in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Plan Commission and accompanying the final major subdivision plat (see §§
155.42 and 155.43).



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.41  FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLANS DATA.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to prepare
and have certified by a registered, professional land surveyor or engineer
licensed in the State of Indiana, a complete set of improvement plans.



   (B)   The final subdivision plans shall be based on primary plans
which have been approved with the primary plat and shall be prepared and
submitted in conjunction with the final major subdivision plat.  The plans
shall show all items in § 155.33 and the following:



      (1)   Plan and profile sheets showing existing and proposed
elevations along center lines at no more than 100-foot intervals for all
streets.  Where a proposed street intersects an existing street or streets,
show elevations along the center line of the existing street or streets
within 100 feet of the intersection.  Radii of all curves, lengths of
tangents and central angles on all streets shall be shown.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may require that cross-sections are
shown for proposed streets where steep slopes exist along or adjacent to
proposed street center lines.



      (3)   Plan and profile sheets shall show the location and
typical cross-section of proposed streets including curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, rights-of-way, drainage facilities, manholes, and catch basins.



      (4)   Plans and profile sheets shall show the location,
material, and size and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and water lines, as well as the locations, materials and
sizes where available of gas lines, fire hydrants or other utilities showing
proposed connection to any existing or proposed utility systems.



      (5)   Location, size, elevation, official names and other
appropriate descriptions of any other existing physical and natural features
or facilities including features noted on the official map of the local
government, ground cover, trees or wooded areas and the top of bank, toe of
slope, flow line, normal pool elevation, flood boundaries and approximate
high and low water elevations of all ponds, lakes, tributaries, significant
swales/ditches and streams.  All elevations should be referenced to the USGS
datum or city datum.



      (6)   A traffic control plan showing the type and location of
proposed traffic control devices.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.42  SURETY.



   (A)   At the time the final major subdivision plat is approved by
the Plan Commission and before the plat is signed by the officers of the Plan
Commission, the petitioner shall file a surety or irrevocable letter of
credit with the city.  The performance bond or letter of credit shall:



      (1)   Be drawn in favor of the city.



      (2)   Be in an amount and time period determined by the City
Engineer to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations in
compliance with this chapter.  The petitioner's engineer or surveyor shall
supply an estimate of the cost of improvements and installation on the
project to aid the City Engineer in his/her determination of the amount of
the bond.  The engineer's estimate, however, shall not be binding.



      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to city.



      (4)   Comply with all statutory requirements and shall be
satisfactory to the city's attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of
execution as set forth in these regulations.



      (5)   Extend for the period within which required improvements
must be completed as specified by the Commission in the resolution approving
the final major subdivision plat.



      (6)   Cover all the costs for the developer's installation,
testing, inspection, and preparation of as-built drawings of the streets,
sanitary sewers, curbs, street signs, sidewalks on existing and proposed
right-of-way adjacent to the subdivision and common areas, and other
recreational amenities, surface swales, subsurface and storm drainage
systems, seeding and erosion control, landscaping and other public
improvements.



   (B)   The city may, upon satisfactorily proving difficulty of
circumstances to the Plan Commission, extend the completion date set forth in
such bond for a maximum period of one addition year.  The city may at any
time during the period of such bond, accept a substitution of principal or
sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the City Engineer.  The city
shall have the authority to increase the bond amount to sufficiently cover
increased costs.



   (C)   All required improvements shall be made by the petitioner, at
his or her expense, without reimbursement by the local government or any
improvement district therein.



   (D)   Installation of improvements shall be inspected by the City
Engineer or his/her representative.  The inspections shall be required in
all instances regardless of whether the work is performed before or after the
final plat approval.  Failure of the subdivider to request inspections at
proper and reasonable intervals during construction of the improvements and
installations as required may be cause for either denial of final major
subdivision plat approval and/or denial of acceptance for maintenance by the
city.



   (E)   If the City Engineer or his/her designee finds upon inspection
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance
with the approved improvement plans and associated construction standards and
specifications, the petitioner shall be responsible for correcting any errors
in construction and completing the improvements in accordance with such
improvement plans, standards and specifications.  Wherever the cost of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the petitioner and the bonding
company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements
according to specifications.



   (F)   If a final major subdivision plat is divided into sections,
the Plan Commission may allow for performance bonds to be submitted covering
only the improvements to be constructed in each approved section.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.43  OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.



   Should the petitioner be required to extend to the subdivision site
improvements such as extensions of water and sewer lines owned by the city
which may provide benefits to other properties in the vicinity of the
proposed subdivision, then the petitioner and city may, by contract, agree
that the other property owners in the vicinity of the subdivision who wish to
connect to or utilize the installation provided by the petitioner shall pay
the city over a 15-year period a fee in an amount agreed to by the contract
and that portion of said fee shall be rebated to the petitioner in annual
installments.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.44  FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall review the final complete plat and
all required supportive information and either approve or disapprove it.  If
the Commission determines that the plat complies with the standards of this
chapter, it shall make written findings and a decision regarding final plat
approval.  No notices of public hearing shall be required for final major
subdivision plat approval.



   (B)   In reviewing applications for final major subdivision plat
approval, the Plan Commission shall determine that the final major
subdivision plat substantially conforms with the primary plat as approved and
with all changes permitted and all requirements imposed as a condition of
approval.



   (C)   A certificate of final major subdivision plat approval shall
not be signed until proof of city acceptance of a performance bond or proof
of surety has been submitted to the Plan Commission.



   (D)   The approval of the final major subdivision plat by the Plan
Commission shall be certified on behalf of the Plan Commission by the
President and Secretary who shall affix their signatures to the plat original
and all other relevant documents which also may require such signatures.



   (E)   Approval of the final major subdivision plat shall be
effective for a maximum period of one year from the date of approval unless
recorded.  An extension of time may be approved by the Plan Commission.



   (F)   If the Plan Commission disapproves the final major subdivision
plat, it shall make written findings and notify the petitioner in writing,
stating the specific reasons for disapproval. This written notice shall be
signed by the President and Secretary of the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.45  RECORDING OF FINAL MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to file the
approved and signed final major subdivision plat with the Howard County
Recorder within 30 days of the signature.  Simultaneously, the petitioner
shall record the covenants, any documents establishing the neighborhood
association or other organization with assigned responsibility for
maintaining common areas and facilities, and any agreements of dedication
together with any other documents as shall be required to be recorded by the
Plan Commission or other applicable governmental agency.  The filing and
recording of a plat is without legal effect unless the plat was approved by
the Plan Commission.



   (B)   No improvement location permit shall be issued by the Plan
Director or his or her agent, for any structure(s) on any subdivision lots
prior to the recording of said subdivision plat by the Howard County
Recorder's Office.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.46  RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE BOND/ISSUANCE OF MAINTENANCE BOND.



   (A)   Upon completion of the infrastructure improvements as shown on
the subdivision plans, the petitioner's surveyor or engineer shall provide
the Plan Commission with a set of "as-built" plans showing the actual
location, dimensions and materials used to construct all improvements within
the subdivision.  "As-built" plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer's
Office.



   (B)   The city shall not accept dedication of required improvements
nor release or reduce the performance bond amount until the City Engineer has
submitted a final inspection report of the subdivision improvements and a
maintenance bond has been secured



   (C)   Upon completion of all required improvements and
installations, and prior to the acceptance of public maintenance by the city,
the subdivider shall provide a three-year maintenance bond satisfactory to
the city.  The maintenance bond or letter of credit shall:



      (1)   Be drawn in favor of the city.



      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 25% of the cost of the
improvements and installations as required by this chapter.  The
petitioner's surveyor or engineer shall supply record of the actual costs of
improvements and installation on the project to aid the City Engineer in the
determination of the amount of the bond.



      (3)   Be with surety satisfactory to city.



      (4)   Warrant the workmanship and all materials used in the
construction, installation and completion of improvements; warrant the
installations to be of good quality and to have been constructed and
completed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the standards,
specifications and requirements of this chapter and with the plans and
specifications approved by Plan Commission.



      (5)   Provide that for a period of three years from the date
of the acceptance of the improvements, the petitioner shall, at his or her
own expense, make all repairs to the improvements and installations, or the
foundations thereof, which may become necessary by reason of improper
workmanship or materials, but not including any damage to the improvements
and installations resulting from forces or circumstances beyond the control
of the applicant or occasioned by the inadequacy of the standards,
specifications or requirements of this chapter.



      (6)   Comply with all statutory requirements and shall be
satisfactory to the city as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as
set forth in these regulations.



   (D)   The city, upon approval of the City Engineer's inspection
report and issuance of a maintenance bond, shall pass a resolution accepting
the improvements in the subdivision and formally releasing the performance
bond.



   (E)   In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and
required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such
performance bond, the city may thereupon declare the bond to be in default
and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent
of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default
as determined by vote of the city's Board of Pubic Safety or the beneficiary
designated on the performance bond.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.47  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Plan Director or
city Building Inspector for any structure on any subdivision lots prior to an
address being approved, installation and completion of all facilities,
including grading, as shown on the plans approved by the Plan Commission;
except that in the case of an asphalt road surface, the installation of the
final surface coat may be postponed until the end of the maintenance
period.  The final coat of asphalt shall be installed prior to acceptance of
the road for public maintenance.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.48  VESTED RIGHTS.



   (A)   No vested rights shall accrue to any plat by reason of
approval of the primary plat or issuance of earthwork permit until the actual
signing of the primary plat by the President and Secretary of the Plan
Commission.



   (B)   All requirements, conditions, or regulations adopted by the
Commission applicable to the subdivision, or on all subdivisions generally,
shall be deemed a condition for any subdivision prior to the time of the
signing of the final major subdivision plat.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 155.65  DESIGN STANDARDS INTRODUCTION.



   The following standards state the design standards for all
subdivisions.  Each section is broken down into specific categories. These
categories include:



      General Standards



      Lot Standards



      Street Location and Arrangement Standards



      Alley Standards



      Block Standards



      Street Standards



      Private Street Standards



      Curb Standards



      Sidewalk Standards



      Street Lighting Standards



      Subdivision and Street Name Standards



      Easement Standards



      Public Sites and Open Space Standards



      Grading - Excavation and Fill Drainage Standards



      Drainage and Storm Water Management Standards



      Storm Water, Floodplain and Subsurface Drainage Standards



      Sewer Standards



      Water Supply Standards



      Miscellaneous Utility Standards



      Erosion Control Standards



      Monument and Marker Standards



      Street Signage Standards



      Conservation Standards



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.66  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to:



   (A)   Promote the proper arrangement of streets and arterials;



   (B)   Prevent congestion of streets and promote traffic safety;



   (C)   Secure adequate public spaces;



   (D)   Insure proper densities of population;



   (E)   Provide adequate utilities and public improvements;



   (F)   Insure the accurate survey and proper preparation of plats;



   (G)   Insure compliance with the comprehensive plan, the Zoning
Ordinance and other ordinances; and



   (H)   Protect the health, safety and general welfare of the people.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.67  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   No land shall be subdivided unless adequate access to the land
over improved streets or thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the
subdivider, or if such land is considered by the Plan Commission to be
unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper drainage,
objectionable earth or rock formation, topography or any other feature
harmful to the health and safety of future residents and the community as a
whole.



   (B)   The Plan Commission may require either a general or
operational soil survey, with interpretations, where it is not readily
apparent from existing information that the land to be subdivided is not
subject to flooding or does not contain poor drainage characteristics. If
required, the survey shall be conducted by a qualified person or agency
acceptable to the Plan Commission.  In the event that the Plan Commission
finds the land to be subdivided unacceptable due to the results of the soils
survey, the Plan Commission shall not approve the plat.  The Plan Commission
may, however, prescribe conditions that the subdivider must meet to obtain
approval and these conditions may be incorporated into an agreement between
the Plan Commission and the subdivider.



   (C)   The subdivision design and layout shall be such that it
protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents in the
jurisdiction of the Plan Commission.



   (D)   The Plan Commission may require improvements to streets and
intersections adjacent to or in the vicinity of the subdivision as determined
by the required traffic impact study and in accordance with the city
thoroughfare plan.  Additional dedication of right-of-way may also be
required.



   (E)   Tree planting is encouraged where trees within the
right-of-way are proposed, the planting plan shall have been submitted with
the preliminary plat and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety or
its designated city department.



   (F)   In addition to the requirements established herein, all
subdivision plats shall comply with the following rules, laws, and
regulations:



      (1)   All applicable statutory provisions.



      (2)   The local Zoning Ordinances, building and housing codes,
and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdiction.



      (3)   The comprehensive plan, thoroughfare plan and any other
appropriate plans of the city.



      (4)   The rules and regulations of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management, the Department of Natural Resources, Aeronautics
Commission, Howard County Drainage Board, and other appropriate agencies.



      (5)   The rules, regulations, and standards of the Indiana
Department of Transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein
abuts a state highway.



      (6)   All applicable planning and regulatory guidelines,
including access control, driveway manuals, parking and traffic control
ordinances, and other applicable guides published by the local governmental
units.



      (7)   The Indiana Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(or its replacement) shall be used or the design and installation of traffic
control devices.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.68  LOT STANDARDS.



   (A)   All lots shall abut and have access to a street or a place.



   (B)   In any subdivision, the minimum width and area for lots shall
conform to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the city.



   (C)   Side lines of lots shall be approximately right angles to
straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets.  Some variation from
this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots shall be avoided.



   (D)   Double frontage lots, such as lots where access is allowed
from two streets on opposite sides of the lot shall not be platted. Lots
facing one street and abutting another street to which no access is allowed,
shall not be considered double frontage, and shall have a ten-foot wide "no
access" planting screen easement against the no-access street.



   (E)   The widths and area of lots shall not be less than provided in
the Zoning Ordinance for single-family dwellings for the district in which
the subdivision is located except as specified in § 155.89, Conservation
Standards.



   (F)   The depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall be
at a maximum 3.0 to 1.0.



   (G)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to
permit appropriate setbacks from both streets and maintain effective frontage.



   (H)   Whenever possible, unit shopping centers, based upon sound
development standards, should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots
for unrestricted commercial use.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-60)



§ 155.69  STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the thoroughfare
plan contained in the city comprehensive plan as is now or may be set forth
hereafter.  Whenever any tract to be subdivided abuts or is adjacent to any
street shown in the thoroughfare plan, that part of the public right-of-way
for that street shall be dedicated and platted by the subdivider in the
location and with the right-of-way width as indicated on the thoroughfare
plan and the subdivider shall construct the street improvements.  The
arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation
and extension of existing principal streets in surrounding areas or conform
to a plan of the neighborhood approved and adopted by the Plan Commission.



   (B)   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall be correlated to existing and planned streets, existing
topography, public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation
to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.



   (C)   Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by
"cut-through" traffic will be discouraged, but in such a manner that
inter-connectedness between neighborhoods and to collector and arterial
streets is created.



   (D)   Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial or major collector street as indicated on the thoroughfare plan, the
Plan Commission may require:



      (1)   Marginal access streets;



      (2)   Reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
"no-access" easement along the rear property line having a minimum width of
ten feet;



      (3)   Deep lots with rear service ways; or



      (4)   Such other treatments as may be necessary for adequate
protection of properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.



   (E)   Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or
proposed arterial, a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway
right-of-way, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately parallel
with the right-of-way, at a distance from the right-of-way. The land between
the street and the right-of-way will have sufficient depth to provide an
adequate buffer between the street and the subdivision uses. Such distances
shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades
and future grade separations. The Plan Commission may require that the
intervening land strips be dedicated to the city, or if located in the
unincorporated jurisdictional area, to the county.  The land strip shall be
maintained by the involved governmental unit from the date of dedication.



   (F)   Whenever an existing half-street or half-alley is adjacent to
a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted within the tract.  Whenever the thoroughfare follows a property
line, half of the right-of-way of the thoroughfare shall be platted within
the tract. Half-streets and half-alleys shall be prohibited otherwise.



   (G)   Wherever a dedication or platted portion of a street or alley
exists adjacent to the proposed subdivision, an extension of the remainder of
the street or alley to the right of way width, indicated on the thoroughfare
plan, shall be platted within the proposed subdivision.



   (H)   In designing and approving subdivision streets, the following
factors shall receive consideration:



      (1)   Accessibility for emergency vehicles and school buses;



      (2)   Safety for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic through
the use of roundabouts, curvilinear features, boulevards and other traffic
calming design elements;



      (3)   Efficiency of services for all users;



      (4)   Livability or amenities as affected by traffic elements
in the circulation system;



      (5)   Economy of both construction and use of land; and



      (6)   Improving connectivity and dispersion of traffic on
local, collector and arterial streets.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.70  ALLEY STANDARDS.



   (A)   Alleys should be included in commercial and industrial areas
where needed for loading and unloading or access purposes and where platted
shall be at least 20 feet in width.



   (B)   Alleys are encouraged in residential areas to provide access
to rear loading garages and provide for a traditional neighborhood design. 
Where platted in residential areas, alleys shall be platted at least 16 feet
in width.



   (C)   Alley intersections with sharp changes in alignment shall be
avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit
safe vehicular movement.  Minimal radii at street intersections shall be 20
feet.



   (D)   Alleys shall end at a street intersection or have turnarounds
with sufficient turning radii for safe vehicular movements.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.71  BLOCK STANDARDS.



   (A)   Blocks shall not exceed 1,500 feet in length.



   (B)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of
lots of appropriate depth except where an interior street parallels a limited
access highway, arterial or collector street(s).



   (C)   Block length and width or acreage within bounding streets
shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required by the Zoning
Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is to be located, and to
provide convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street
traffic.  Blocks that are unreasonably large or small should not be approved.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.72  STREET STANDARDS.



   (A)   Streets and alleys shall be constructed to grades shown on
plans, profiles and cross-sections prepared by the subdivider and approved by
the governmental unit having jurisdiction over physical improvements.



   (B)   Streets and alleys shall be graded, constructed, surfaced and
improved to the dimensions required by the cross-sections, and the work shall
be performed in accordance with the current Indiana Department of
Transportation regulations, or as otherwise approved by the Plan Commission
or City Engineer.



   (C)   The street layout shall provide adequate vehicular access to
all lots and parcels of land within the subdivision.



   (D)   The minimum width of improvements on any two-way street shall
be 30 feet measured from back of curb to back of curb and shall have curb and
gutter.



   (E)   The Commission may require adjustment of lot width, setback or
street width to maintain reasonable uniformity of street improvements where
they join at subdivision limits.



   (F)   Between reversed curves on primary arterials, secondary
arterials, and collector streets a tangent of not less than 200 feet shall be
provided and on local streets such tangent shall not be less than 100 feet.



   (G)   Streets shall also conform to the following standards:



      (1)   Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the
land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient,
according to the street design standards contained within the following
subsections.



      (2)   Residential street systems shall be designed to minimize
through traffic movement, but certain proposed streets, where appropriate,
shall be extended and improved to the boundary line of the tract to be
subdivided so as to provide for normal circulation of traffic within the
vicinity.



      (3)   Wherever a dedicated or platted portion of a street or
alley exists adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the
street or alley shall be platted and constructed to the prescribed width
within the proposed subdivision.  The Plan Commission may require extension
of improvements to the existing street or alley.



      (4)   Residential street patterns shall provide reasonably
direct access to the primary circulation system.



      (5)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles.  A proposed intersection of two new streets at
an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable.  A street should
be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom.



      (6)   No more than two streets shall intersect at any one
point, unless specifically approved by the Plan Commission.



      (7)   Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing
street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersection
on the opposite side of such street.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of
less than 125 feet shall not be permitted except where the intersected street
has separated, dual drives, without median breaks at either such
intersection.  Where local streets intersect with arterial or collector
streets, their alignment shall be continuous.



      (8)   The minimum right-of-way of local streets shall be as
listed in the table contained in division (P).



      (9)   A temporary dead-end street shall be permitted in
certain cases in which a street is proposed to be and should logically be
extended but is not yet necessary to be constructed.  An adequate barrier
and signage or temporary cul-de-sac shall be provided for any such temporary
dead-end or cul-de-sac feature which extends 200 feet or more in length. 
Provisions for future removal of physical features of cul-de-sac shall be
recorded in commitments by the subdivider, and all costs associated with such
removal shall be borne by the subdivider.



      (10)   At the intersection of any proposed residential street
with any existing arterial or collector street, acceleration and deceleration
lanes, passing blisters and/or left turn lanes shall be provided where
right-of-way is available for such improvements, and shall be constructed as
part of the subdivision.



      (11)   The installation of a grass center median/boulevard up
to 20 feet in width may be required on all arterial and collector streets.



      (12)   All streets without curb and gutter shall have adequate
shoulders, side swales and culverts under driveways.  Driveway culverts
shall meet the specifications of the Indiana Department of Transportation
and/or the City Engineer, as applicable.



   (H)   The classification of all streets shall be determined by the
thoroughfare plan which is maintained within the city comprehensive plan.



   (I)   Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a
leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a 2% grade at a
distance of 100 feet in each direction, measured from the centerline of the
intersecting street.



   (J)   At intersections of street right-of-way lines, property
corners shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than 15 feet, or by
chords of such arcs.



   (K)   If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is less
than 60 degrees; the radius of the arc at the intersection of property lines
shall be increased as deemed advisable by the City Engineer.



   (L)   Before any performance bond covering a street installation is
released, City Engineer may request that core borings of the street be done
at the subdivider's expense.  Cores shall be reviewed by an independent
testing laboratory or registered engineer for analysis.



   (M)   A developer may request permission of the City Engineer to
delay the installation of the final surface layer of asphalt until the binder
layer of asphalt has had a sufficient time period to prove its durability
under the stress of heavy construction traffic.  The developer may be
required to submit a separate performance bond to cover the cost of the
installation of the final surface layer.



   (N)   Type of materials and thickness of pavement shall be in
accordance with the following table.



 

Design Characteristics of Street and Alley Pavements


Pavement Type
 
Pavement Thickness by Street and Alley Type


 
Arterial
 
Feeder
 
Local
 
Alley


Portland Cement Concrete

Uniform thickness on compacted subgrade
 

7.5"
 

6.5"
 

6"
 

6"


Flexible

Hot asphalt concrete

Compacted aggregate base on compacted subgrade

 

Total thickness
 

3.5"

16"

 

 

19.5"
 

3.5"

12"

 

 

15.5"
 

3"

8"

 

 

11"
 

3"

8"

 

 

11"


Deep-strength hot asphalt concrete

Uniform thickness on compacted subgrade
 

 

11.5"
 

 

9.5"
 

 

7.5"
 

 

7.5"


All materials and methods of construction shall meet Indiana Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications current at the time or primary
approval.

Compacted aggregate base may be reduced by 50% if a lime stabilized subgrade,
18 inches thick is provided, if approved by the City Engineer.



 



   (O)   Alternative methods for traffic control at all intersections,
specifically roundabouts and traffic circles, are encouraged and may be
required at the request of the Board of Public Works and Safety or the City
Engineer.



   (P)   Basic street and sidewalk standards shall be in accordance
with the following table.



 

Street Design Standards


 
Standard for Street and Alley Type


Arterial
 
Collector
 
Local
 
Alley (f.)


Primary
 
Minor
 
Major
 
Minor




Right-of-way (ft.)
 
180
 
100
 
90
 
66
 
56
 
16-30


Pavement width (ft.)

  With curb and gutter(a.)

  Without curb and gutter

  With curb and gutter and 14

  ft. median with curb and

  gutter(a.)
 

 

 

70
 

 

 

70
 

 

 

62
 

44

 

 

 

 
 

30
 

N/A

 

12-22


Type of curb permitted

  Vertical face

  Rolled face

  None
 

X

 

X
 

X

 
 

X
 

X
 

X

X
 

 

 

X


Sidewalk width (ft.)(b.)
 
8
 
8
 
6
 
5
 
5
 


Minimum sight distance
 
   in accordance with AASHTO standards


Maximum grade
 
4%
 
4%
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%
 
5%


Minimum grade
 
0.4%
 
0.4%
 
0.4%
 
0.4%
 
0.4%
 
0.4%


Minimum centerline with radius (ft.)
 
500
 
500
 
250
 
250
 
150
 
50


Cul-de-sac

  Maximum length (ft.)(d.)

  Right-of-way radius (ft.)

  Curb radius (ft.)
 
 
 
 
 

600

50

40
 


Frontage road(e.)

  Right-of-way when adjacent

  to street type (ft.)

  Pavement width (ft.)
 

60

 

40
 

60

 

36
 

50

 

36
 

50

 

30
 
 


a.   Pavement widths are measured between the backs of the outside
curbs.  The width of the median and associated curb and gutter are included
in minimum pavement widths.

b.   Installation of sidewalks on both sides of streets required.  All
sidewalks shall be built one-foot from right-of-way maximizing the green
space between the sidewalk and the curb.  The Plan Commission may waive this
requirement along strictly rural streets if multi-purpose trails are
substituted.

c.   Minimum sight distances for limited access highways shall be
determined by the design standards established within all current and revised
editions of the AASHTO standards.

d.   A cul-de-sac shall not be the only access to a major subdivision. 
The maximum length of a cul-de-sac is the distance from the end of the
cul-de-sac, across other connecting cul-de-sacs and streets, to the
intersection with a street which intersects with other non-cul-de-sac streets.

e.   A planting strip or multi-purpose trail may be required on the
highway side.  The recommended design shall be determined by the Plan
Commission.

f.   Dead-end alleys shall have turning areas in accordance with AASHTO
standards.




 



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.73  PRIVATE STREET STANDARDS.



   The Plan Commission may waive the requirement of a street to be
dedicated to the public and approve a private street in a subdivision
provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:



   (A)   Restrictive covenants, a written commitment, or other
necessary document(s) running with the land, shall be recorded in such form
as is approved by the Plan Commission to clearly state of record each of the
following provisions:



      (1)   The Board shall never be obligated to accept a public
dedication, deed, or any other conveyance of such private street.



      (2)   The Howard County Highway Department or city shall never
be obligated to maintain or repair the street, or accept it into its
maintenance program.



      (3)   A legally-formed community association comprised of all
owners of lots in the subdivision, as well as each such owner individually,
shall be jointly and severally obligated to maintain and repair each private
street in the subdivision.



      (4)   The subdivision's community association and all owners
of lots in the subdivision shall jointly and severally indemnify and hold
harmless City of Kokomo, the City Council and the Plan Commission, against
any loss, damage, or liability arising from claims or suits for personal
injury or property damage involving the design, construction, use or
maintenance of a private street in the subdivision.



      (5)   While the use of a private street may be restricted to
owners of lots in the subdivision, or their guests, an express easement shall
be granted to public and quasi-public agencies for use of such streets by
emergency, utility, and school vehicles and personnel, and for any other
purpose the Plan Commission reasonably believes is necessary or appropriate.



   (B)   Title to each private street in the subdivision shall be
properly conveyed by warranty deed to the subdivision's community association.



   (C)   Evidence of the legal formation of the subdivision's community
association shall be recorded.



   (D)   A maintenance bond to the city, with coverage comparable to
that required for public streets, for the benefit of the subdivision's
community association and lot owners, shall be provided by the developer of
the subdivision, if the Plan Commission finds such a bond necessary.



   (E)   A sign, meeting the standards of the city, must be posted
declaring the street is privately maintained.



   (F)   The ownership, operation and maintenance of any private street
or place shall be subject to any action by the Board of Public Works and
Safety and when it relates to serviceability for the facilitation of city
services such as, but not limited to, trash pickup, fire protection, police
services, or any such required municipal service.



   (G)   A detailed signage plan shall be provided to ensure
appropriate, minimum controls are in place for public safety.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.74  CURB STANDARDS.



   (A)   Curb and gutter shall be constructed as per the standard
details adopted by the Board of Public Works and Safety and on file with the
City Engineer.



   (B)   Curbs and gutters in residential areas along local streets
shall be roll or mountable type.



   (C)   Curbs and gutters in non-residential areas and along arterials
and collectors shall be vertical type curb.



   (D)   Curbs for medians, islands or along interior sides of streets
shall be constructed as per the standard details adopted by the Board of
Public Works and Safety and on file with the City Engineer.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.75  SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide sidewalks on all dedicated street
right-of-way, existing street right-of-way adjacent to the subdivision, and
inside all proposed subdivisions other than in industrial subdivisions,
unless required by the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete pavement and at
least four feet wide, four inches thick, sloped 1/4 inch per foot toward the
street and located one-foot inside the right-of-way line. Multi-use paths
shall be constructed of asphalt pavement, eight feet wide, three inches thick
on a compacted stone base four inches thick, sloped 1/4 inch per foot toward
the street, located one-foot inside the right-of-way line.



   (C)   Sidewalks and pathways located away from streets or dusk to
dawn lights should be properly lighted to permit clear vision of the walk or
path all hours of the day.



   (D)   When sidewalks, trails or paths cross arterials or collectors
within or adjacent to the subdivision, safety devices such as painted
crosswalks, signs or pedestrian signals shall be installed in accordance with
the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (Indiana MUTCD).



   (E)   Easements of at least eight feet in width shall be provided
for sidewalks or 12 feet in width for multi-use paths not located in a
right-of-way.



   (F)   Americans with Disability Act (ADA) compliant ramps for
wheelchairs and bicycles shall be provided on all sidewalks and paths. Ramps
are to be located at all intersection and other transition access points,
according to Indiana MUTCD and local standards.



   (G)   Vertical clearance shall be provided for all sidewalks with
all overhead obstructions cleared to a height of at least eight feet.



   (H)   Sidewalks adjacent to roads within subdivisions shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications
of the Indiana Department of Transportation, latest edition.



   (I)   Where driveways are to be built across the sidewalk space,
they shall conform to the sidewalk grade and shall be six inches minimum in
depth of the same quality and material as specified for sidewalks herein.



   (J)   All new or repaired sidewalks shall be constructed under the
supervision of the City Engineer who shall inspect and report on the same
before approval and/or release of bonds for such sidewalk improvements.



   (K)   No sidewalk section installed at the time of the original
construction shall be cut in order to save a part of the original section at
the time of repair, but rather the entire section shall be replaced.



   (L)   All sidewalks shall be installed by each property owner in the
subdivision within one year of issuance of an improvement location permit for
construction of improvements on the property or within three years of
subdivision approval which ever is less.  In the event that sidewalks are
not installed, the City Engineer may notify the property owner, allowing a
minimum of 30 days to install the sidewalk.  If the sidewalk is not
installed within the given time, the city may install the sidewalk and assess
the property owner for all materials and labor.



   (M)   For sidewalks on existing street frontage, the city may accept
payment in lieu of sidewalks.  Payment shall be based upon costs of recent
similar projects contracted by the city or per the standard bidding process
used by the city.  These funds will be used to implement the city's
alternative transportation plan.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-060



§ 155.76  STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Street lights shall be shielded with opaque material
preventing upward light spillage, in compliance with the standards of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA).



   (B)   All electric lines are to be buried.



   (C)   Placement of lines should be coordinated with the City
Engineer.



   (D)   Once 51% of the development is occupied, the developer may
request for the city to initiate and coordinate the installation of the
lights.  The power company will install the lighting using the city's
current, preferred street lighting fixture.  The developer may utilize
different lighting fixtures if the developer obtains the approval of the City
Engineer, pays all costs of the fixtures including any additional
installation costs and any additional monthly fees above the normal amounts
associated with the standard city style.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.77  SUBDIVISION AND STREET NAME STANDARDS.



   (A)   The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate, or
too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in
the area covered by these regulations.  The Plan Commission shall have final
authority to approve the name of the subdivision which shall be determined at
the time of the primary plat approval.



   (B)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing name within the
area covered by these regulations except where a new street is a continuation
of an existing contiguous or non-contiguous street.  Street names that may
be spelled different but sound the same as existing streets shall not be used.



   (C)   The Plan Commission shall have final authority to name all
streets (in case of conflicts) at the time of secondary plat approval.



   (D)   Private street names shall end in the word "place", as in
Berwick Place or Harbour Place.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.78  EASEMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Where alleys are not provided, easements for utilities and
other required uses such as access, drainage, walkways and/or landscaping
shall be provided.  Such easements shall have minimum width of 16 feet, and
where located along lot lines, one-half of the width shall be taken from each
lot.



   (B)   Where a subdivision is traversed by an existing watercourse,
drainage way, channel, or stream, the subdivider shall designate drainage
easements on both sides of the watercourse.  Such easements shall have a
minimum width of 16 feet, and where located along lot lines, one-half of the
width shall be taken from each lot.  In the case of a regulated drain, the
Howard County Drainage Board shall determine the width of the easement.



   (C)   Easements to permit access for maintenance and repair of
surface and subsurface drainage improvements shall be provided on the final
copies of the primary plat, secondary plat, and construction plans. 
Location of easements shall be reviewed by the city and/or its
representatives along with the local utility companies.



   (D)   In the case of lots extending to the boundary of the lands
platted and not adjoining another plat, the full width of the required
easement shall be provided.



   (E)   When a proposed drainage system shall direct or carry
collected water across private lands outside the subdivision, appropriate
off-site drainage rights such as easements must be secured by the subdivider
and indicated on the plat.



   (F)   Detention basins shall be protected and located within
detention easements, with suitable access provided to the basins and
associated inflow and outflow elements.



   (G)   Physical encroachments or improvements within platted
easements shall only be permitted if they do not restrict, obstruct or
prohibit the use of the easement for which it was intended as determined by
the Board of Public Works and Safety.  Any encroachment or improvement which
restricts, obstructs or prohibits use of the easement may be removed at the
property owner's expense.



   (H)   Other easements may be required by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.79  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACE.



   (A)   Tree planting is encouraged but in no case may trees be
planted in the right-of-way of residential streets having 50 feet or less
right-of-way and the covenants shall so state.  Where trees within
right-of-way are planned; the planting plan shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat for approval.



   (B)   Where sites for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public
uses are located within the subdivision area as shown on the Master Plan, or
where such sites appear to be desirable, the Commission may request their
dedication for such purposes, or their reservation for a period of one year
following the date of the approval of the plat.  In the event a governmental
agency concerned passes a resolution expressing its intent to acquire the
land so reserved, the reservation period shall be extended for an additional
six months.



   (C)   Subdivision developments are encouraged to provide open space
areas such as boulevard streets, enhanced streetscapes, community spaces,
preserved natural features and other neighborhood amenities.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.80  GRADING - EXCAVATION AND FILL STANDARDS.



   In order to provide more suitable sites for building, to improve
surface drainage, the following requirements shall be met:



   (A)   All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded such that positive
drainage away from physical structures is achieved, in accordance with all
applicable building codes.



   (B)   All land shall be graded to drain, control and/or divert
natural and generated surface runoff to a proper location.



   (C)   Fill material altered or moved onto the site shall not
encroach or impede natural flow  of drainage across the site, unless
measures are approved by the City Engineer which accommodate the maximum
design flow.



   (D)   Grading shall not cause the unnatural diversion of flows onto
adjacent property except to previously existing, adequately sized receiving
facilities (storm sewers, ditches, ponds, and the like) and only with the
appropriate easements or written, recorded consent of the property owner.



   (E)   Dust control measures shall be taken during grading
operations, and watering of sites may be required in order to control such
conditions.



   (F)   Proper care must be taken when operations occur at or across
streams or natural drainage ways.  Provisions shall be made for the
installation of temporary or permanent culverts or bridges, and approvals and
permits from proper agencies must be obtained prior to work at stream
crossings.  Adequate erosion control measures shall be in place to prevent
negative impacts to the streams and waterways.



   (G)   Site grading shall not cause dirt, sediment or debris to be
tracked upon public roads or placed within public right-of-way.  Care must
be taken to provide cleaning/washing operations for equipment leaving site to
minimize any such impact to city streets, and site owner shall be responsible
for all clean-up of dirt on streets as directed by the City
Engineer/Inspector.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.81  DRAINAGE AND STORM WATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.



   In order to provide more suitable sites for building that comply with
all required storm water regulations and to minimize the impact of
development on surface drainage, the following requirements shall be met:



   (A)   A storm water management plan and/or drainage report shall be
prepared indicating how surface and subsurface drainage will be handled. 
The plan should summarize all conditions, criteria and design related to the
drainage system proposed for the site.



   (B)   All subdivisions must comply with the requirements of the City
of Kokomo's Drainage Ordinance and the City of Kokomo Engineering Design and
Construction Standards.



   (C)   The burden of proof shall be upon the subdivider to show that
outfall and downstream facilities are adequate to handle the design flows. 
The storm water system may be any combination of pipes, swales, ditches,
detention basins or streams.  Detailed computations of runoff before and
after development, redevelopment, or new construction shall be submitted to
provide proof.



   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the landowner to maintain
the drainage system, as provided by the approved construction plans and/or
the natural drainage patterns.



   (E)   Responsibility for maintenance of all storm water facilities
during construction shall be that of the land developer/property owner.
Assignment of maintenance responsibility for certain facilities serving more
than one lot or parcel shall be documented by appropriate covenants and
easements on property deeds or plats, unless such responsibility is formally
accepted by a public body.  Maintenance responsibility shall be determined
before final approval.



   (F)   All subdivision plats shall have a covenant requiring all
owners to preserve drainage swales along the back, side and front of lots to
the size, slope and capacity approved for the subdivision.



   (G)   Detention basins may be designed as wet or dry basins, but
shall be sized to accommodate detaining the runoff volume generated by a
100-year storm event on the proposed site, holding the outlet flow equal to
or less than the peak flow rate generated by a ten-year storm event for the
existing conditions site.  Detention basin design must also include
provisions for an emergency spillway, outlet structure/pipe details, safety
shore and shelf, contours around and/or typical cross-sectional detail for
the pond, and normal pool and 100-year peak elevations.



   (H)   The storm sewer conveyance system, including curbs,
inlets/drains, manholes, pipes and swales shall be designed to handle a
ten-year storm event.



   (I)   All subdivision plats shall indicate the lowest or minimum
floor elevation on every lot within 100 feet of the 100-year flood plain,
detention basins or other designated flood areas, such that all structures
will be protected from flooding during and beyond the 100-year storm event. 
Additionally, lots for which basements, walkouts and/or window-outs are not
to be allowed shall be clearly indicated as such on subdivision plats.



   (J)   Maintenance of private drain systems.



      (1)   The developer or owner of each proposed subdivision
shall state on the final subdivision plat that the lot owners are assigned
maintenance of any private drain systems.  The developer or owner may, for
the lot owners, delegate maintenance to a neighborhood association or other
ongoing organization through the subdivision covenants or other documents. 
If the association or organization ceases to exist, then responsibility shall
revert to the lot owners.



      (2)   The developer or owner of each proposed subdivision
shall dedicate easements for drainage, not less than 16 feet in width, on the
plat of such subdivision, in which easements the drainage system for such
subdivision shall be installed.



      (3)   The drainage easements, as provided in divisions (J)(1)
above, shall run in favor of the Kokomo Board of Works and Safety, which
Board shall have perpetual jurisdiction to repair and maintain the drainage
system in each subdivision as hereinafter provided.



      (4)   In the event that the owner or owners of a lot in any
subdivision, approved and platted after the effective date of this chapter,
believes that the private drainage system in such subdivision is not
operating properly and is in need of repair, said owner or owners shall file
a written petition with the Kokomo Board of Works and Safety, which petition
shall set forth the name of the subdivision, the location of the requested
repair, and a brief description of the problem necessitating the requested
repair.



      (5)   Upon receipt of such petition, the Kokomo Board of Works
and Safety shall direct the City Engineer to make an investigation of the
requested repair.  The City Engineer shall make said investigation and file
a written report therein to the Kokomo Board of Works and Safety within ten
days from the date upon which he receives said order for investigation. 
Said City Engineer's report shall include the following:



         (a)   An opinion as to whether the drainage system is in
need of repair.



         (b)   An opinion as to the cause of the alleged drainage
problem.



         (c)   An opinion as to the best method to correct such
problem.



         (d)   The lots in such subdivision that are adversely
affected by the drainage problem in question.



         (e)   An estimate of the cost to make the necessary
repairs.



      (6)   Upon the filing of said City Engineer's report, the
Kokomo Board of Works and Safety shall set a hearing on the petition for
repair and the City Engineer's report.  Notice by ordinary mail shall be
given to the owners of all lots affected as shown on the City Engineer's
report, and notice to the public shall be given by one publication in the
Kokomo Tribune, not less than five days prior to said hearing.  At the
hearing, the Board shall make findings on each of the items contained in the
City Engineer's report.



      (7)   If the Board shall find that the alleged problem with
the drainage system is the sole fault of the owner of the lot where said
problem is located, the Board shall order that said owner make the repairs
necessary to correct such drainage problem within a reasonable time. In the
event that such owners refuses or fails to comply with said order, within the
time specified by the Board, the Board shall have the right, power and
authority to enter upon said real estate to make necessary repairs to said
drainage system.  If the Board completes said repairs under the above
provision, the cost thereof shall be paid from the Kokomo General Drain Fund,
and the owner of said real estate where said repair was made shall be charged
the entire cost thereof.  If said owner fails to pay said sum into the
Kokomo General Drain Fund within 30 days from the date of mailing said
billings, then the amount of such cost, together with a penalty of 10% of
such costs, shall be certified to the Howard County Treasurer by the
Secretary of the Board, and the amount so certified shall be added to said
owners real estate tax statements or duplicates and shall be collected at the
next consecutive time that real estate taxes become payable following such
certification.  Such certification shall contain a complete legal
description of the lot and the name of each owner thereof. Said Secretary
shall also cause a copy of said certification to be recorded in the Howard
County Recorder's Office.



      (8)   If the Board finds that the problem with the drainage
system was not caused by the fault of any one person or owner, then it shall
order that the necessary work to correct such problem be done, and shall
order that each lot owner affected by such a repair shall pay his or her
proportionate share of the cost thereof.  Upon the receipt by the Board of a
claim for the cost of such work, the Board shall mail a statement of the
proportionate share of such cost to each affected lot owner, and each owner
shall pay said amount billed into the Kokomo General Drain Fund within 30
days from date of mailing of said bill.  If any such owner fails to pay such
bill within 30 days from the date of the mailing thereof, then the amount of
such unpaid bill, together with a penalty of 10% shall be certified to the
Howard County Treasurer by the Secretary of the Board, and the amount so
certified shall be added to said owners real estate tax statement or
duplicates and shall be collected at the next consecutive time that real
estate taxes become payable following such certification.  Such
certification shall contain a complete legal description of the lot and the
name of each owner thereof.  Said Secretary shall also cause a copy of such
certification to be recorded in the Howard County Recorder's Office.



      (9)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, each
plat submitted for approval shall contain a covenant or other statement
referring to divisions (J)(1) through (J)(8), which covenant or statement
shall read substantially as follows: "This subdivision is subject to the
provisions of divisions (J)(1) through (J)(8), both inclusive, of this
chapter, as amended, which provide for the repair and maintenance of drainage
systems in subdivisions, including the assessment of owners of lots to pay
for the cost of repair and maintenance."



      (10)   Subdivision plats, approved by the Howard County Plan
Commission with covenants or other statements referring to Section 5,
Paragraph E., subparagraph's 1 through 7 of the Howard County Major Streets
and Highways and Subdivision Control Ordinance, and annexed by the City of
Kokomo, shall be subject to divisions (J)(1) through (J)(8) instead.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.82  STORM WATER, FLOODPLAIN AND SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Loss of the 100-year floodplain water storage capacity due to
building or filling shall not be allowed.  Any losses in capacity shall be
off-set with an increase in capacity at other portions of the subdivision. 
No lot shall be platted where the primary structures are in the floodway
fringe unless explicitly permitted by the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.  No
building or filling is allowed in the Floodway.



   (B)   The Commission shall review all proposed subdivisions to
determine whether the subdivision lies in a flood prone area as defined
elsewhere by ordinance.  If the Plan Commission finds the subdivision to be
so located, the Plan Commission shall forward pertinent plans and material to
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. The Plan
Commission may require appropriate changes and modifications in order to
assure that it is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; adequate
drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and that
on-site waste disposal systems, if provided, will be located as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during the occurrence of the
regulatory flood.



   (C)   All subdivision plats shall indicate the lowest or minimum
floor elevation on every lot within 100 feet of the 100-year flood plain,
detention basins or other designated flood areas, such that all structures
will be protected from flooding during and beyond the 100-year storm event.
Additionally, lots for which basements, walkouts and/or window-outs are not
to be allowed shall be clearly indicated as such on subdivision plats.



   (D)   Any physical conditions regarding drainage, elevations, field
tiles, flood area or related storm water features that are discovered in the
field during construction that deviate from what was represented on the
approved plans shall be brought to the attention of the City Engineer. 
Modifications to address the impacts of these changed conditions shall be
prepared and submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to work
progressing.  The developer may be required to perform additional work to
address the situation.  No changes to the approved design construction plans
shall be permitted without the written approval of the City Engineer.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.83  SEWER STANDARDS.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
sanitary sewer system that meets the standards and requirements of the
Indiana Department of Environmental Management and said sewers shall connect
to a sewage treatment facility.



   (B)   Sewers shall comply with the City of Kokomo Engineering Design
and Construction Standards.



   (C)   If in the judgment of the Plan Commission, a public sanitary
sewer main is not reasonably accessible, then it shall not approve the
subdivision.



   (D)   The Plan Commission may require the subdivider to agree to
provide greater sewer capacity to accommodate future development.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-21-06)



§ 155.84  WATER SUPPLY STANDARDS.



   (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
Water Main Supply System which shall be connected to a municipal or community
water supply system.



   (B)   The plan for the installation of a subdivision Water Main
Supply System shall be prepared by the subdivider, reviewed by the City
Engineer and approved by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



   (C)   Upon the completion of the Water Main Supply System
installation, the plans for such system as built shall be filed with the
Board of Public Works and Safety and the Commission.



   (D)   Hydrant locations shall be approved by the City of Kokomo Fire
Chief.  Prior to issuance of building permits, hydrants shall be inspected
for operation by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.85  MISCELLANEOUS UTILITY STANDARDS.



   (A)   Prior to installation of any utilities, the Developer shall
arrange and facilitate a "utility coordination" meeting. A representative
from each potential utility provider (sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water,
gas, cable, electric, telephone and the like) must be invited.  If the total
attendance is not satisfactory to the City Engineer, the meeting shall be
rescheduled or continued.  The purpose of this meeting is to coordinate all
utility work and avoid conflicts and inefficiencies, in addition to promoting
an effective, predictable and appropriate system of buried utilities.



   (B)   All utility lines, including electrical power, gas, telephone,
cable, sewer, and water shall be located underground throughout the
subdivision.  The location of utility lines shall be shown on the
construction plans.  Location of the utilities shall be shown in a cross
section, for every significantly different cross section.  Service
connections to the property lines of each lot in the development shall be
provided by the utility or subdivider.



   (C)   Utility installations within off-site easements must be
coordinated with property owners prior to the commencement of work.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-21-06)



§ 155.86  EROSION CONTROL STANDARDS.



   (A)   No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, nor shall
grading or excavating begin until a plan for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation has been reviewed and approved by the Plan Commission and/or
appropriate authority.



   (B)   Erosion and sediment control shall conform to the requirements
of the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) Notice of Intent
(NOI), General Permit Rule 327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and the City of Kokomo
Stormwater Erosion Control Ordinance.



   (C)   Any development over one acre shall be reviewed by IDEM or by
the storm water management agency designated by the city, if required by
local ordinance.



   (D)   A copy of submittal for approval shall be held in the office
of the Plan Commission.



   (E)   Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping of vegetation,
regrading, or other development activities, it shall be the developer's
responsibility to remove such sedimentation from all adjoining surfaces,
drainage systems, and watercourses, and to repair any damage at his or her
expense.



   (F)   For any work or activity done on or across a communal stream,
watercourse, or swale, or upon the floodplain or floodway area of any
watercourse during the period of development, it shall be the developer's
responsibility to return these areas to their original or equal conditions
upon completion of said activities.



   (G)   The developer shall not block, impede the flow of, alter,
construct any structure, deposit any material or thing, or commit any act
which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal stream or watercourse
without having obtained prior approval from the City Engineer, Howard County
Drainage Board and/or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Division
of Water, whichever is applicable.



   (H)   The developer will be responsible for maintaining the open and
free-flowing condition in all major and minor communal streams, watercourses,
creeks and drainage systems, constructed or otherwise improved, not under the
jurisdiction of any public agency, which are necessary for proper drainage.



   (I)   The developer must conform to the city's Drainage Ordinance
and any erosion control standards and policies promulgated and enforced by
the city's Board of Public Works and Safety and its designated agent if one
or more acres of land is disturbed on a parcel.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.87  MONUMENT AND MARKER STANDARDS.



   (A)   Monuments shall be either strikingly visible and unusually
permanent or shall be of ferrous metal to provide magnetic indicator
response.  Where monuments are predominantly of one type, the plat shall so
indicated by note and legend.  Where monuments vary, each shall be described
and its location indicated on the plat.



   (B)   Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored or
marked point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be
marked, and shall be set so that the top of the monuments is level with the
surface of the surrounding ground.



   (C)   Monuments shall be set:



      (1)   At the intersection of all lines forming right angles in
the boundary of the subdivision.



      (2)   On street centerlines where other streets and plat
boundaries intersect, and where curves begin and end.



   (D)   Markers shall be set:



      (1)   At the beginning and ending of all curves along street
property lines.



      (2)   At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either
front or rear.



      (3)   At all angles on property lines of lots.



      (4)   At all other lot corners not established by a monument.



      (5)   At a given distance from the lot corner on the property
line where the lot corner falls in a lake or stream or other unaccessible
place.



   (E)   Steel pipe monuments may be used as per Rule 12 Surveying
Standards.



   (F)   markers shall be of ferrous metal bars 5/8-inch minimum
diameter, 24 inches long set after grading and physical improvement
construction is complete with not more than three inches projection.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.88  STREET SIGNAGE STANDARDS.



   Street signage shall be installed and conform to the standards on file
in the City Engineer's Office.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



§ 155.89  CONSERVATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following standards are optional but encouraged.  They
provide the subdivider the opportunity to achieve density bonuses for
preserving natural areas and providing community open space.



   (B)   The following types of conservation areas shall be recognized:



      (1)   Primary conservation areas include unique environmental
features such as woodlands, riparian corridors, floodplain, areas with
demonstrated animal habitat, and other such areas.



      (2)   Secondary conservation areas include open spaces which
are mostly flat grassy areas.



   (C)   The petitioner shall propose the delineation of primary or
secondary conservation areas on the preliminary plat. The Plan Commission
will make the final determination whether an area is considered a primary or
secondary conservation area.



   (D)   Required lawn areas, landscaped medians, bufferyards, and
landscape cul-de-sac islands shall not be considered conservation areas.



   (E)   The subdivider must reserve at least 10% of the total area of
the plat as a conservation easement in order to achieve the following
incentives:



      (1)   For primary conservation areas, the subdivider may
reduce the lot area, width and setbacks of the district utilizing the
following formula:  (percent of plat area conserved) + 6% = total percent
lot area, width and setbacks may be reduced



      (2)   For secondary conservation areas, the subdivider may
reduce the lot standards of the district utilizing the following formula: 
(percent of plat area conserved) + 3% = total percent lot area, width and
setbacks may be reduced



      (3)   The maximum reduction in lot standards may not exceed
35%.



      (4)   The minimum distance permitted between primary
structures is ten feet.



   (F)   The conservation easement shall be shown on the plat and
labeled as such.



   (G)   The covenants for the subdivision must include a statement
indicating that no structures are permitted to be built within the
conservation easement in perpetuity.



(Ord. 6405, passed 4-10-06)



APPENDIX A:  PRIMARY CERTIFICATE



The following language shall be used on primary plats:



UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY IC 36-7-4-700 SERIES – SUBDIVISION CONTROL,
ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF INDIANA AND ALL ACTS
AMENDATORY THERETO, AND AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE CITY OF KOKOMO, THIS PLAT
WAS GIVEN APPROVAL AS FOLLOWS:



Approved by the Kokomo City Plan Commission at a meeting held this



                  day of           , 20  .



                                    



                     President (name)



                                    



                     Secretary (name)



Approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety at a meeting held this    
          day of             , 20  .



                                



                     Member (name)



                                



                     Member (name)



                                



                     Member (name)



                     ATTEST:



                                      



                     Secretary (name)



APPENDIX B:  FINAL CERTIFICATE



The following language shall be used on final plats:



UNDER AUTHORITY PROVIDED BY IC 36-7-4-700 SERIES – SUBDIVISION CONTROL,
ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF INDIANA AND ALL ACTS
AMENDATORY THERETO, AND AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY THE CITY OF KOKOMO, THIS PLAT
WAS GIVEN APPROVAL AS FOLLOWS:



Approved by the Kokomo City Plan Commission at a meeting held this



              day of           , 20    .



                                    



                     President (name)



                                    



                     Secretary (name)



Approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety at a meeting held this    
          day of             , 20  .



                                



                     Member (name)



                                



                     Member (name)



                                



                     Member (name)



                     ATTEST:



                                      



                     Secretary (name)



APPENDIX C:  LAND SURVEYOR CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a
certificate signed by a registered professional land surveyor, in
substantially the following form:



I                       , do hereby certify that I am a
Professional Land Surveyor, licensed in compliance with the Laws of the State
of Indiana; that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on
              that all monuments shown thereon actually exist as
shown; and that their location, size, and type and material are truly
represented".



(SEAL)                 



APPENDIX D:  DEED OF DEDICATION CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry a deed
of dedication in substantially the following form:



"We, the undersigned                     , owners of the real
estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we have a laid off,
platted and subdivided, and hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real
estate in accordance with the within plat."



This subdivision shall be known and designated as                  
an addition to                   .



All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated are hereby
dedicated to the public.



Building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between
which lines and the property lines of the street, there shall be erected or
maintained no building or structure.



There are strips of ground shown on this plat and marked "Easement" reserved
for drainage and the use of public utilities for the installation of water
and sewer mains, poles, ducts, lines and wires subject at all times to the
proper authorities and to the easement herein reserved.  No buildings or
other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land,
but owners of lots in this subdivision shall take their titles subject to the
rights of the public utilities.



Witness our Hands and Seals this             day of       , 20  .



STATE OF INDIANA )



         )SS:



COUNTY OF HOWARD )



Before me the undersigned NOTARY PUBLIC, in and for the County and State,
personally appeared                 , and each separately and
severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or
her voluntary act and deed, for the purpose therein expressed. Witness my
Hand and Notarial Seal this           day of           ,



                  



   Notary Public



   My Commission Expires:



                        



APPENDIX E:  DRAINAGE CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry the
following certification.



We, the undersigned, certify to the best of our knowledge and belief that the
drainage of surface waters will not be significantly changed by the
construction of such subdivision or part thereof, or, that if such surface
water drainage will be changed; adequate provision has been made for such
surface waters.



                                                  
       



(Owner's name)      (Surveyor's name and registration no.)



APPENDIX F:  FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE



Each final plat submitted to the Commission for approval shall carry the
following certification.



The accuracy of any flood hazard data shown on this report is subject to map
scale uncertainty and to any other uncertainty in location or elevation on
the referenced flood insurance rate map.  This parcel is located in Zone  
    on Flood Insurance Rate Map Community Number                 ,
Panel             Dated         . (Use either of the following:)
Zone C is not located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, (or) Zone        
is located in a Special Flood Hazard Area with a Base Flood Elevation of  
            .  This parcel is (or) is not in a Floodway as shown on
Floodway Map Community Number             , Panel          ; Dated
            .



CHAPTER 156:  THOROUGHFARE PLAN



Section



   156.01   Short title



   156.02   Map of the thoroughfares



   156.03   Designation



   156.04   Policies and directives



   156.05   Thoroughfare fund



   156.06   Authority for procedure



   156.07   Method of procedure



   156.08   Priority of improvements



   156.09   Continuing authority of City Plan Commission



   156.10   Amendments



   156.11   Copies on file



   156.12   Extraterritorial effect



Statutory reference:



   Planning and zoning generally, see IC 36-7-2-2



   Power of city to provide for thoroughfares, see IC 36-9-2-5



§ 156.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the thoroughfare plan,
a section of the master plan.



('75 Code, App. C § l)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.02  MAP OF THE THOROUGHFARES.



   The official thoroughfare plan consists of a map entitled "Kokomo,
Indiana, Major Street and Highway Plan, Jurisdictional Area" revised November
l, l972, which shows the location of existing and proposed thoroughfares
within the jurisdictional area of the City Plan Commission, and is declared
to be a part of this chapter.  Notations, summaries, typical cross sections,
references, indications, and other details shown on the official thoroughfare
plan are as much a part of this chapter as if they were fully set out in the
text of this chapter.



('75 Code, App. C § 2)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.03  DESIGNATION.



   The thoroughfares within the city jurisdictional area are classified as
to width and type in accordance with their function as a part of the
thoroughfare system.  Such streets are to be provided with the right-of-way
widths shown on the thoroughfare plan as set out in§  l56.04 and are to be
improved as required by the chapter providing for the control of the
subdivision of land.



('75 Code, App. C § 3)  (Ord. 3266-1952, passed 3-30-53; Am. Ord. 4151,
passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.04  POLICIES AND DIRECTIVES.



   (A)   Opening or widening of streets.  Whenever a street desig-
nated on the thoroughfare plan is to be platted as a part of a  subdivision
of land, the right-of-way width shall conform to the policies and specified
designations and indications in the thorough- fare plan, provided that where
a street borders a tract of land to be subdivided, the owner of such land
shall be required to plat only one- half of the right-of-way width designated
for such street, measured at 90° to the center line thereof.



   (B)   Location of streets.  Wherever the locations of streets are
indicated on the thoroughfare plan as following existing roads or streets, or
section or half-section lines, or other established property lines, they
shall conform to such locations.  However, streets lying wholly within a
subdivision, and not designated as following an existing road or a section
line, may be varied in their alignment when such variance promotes the plan
of a neighborhood development unit in accordance with good site planning
principles, and if such alignment provides for the continuity of traffic
movement. Streets which follow irregular alignments, or indicate revised
alignments, or are not referenced to established lines, shall follow in a
general manner the alignment shown on the thoroughfare plan. Their alignment
shall be subject to detailed surveys which may be made by the City Engineer,
the City Plan Commission, or other public agencies, or by the owners of land
to be subdivided.  Such surveys shall be subject to the approval of the City
Plan Commission prior to the acquisition of land or the filing of subdivision
plans affecting such streets.



   (C)   Consideration by public agencies.  After adoption of the
thoroughfare plan and this chapter, the Common Council shall be guided by and
give consideration to the general policy and pattern of development set out
in the thoroughfare plan in the authorization, construction, alteration, or
abandonment of public highways and structures.



   (D)   Issuance of permits.  In the case of permits authorized by
the Common Council, for the erection or alteration of structures and other
improvements, the permit shall be issued only if the proposed street and
thoroughfare rights-of-way as set forth by this plan will be protected from
encroachment and, for planning and zoning purposes, the proposed street and
thoroughfare right-of-way lines will be considered as the front line of lots
and tracts bordering such streets and thoroughfares.



('75 Code, App. C § 4)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.05  THOROUGHFARE FUND.



   The Common Council may levy a tax annually of not to exceed $.15 on
each $100 of taxable property within the city for the purpose of a
thoroughfare fund, which when collected shall be kept separate from the other
funds of the city and shall be a continuing fund to be drawn on by the City
Board of Public Works and Safety for work done under, on, in furtherance of,
or in carrying out a part of the official thoroughfare plan within the city.



('75 Code, App. C § 5)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.06  AUTHORITY FOR PROCEDURE.



   In the carrying out of any project under the official thorough- fare
plan, the Board of Public Works shall proceed, and shall have authority under
the provisions of Chapter 44, Acts of the General Assembly of Indiana for
l93l, and all acts amendatory thereto, and the method of procedure shall
comply with the provisions of an Act of the General Assembly of the State of
Indiana entitled, "An act concerning municipal corporations", approved March
6, l905, and all acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, except that
the provisions for remonstrance of resident freeholders shall not apply,
provided, further, that if it shall be determined that property shall be
assessed within a special benefit district, the Board shall determine the
boundaries of such district.



('75 Code, App. C § 6)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



Statutory reference:



   Thoroughfare projects, see IC 36-9-6.1-1 et seq.



§ 156.07  METHOD OF PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Responsible Public Agency, in the carrying out of any
project under the official thoroughfare plan adopted by this chapter shall
consider and determine what proportionate part of the cost of such project,
or of any separate phase of improvement thereunder, shall be paid by the city
out of the thoroughfare fund, including any increase of damages ordered by
any court on appeal, as benefit to the city at large, and, at such time,
shall determine the amount, if any, of the total cost of any such phase of
improvement under such project, including damages awarded by the Board, which
shall be assessed as benefits on the real estate within a special benefit
district.



   (B)   In the event the cost of acquisition and the benefits assessed
against the city, by reason of any such project, shall, at any time, be in
excess of the amount of money then standing to the credit of the thoroughfare
fund of the city, the city shall have the power, and the Common Council is
authorized by ordinance, with the approval of the Mayor, to issue and sell
bonds of the city in a sum sufficient to pay for such benefit, or any part
thereof, as may be deemed necessary, the same to be issued and sold in the
same form and manner, and with the same rate of interest and with such
maturities as are by law provided for the issuance and sale of bonds of the
city for the general purposes thereof, and the proceeds of the sale of such
bonds shall be deposited in, and credited to, the thoroughfare fund, to be
used in the payment for such cost of acquisition and the benefits assessed
against the city at large and any increased damages which may be ordered paid
by any court on appeal.



('75 Code, App. C § 7)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.08  PRIORITY OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City Plan Commission may recommend to the Board of Public Works the
order in which improvements made pursuant to this chapter and to be paid for
in part out of the thoroughfare fund shall be undertaken and carried out, and
when so made, the Board of Public Works shall not start or commence by
resolution or otherwise, any work, appropriation, or improvement pursuant to
this chapter, other than in the order designated by such recommendation.



('75 Code, App. C § 8)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.09  CONTINUING AUTHORITY OF CITY PLAN COMMISSION.



   Subsequent to the adoption of the official thoroughfare plan and the
passage of this chapter, the City Plan Commission may:



   (A)   Determine lines for new, extended, widened, or narrowed
thoroughfares in any portion of the jurisdictional territory of the city as
defined in this chapter.



   (B)   Certify to the Common Council the amended or additional plan
under the same procedures as established for the certification and approval
of the original official thoroughfare plan.



('75 Code, App. C § 9)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.10  AMENDMENTS.



   In addition to the provisions of § 156.09, amendments may be initiated
as follows:



   (A)   The Common Council may direct the City Plan Commission to
prepare an amendment, as desired, and submit it to public hearing within 60
days after formal written request by the Common Council.



   (B)   The owners of 50% or more of the area of property abutting on
a street may also petition the City Plan Commission requesting an amendment
to the official thoroughfare plan.



('75 Code, App. C § 10)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.11  COPIES ON FILE.



   Two copies of the official thoroughfare plan and ordinance shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be subject to public
examination during the regular office hours of the City Clerk.



('75 Code, App. C § 11)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



§ 156.12  EXTRATERRITORIAL EFFECT.



   As to any unincorporated area within the two miles of the cor- porate
limits of the city, this chapter shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, signature by the Mayor, and at such time as the City Plan
Commission has exercised and has acquired control of any part of the two-mile
area according to IC 18-7-4-205.



('75 Code, App. C § 12)  (Ord. 4151, passed 12-18-72)



CHAPTER 157:  ZONING



Section



   157.01   Zoning Ordinance adopted by reference



§ 157.01  ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Zoning Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in
full herein. Copies of the Zoning Ordinance are available for review in both
the Office of the Kokomo City Clerk at City Hall, and the Office of the
Kokomo Plan Commission at 1206 Mulberry Street, Suite 114, Kokomo, Indiana
46901.



(Am. Ord. 6279, passed 9-29-03; Am. Ord. 6375, passed 5-9-05; Am. Ord. 6426,
passed 5-8-06; Am. Ord. 6434, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 6435, passed 6-26-06;
Am. Ord. 6564, passed 1-13-09; Am. Ord. 6565, passed 1-13-09; Am. Ord. 6566,
passed 1-13-09; Am. Ord. 6571, passed 2-11-09; Am. Ord. 6572, passed 2-11-09;
Am. Ord. 6574, passed 4-14- 09; Am. Ord. 6577, passed 4-14-09; Am. Ord. 6597,
passed 11-10-09; Am. Ord. 6613, passed 6-8-10; Am. Ord. 6657, passed
12-13-11; Am. Ord. 6663, passed 2-27-12; Am. Ord. 6701, passed 11-20-12; Am.
Ord. 6704, passed 12-11-12; Am. Ord. 6705, passed 11-27-12; Am. Ord. 6719,
passed 5-13-13; Am. Ord. 6815, passed 2-22-16; Am. Ord. 6818, passed 2-22-15;
Am. Ord. 6831, passed 6-27-16; Am. Ord. 6832, passed 6-27-16; Am. Ord. 6855,
passed 11-28-16; Am. Ord. 6871, passed 10-12-17)



CHAPTER 158:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 159:  FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



Section



   159.01   Statutory authorization



   159.02   Purpose of chapter



   159.03   Definitions



   159.04   General provisions



   159.05   Administration



   159.06   Provisions for flood hazard reduction



   159.07   Variance procedures



 



   159.99   Penalty



§ 159.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature granted the power to local units of government
(IC 36-7-4) to control land use within their jurisdictions in order to
accomplish the following.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.02  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
inadequately flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



   (B)   Statement of purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:



      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.



      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction.



      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters.



      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other
development which may increase erosion or flood damage.



      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.



      (6)   Make federal flood insurance available for structures
and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   (C)   Objectives.  The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To protect human life and health.



      (2)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



      (3)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public.



      (4)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions.



      (5)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets,
and bridges located in floodplains.



      (6)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to
minimize flood blight areas.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “A ZONE.” Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of
flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A
zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The
definitions are presented below:



      “ZONE A”: Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no
base flood elevation or depths are shown.



      “ZONE AE and A1-A30": Areas subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps
in place of Zones A1-A30.)



      “ZONE AO”: Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone.



      “ZONE AH”: Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between
one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown within this zone.



      “ZONE AR”: Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection.



      “ZONE A99": Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an
under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown.



   “ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).” A structure with a
floor area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a
minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be
designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory
structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay
sheds.



   “ADDITION (to an existing structure).” Any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected
by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed
addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   “APPEAL.” A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   “AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.” A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   “BASE FLOOD.” The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   “BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).” The elevation of the 1% annual chance
flood.



   “BASEMENT.” That portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade
(below ground level) on all sides.



   “BOUNDARY RIVER.” The part of the Ohio River that forms the
boundary between Kentucky and Indiana.



   “BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY.” The floodway of a boundary river.



   "BUILDING."  See "STRUCTURE."



   “COMMUNITY.” A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   “COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).” A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
Regular Program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   “CRITICAL FACILITY.” A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   “D ZONE.” Unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but
flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating
communities but is not required by regulation in this zone.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to:



      (1)   Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



      (2)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a
site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days;



      (3)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences,
construction of roads, or similar projects;



      (4)   Construction of flood control structures such as levees,
dikes, dams, channel improvements, and the like;



      (5)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations.



      (6)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



      (7)   Storage of materials; or



      (8)   Any other activity that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.



"DEVELOPMENT" does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing
structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or
gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve
filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent structures.



   “ELEVATED STRUCTURE.” A non-basement structure built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain
walls), pilings, or columns (posts and piers).



   “ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.” A certified statement that verifies a
structure's elevation information.



   “EMERGENCY PROGRAM.” The first phase under which a community
participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of
insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community
before the effective date of the initial FIRM.



   "EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION."  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   "EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION."  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   "FBFM."  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.



   "FEMA."  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   "FHBM."  Flood Hazard Boundary Map.



   "FIRM."  Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   "FLOOD."  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   “FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).” An official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   “FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).” An official map of a community,
on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.



   “FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).” The official hydraulic and
hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as
well as the FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.



   “FLOOD PRONE AREA.” Any land area acknowledged by a community as
being susceptible to inundation by water from any source. (See "Flood".)



   "FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG)."  The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See “Freeboard”.)



   "FLOODPLAIN."  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood.  The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   “FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.” The Improvement Location Permit
issued by the Howard County Plan Commission.



   “FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.” The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   “FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.” This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management
regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management
requirements.



   “FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING).” A method of protecting a
structure that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities
and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation
with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   “FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE.” A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a Registered Professional
Engineer or Architect.



   "FLOODWAY."  The channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   “FREEBOARD.” A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above
the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is
used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   "FRINGE."  Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   “HARDSHIP.” As related to variances of this chapter, the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The City of Kokomo Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the
variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere
economic or financial hardship alone is NOT exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the
disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an
exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other
means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive,
or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a
different use than originally intended.



   “HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.” The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed
walls of a structure.



   “HISTORIC STRUCTURES.” Any structures individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of
Historic Sites and Structures.



   “IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.” A permit issued under the Zoning
Ordinance prior to receiving a Building Permit, permitting a person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, occupy, use,
improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure within its
jurisdiction, or permitting a person to change the condition of the land.



   “INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).” The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All
renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or
after June 1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   “LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD).” A letter issued by FEMA
during the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and
provides the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD
initiates the six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend
its floodplain management regulations during this six-month period unless the
community has previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   “LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC)” A general term used to refer to the
several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be
accomplished by letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter
of Map Revision (LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).
The definitions are presented below:



      “LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).” An amendment by letter to
the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not
located in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data.
A LOMA is only issued by FEMA.



      “LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).” An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



      “LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).” An official
revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's
determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on
fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   “LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.” The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   "LOWEST FLOOR."  The lowest elevation described among the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has
more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;



         (b)   The total net area of all openings shall be at
least one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom
of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior
grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is
higher; and



         (c)   Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   "MANUFACTURED HOME."  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "MANUFACTURED HOME" does not include a recreational vehicle.



   “MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.” A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   “MARKET VALUE.” The building value, excluding the land (as agreed
to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   “MITIGATION.” Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate
long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The
purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to
minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.



   “NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).” The federal program that
makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating
communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal
Government and the private insurance industry.



   “NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) OF 1929 AS CORRECTED IN
1929.” A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   “NEW CONSTRUCTION.” Any structure for which the "start of
construction" commenced after the effective date of the community's first
floodplain ordinance.



   "NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION."  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   “NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY.” The floodway of any river or stream
other than a boundary river.



   “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88) AS ADOPTED IN
1993.” A vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing
varying elevations within the floodplain.



   “OBSTRUCTION.” Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall,
wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   “ONE-PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.” The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See "Regulatory
Flood".



   “PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR).” An official republication of a
community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   “PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE.” Anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or
basin.



   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE."  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters
for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.



   “REGULAR PROGRAM.” The phase of the community's participation in
the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are
imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones
and elevations determined in a FIS.



   "REGULATORY FLOOD."  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 159.04(B). The "Regulatory Flood" is also
known by the term "Base Flood", "One-Percent Annual Chance Flood", and
"100-Year Flood".



   “REPETITIVE LOSS.” Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equaled or
exceeded 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   “SECTION 1316.” That section of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   "SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)."  Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the county subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The
SFHAs of Howard County are generally identified as such on the Howard County,
Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated February 4,
2015 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas
are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO).



   “START OF CONSTRUCTION.” Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   "STRUCTURE."  A structure that is principally above ground and is
enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank,
septic tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also
includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 120
days.



   “SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.” Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 40 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.



   "SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT."  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have
incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage regardless of the actual
repair work performed.  The term does not include improvement of structures
to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code requirements or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   “SUSPENSION.” The removal of a participating community from the
NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper
floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   “VARIANCE.” A grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   “VIOLATION.” The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without
the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required
in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   “WATERCOURSE.” A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
“WATERCOURSE” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial
flood damage may occur.



   “X ZONE.” The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the
SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate
areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older
FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is
less than 0.2 percent.



   “ZONE.” A geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   “ZONE A.” (see definition for A zone)



   “ZONE B, C, and X.” Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated
rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is
available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in
these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and
C.)



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6230, passed 5-21-02; Am. Ord. 6785,
passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.04  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known
flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the city.



   (B)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. This chapter's
protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory
flood data is listed below.



      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of Howard County shall
be as delineated on the 1% annual chance flood profiles in the Flood
Insurance Study of Howard County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated
February 4, 2015 and the corresponding Flood Insurance Rate Map dated
February 4, 2015 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.



      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe
limits for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of Howard County,
delineated as an "A Zone" on the Howard County, Indiana and Incorporated
Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated February 4, 2015 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best
data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources;
provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one
square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the
party needs to replace existing data with better data that meets current
engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.



      (3)   In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of
identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the
subject site is greater than one square mile.



      (4)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination (LFD),
any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall
be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing
all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA.



   (C)   Establishment of floodplain development permit.  A Floodplain
Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas
of special flood hazard.



   (D)   Compliance. No structure shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or
stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions.  This chapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (F)   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations.



      (1)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



      (2)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the
base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



      (3)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question
is above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that
site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will
not be applied. The property owner shall be required to receive a LOMA in
order for the site to be considered.



   (G)   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of
this chapter all provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements.



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



   (H)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.  The degree of flood
protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on the part
of the city, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of
Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Designation of Administrator. The City Common Council hereby
appoints the Director of the City Plan Commission to administer and implement
the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   Permit procedures.  Application for a Floodplain Development
Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by
him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be
limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or
equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically the following information is required:



      (1)   Application stage.



         (a)   A description of the proposed development.



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and
streams.



         (c)   A legal description of the property site.



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades.



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD.



         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
non-residential structure will be floodproofed.



         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse
changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a Letter of Map
Revision. (See § 159.05(C) for additional information.)



      (2)   Obtain improvement location permit from Zoning
Administrator.



      (3)   Construction stage.



         (a)   Upon establishment of the lowest floor of an
elevated structure or structure constructed on fill, it shall be the duty of
the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of
the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor, as built. Said
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same.
The Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor elevation survey
data submitted. The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such
review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the
survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project. Any work undertaken prior to
submission of the elevation certification shall be at the applicant's risk.



         (b)   Upon establishment of the floodproofed elevation
of a floodproofed structure, it shall be the duty of the applicant to submit
to the Floodplain Administrator a floodproofing certificate. Certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered
professional engineer and certified by same. (The Floodplain Administrator
shall review the floodproofing certification submitted.) The applicant shall
correct any deficiencies detected by such review before any further work is
allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the floodproofing certification or
failure to make correction required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project.



      (4)   Finished construction. 



         (a)   Upon completion of construction, an elevation
certification which depicts the "as-built" lowest floor elevation is required
to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification is required to be
submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



         (b)   Upon completion of construction, a FEMA elevation
certificate, Form 81-31, which depicts all finished construction, is required
to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, a FEMA floodproofing certificate, Form 81-65, is
required to be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



   (C)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.



      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is
hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



      (2)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator shall include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Review all floodplain development permits to
assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



         (b)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the
SFHA and complete substantial damage determinations.



         (c)   Ensure that construction authorization has been
granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development
projects subject to § 159.06(E) and (G)(1), and maintain a record of such
authorization (either copy of actual permit/ authorization or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment).



         (d)   Ensure that all necessary federal, state and local
permits have been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain
development permit. Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be
maintained on file with the floodplain development permit.



         (e)   Maintain and track permit records involving
additions and improvements to residences located in the SFHA.



         (f)   Notify adjacent communities and the State
Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.



         (g)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon
request local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial
damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters of Map
Change (LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and
floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation),
federal permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for
all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.



         (h)   Utilize and enforce all Letters of Map Change
(LOMC) or Physical Map Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently
effective SFHA maps of the community.



         (i)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance.



         (j)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with § 159.05(B).



         (k)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which
any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in
accordance with § 159.05(B).



         (l)   Perform a minimum of three inspections to ensure
that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements have
been satisfied: the first upon the establishment of the Flood Protection
Grade reference mark at the development site; the second upon the
establishment of the structure's footprint/establishment of the lowest floor;
and the final inspection upon completion and submission of the required
finished construction elevation certificate. Authorized city officials shall
have the right to enter and inspect properties located in the SFHA.



         (m)   Stop work orders.



            1.   Upon notice from the floodplain
administrator, work on any building, structure or premises that is being done
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease.



            2.   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



         (n)   Revocation of permits.



            1.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a
permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases
where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the
material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was
based.



            2.   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a
permit upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the
construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation,
or replacement of the structure for which the permit was issued is in
violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.06  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.



   (A)   General standards.  In all SFHAs and known flood prone areas
the following provisions are required:



      (1)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (3)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG.



      (4)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



      (5)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be
located at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG.



      (6)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system.



      (7)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system.



      (8)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



      (9)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this
chapter.



      (10)   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the SFHA
may be constructed with permeable materials.



      (11)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the BFE shall be compensated for and balanced by an
equivalent volume of excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume
shall be at least equal to the volume of storage lost (replacement ratio of 1
to 1) due to the fill or structure.



         (a)   The excavation shall take place in the floodplain
and in the same property in which the authorized fill or structure is located.



         (b)   Under certain circumstances, the excavation may be
allowed to take place outside of but adjacent to the floodplain provided that
the excavated volume will be below the regulatory flood elevation, will be in
the same property (if not, the excavation will take place upstream) in which
the authorized fill or structure is located, will be accessible to the
regulatory flood water, will not be subject to ponding when not inundated by
flood water, and that it shall not be refilled.



         (c)   The excavation shall provide for true storage of
floodwater but shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood
water.



         (d)   The fill or structure shall not obstruct a
drainage way leading to the floodplain.



         (e)   The grading around the excavation shall be such
that the excavated area is accessible to the regulatory flood water.



         (f)   The fill or structure shall be of a material
deemed stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding
and shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



         (g)   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated and
filled shall be submitted prior to the actual start of construction or any
site work; once site work is complete, but before the actual start of
construction, the applicant shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator a
certified survey of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and
excavation comply with this section.



   (B)   Specific standards.  In all SFHAs, the following provisions
are required:



      (1)   In addition to the requirements of § 159.06(A), all
structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



         (a)   Construction or placement of any structure having
a floor area greater than 400 square feet.



         (b)   Addition or improvement made to any existing
structure where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 40%
of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land).



         (c)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged
structure where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure
(excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred.



         (d)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational
vehicle on a site for more than 120 days.



         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a
new manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.



         (f)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive
loss structure.



         (g)   Addition or improvement made to any existing
structure with a previous addition or improvement constructed since the
community's first floodplain ordinance.



      (2)   Residential structures. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor, including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of § 159.06(B)(4).



      (3)   Non-residential structures. New construction or
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base
flood elevation) or be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid
foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be
provided in accordance with the standards of § 159.06(B)(4). Structures
located in all "A Zones" may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if
done in accordance with the following:



         (a)   A Registered Professional Engineer or Architect
shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 159.05(C)(12).



         (b)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without
human intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



      (4)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above
the FPG.  Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed
to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and
exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings located in a
minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area).



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no more than
one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath
each opening, whichever is higher.



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions.



         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



         (e)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



         (f)   The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be
at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



         (g)   Openings are to be not less than three inches in
any direction in the plane of the wall. This requirement applies to the hole
in the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted such as typical
foundation air vent device.



         (h)   Property owners shall be required to execute a
flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings will be
maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of the
openings in any way will violate the requirements of § 159.06(B)(4).
Periodic inspections will be conducted by the Floodplain Administrator to
ensure compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the office of the
Howard County Recorder.



         (i)   Property owners shall be required to execute and
record with the structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that
the area below the lowest floor (where the interior height of the enclosure
exceeds six feet) shall not be improved, finished or otherwise converted; the
community will have the right to inspect the enclosed area. The
non-conversion agreement shall be recorded in the office of the Howard County
Recorder.



      (5)   Structures Constructed on Fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:



         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than
one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with
either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test
showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file.



         (b)   The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the BFE.



         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and
scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than 3 horizontal to
1 vertical.



         (d)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of
surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



         (e)   The top of the lowest floor including basements
shall be at or above the FPG.



         (f)   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or
earthen material.



      (6)   Standards for manufactured homes and recreational
vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or
substantially improved on a site for more than 120 days must meet one of the
following requirements:



         (a)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes
to be placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as a result of a flood:



            (i)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



            (ii)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in § 159.06(B)(4).



            (iii)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not
attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required
to have openings.



         (b)   These requirements apply to all manufactured homes
to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
that has not been substantially damaged by a flood:



            (i)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.



            (ii)   Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation
and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished
living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required
for elevated structures in § 159.06(B)(4).



            (iii)   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting not
attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not required
to have openings.



         (c)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall
either:



            (i)   be on site for less than 120 days;



            (ii)   be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            (iii)   meet the requirements for "manufactured
homes" as stated earlier in this section.



      (7)   Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



         (a)   Shall not be used for human habitation.



         (b)   Shall be constructed of flood resistant materials.



         (c)   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.



         (d)   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.



         (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.



         (f)   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures in § 159.06(B)(4).



      (8)   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above
ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or
lateral movement.



   (C)   Standards for subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured
home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or
five acres.



      (5)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize development in
the SFHA and/or limit density of development permitted in the SFHA.



      (6)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access
into/out of SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles (especially emergency
responders).



   (D)   Critical facility. No critical facilities shall be built
within the SFHA.



   (E)   Standards for identified floodways.



      (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 159.04(B), are
areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential
projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified
floodway, the Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward
the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of IC 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/ improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (IC 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial
addition/improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to
elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is
required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.)



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for
construction in the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or
letter of authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local Floodplain
Development Permit, provided the provisions contained in § 159.06 have been
met. The Floodplain Development Permit cannot be less restrictive than the
permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive regulations (if
any) shall take precedence.



      (3)   No development shall be allowed which, acting alone or
in combination with existing or future development, will adversely affect the
efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse
effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of
at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by comparing the
regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the
natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses.



      (4)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per
mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12.



   (F)   Standards for identified fringe. If the site is located in an
identified fringe, then the Floodplain Administrator may issue the local
Floodplain Development Permit provided the provisions contained in § 159.06
have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any
new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



   (G)   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation
and/or floodways/fringes.



      (1)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one
square mile:



         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where
the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment.



         (b)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain
Administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway (including
letters of authorization) or a floodplain analysis/ regulatory assessment
citing the 1% annual chance flood elevation and the recommended Flood
Protection Grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



         (c)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of
authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the
proposed development, a Floodplain Development Permit may be issued provided
the conditions of the Floodplain Development Permit are not less restrictive
than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
and the provisions contained in § 159.06 have been met.



      (2)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one
square mile:



         (a)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where
the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and 1% annual
chance flood elevation for the site.



         (b)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue the local Floodplain Development Permit, provided the provisions
contained in § 159.06 have been met.



      (3)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages. Developer is required to
submit H & H study.



   (H)   Standards for flood prone areas. All development in known
flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA published map
is available, shall meet applicable standards as required per § 159.06.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6230, passed 5-21-02; Am. Ord. 6785,
passed 1-12-15)  Penalty, see § 159.99



§ 159.07  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board.  The City of
Kokomo Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board. The Board shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination is made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may appeal such decision to the Howard County Circuit Court.



   (C)   Variance procedures. In passing upon such applications, the
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



      (4)   The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location,
where applicable.



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.



      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.



      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



      (9)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site.



      (10)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (D)   Conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship.



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway
subject to § 159.06(E) or (G)(1) may be granted.



      (3)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §
159.06(E) or (G)(1) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.



      (4)   Variances to the Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
of § 159.06(B), may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on
a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures.



      (7)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice specifying the difference between the Flood Protection
Grade and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating
that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased
risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see § 159.07(E)).



      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records
of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request
(see § 159.07(E)).



   (E)   Variance notification.



      (1)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows
the lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade
shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the flood protection grade will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the flood protection grade
increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded
by the Floodplain Administrator in the Office of the County Recorder and
shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the
affected parcel of land.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



   (F)   Historic structure. Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an "historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (G)   Special conditions.  Upon the consideration of the factors
listed in § 159.07, and the purposes of this chapter, the City of Kokomo
Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



§ 159.99  PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a Floodplain Development Permit in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of a Floodplain Development Permit or
conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such
in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Code for the city. All
violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,500.



   (A)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the
violation continues to exist.



   (B)   The Director of the City Plan Commission shall inform the
owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood
damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy
to be suspended.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 5959, passed 3-13-95; Am. Ord. 6785, passed 1-12-15)



CHAPTER 160:  RENTAL HOUSING



Section



   160.01   Definitions



   160.02   Purpose, rules of construction



   160.03   Compliance required; application of chapter



   160.04   Registration of rental units required



   160.05   Inspection



   160.06   Registration permits



   160.07   Retaliatory eviction prohibited



   160.08   Authority of Rental Housing Officer



   160.09   Rental Housing Officer



   160.10   Appellate body; appeal procedure



   160.11   Rental Housing Code



   160.12   Intent



   160.13   Structures



   160.14   Enforcement authority



   160.15   Duties and powers of Rental Housing Officer



   160.16   Notices and orders



   160.17   Scope; tense and definition of terms



   160.18   Applicability of requirements



   160.19   Premises condition



   160.20   Exterior of structures



   160.21   Interior of structures



   160.22   Light, ventilation and space requirements



   160.23   Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements



   160.24   Water system



   160.25   Sewage system



   160.26   Mechanical and electrical requirements



   160.27   Fire safety



   160.28   Responsibilities of persons



   160.29   Relationship to other ordinances



 



   160.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Housing, see Ch. 152



§ 160.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ADULT."  Every person at least 18 years of age or younger it
emancipated.



   "DWELLING UNIT."  A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   "FAMILY."  An individual, or two or more persons living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.



   "HABITABLE ROOM."  Any room meeting the requirements of this code for
sleeping, living, or dining purposes excluding such enclosed places as
closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage places,
utility rooms and similar spaces.



   "MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING."  A residential building designed for, or
modified to accommodate, more than three independent rental units, with the
number of families in residence not exceeding the number of existing rental
units.



   "REGISTRATION PERMIT."  The permit issued by the city upon
registration of the property.  The registration permit shall remain in
effect until revoked for cause as set out in this chapter, or until a
transfer of legal title to the property, whichever occurs first. Issuance of
a registration permit is not evidence that a property meets the requirements
of this chapter, or is otherwise fit for human habitation.



   "OWNER."  Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property.



   "PERSON."  A corporation or copartnership as well as an individual.



   "PREMISES."  A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.



   "RENTAL BUILDING."  A building containing one or more rental units.



   "RENTAL HOUSING CODE."  Sections 160.11 through 160.28.



   "RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER."  That municipal officer charged with the
primary responsibility of enforcement of the provisions of this code. As set
out in § 160.09 hereof, the city Building Inspector shall serve as the
Rental Housing Officer.



   "RENTAL UNIT."  A rented dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   "ROOMING HOUSE."  Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
five or more persons who are not husband or wife, sister or brother, son or
daughter or father or mother of the owner or operator.



   "ROOMING UNIT."  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   "TENANT."  Any person entitled to occupy a rental unit under a tenancy
agreement to the exclusion of others.



   "TENANCY AGREEMENT."  Includes all agreements, written, oral or
implied, and valid rules and regulations embodying the terms and conditions
concerning the use and occupancy of a rental unit and premises.



   "TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY."  Occupancy which is less than two weeks
duration in the same or similar units owned by the same owner.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.02  PURPOSE, RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its
underlying purpose, which is to encourage the maintenance and improvement of
the quality of rental housing in the city.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.03  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   No person shall occupy or maintain a rental unit within the
city unless in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   This chapter applies to rental units located within the city,
including governmental or public agencies acting as landlords, but shall not
apply to, the following arrangements unless the arrangements are created to
avoid the application of this chapter;



      (1)   Occupancy in "group homes" as that term is defined in
the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   Occupancy in federally subsidized and owned housing
complexes which have multiple on-site units and which are owned and
maintained by the federal government or a local housing authority, or
scattered site Section 8 housing units administered by a local housing
authority.



      (3)   Occupancy by the purchaser of a dwelling unit under a
recorded contract of sale.



      (4)   Transient occupancy in hotel, motel or other similar
lodgings.



      (5)   Owners who reside in a single-family dwelling unit but
who wish to lease to individuals or a family while they are absent from the
city for short periods of time, not to exceed one year, and who intend to
return to their single-family dwelling unit at the expiration of the lease
period.



      (6)   Owners who occupy the premises and rent to no more than
two occupants.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.04  REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No owner of real estate within the city shall use real estate
for the purpose of erecting or maintaining a rental unit thereon without
registering the property with the Rental Housing Officer.  The registration
shall be effected by furnishing to that officer, upon a form furnished by the
officer, the following information:



      (1)   Name of owner;



      (2)   Address of owner;



      (3)   Street address of owner;



      (4)   Telephone number where owner can be reached in an
emergency;



      (5)   Brief description of type and number of rental units;



      (6)   If the owner is not a resident of Howard County,
Indiana, or a county contiguous to Howard County, the name, address, and
telephone number of owner's agent authorized to receive notification of
complaints, damages, emergencies, substandard conditions or other
communications, including service of process.  The address of any agent so
designated shall be within the county or a contiguous county.  Any owner who
does not reside in Howard County, Indiana, or a contiguous county, shall be
required to designate a resident agent; and



      (7)   Property in service as a rental property prior to
November 1, 2003 shall be allowed to continue as a rental property as it
pertains to this chapter, and any subsequent purchaser of the property shall
retain this right.



   (B)   The registration form shall be signed by the owner.



   (C)   Whenever ownership of a rental unit changes, the new owner
shall have the responsibility to report the change in ownership to the Rental
Housing Officer within 30 days of the change of ownership. Previously issued
registration permits shall automatically expire 30 days following transfer of
title to a registered property.



   (D)   Notification of the owner or his or her agent at the address
shown on the registration form shall constitute sufficient notice pursuant to
any provision of this chapter.



   (E)   Registration shall be evidenced by issuance of a registration
permit.  The registration permit for a given property shall remain in effect
until revoked for cause as set out in this chapter, or until a transfer of
the legal title to the property, whichever occurs first.



   (F)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner to
maintain a rental unit which has not been registered in accordance with this
section.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 6454, passed 11-13-06)  Penalty, see §
160.99



§ 160.05  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Each rental unit and premises within the city is subject to
inspection by the Rental Housing Officer.



   (B)   The Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to
establish a reasonable fee schedule to cover the actual cost of inspections,
including labor costs.  The fee schedule may be amended from time to time to
reflect changes in the cost of inspections.  The fee schedule and any
subsequent amendments to the fee schedule are subject to prior approval of
the Kokomo Common Council.  Such approval shall be evidenced by adoption of
a resolution approving the fee schedule, or any amendments thereto. Where
multiple inspections are required to assure that defects are corrected,
separate fees may be charged for each re-inspection.



   (C)   Inspections may be done at the discretion of the Rental
Housing Officer, in those instances where the Rental Housing Officer has
probable cause to believe there is non-compliance of the provisions of this
chapter based either upon visual observation of the property; the personal
knowledge of Rental Housing Officer; or upon the written, signed complaint of
any resident of the city, any governmental agency, or the rental unit's
tenant, the tenant's legal representative, the owner, or the owner's agent. 
The identity of the person making the complaint shall be made available to
the landlord upon the landlord's request.



   (D)   Unless waived by the owner or tenant, the following procedure
shall be used to obtain entry to rental units for the purpose of
inspection.  The owner of the unit, or the owner's representative, shall be
contacted and a date shall be established for inspection.  The owner, or the
owner's representative, shall then furnish to the Rental



   Housing Officer a current list of tenants for each rental unit to be
inspected.  The Rental Housing Officer shall then send a certified letter
with return receipt requested and a stamped self-addressed postcard to each
tenant.  If there is evidence that the tenant received the letter, but no
other response is received from the tenant, consent to enter will be
presumed.  An official record shall be maintained of all notices.  The
owner, or owner's representative, shall be responsible for granting access to
the inspector upon presentation of a copy of the official record of notices
and responses.



   (E)   (1)Should either a tenant or owner refuse to allow an
inspection after proper notification, the Rental Housing Officer shall not
inspect without first obtaining an inspection warrant utilizing the procedure
set out at IC 36-7-9-16.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting an emergency inspection when there is probable cause to believe
there exists an imminent danger to life, property, or public health.



   (F)   All other provisions of this section notwithstanding, the city
may contract with outside persons or companies to perform inspections
services provided that all such entities shall report to the Rental Housing
Officer who alone shall have enforcement authority.



   (G)   All other provisions of this section notwithstanding, no
inspection fee shall be charged under the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon inspection by the Rental Housing Officer, or that
officer's designee, insufficient evidence is found of material violations of
the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   Upon appeal to the Kokomo Board of Public Works and
Safety as provided in § 160.10, it is found by that board that there is
insufficient evidence of material violations of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (H)   Any person found by the Rental Housing Officer to have
maliciously submitted a complaint under this section for the purpose of
harassing the owner, or to gain any other unlawful advantage over the owner,
is subject to being cited for violation of this chapter and shall be subject
to the penalties set out at § 160.99.  Any such determination is subject to
appeal to the Board of Public Works and Safety as provided in § 160.10.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.06  REGISTRATION PERMITS.



   (A)   A registration permit shall be issued for all registered
rental units.



   (B)   The owners of rental units and premises found to be in
violation of the Rental Housing Code shall be notified in writing of the
reason for disapproval and given a reasonable time to bring the property into
compliance with the Rental Housing Code.  Such period shall be no less than
30 days.



   (C)   At the end of the time period specified in the notice
described in division (B), any rental unit or premises found to be in
violation of the Rental Housing Code shall be re-inspected by the Rental
Housing Officer after such owner or agent has effected those corrections and
additions required by the city as a result of any previous inspection.  Upon
such re-inspection the rental unit and premises shall be approved or
disapproved for a continuation of the property's registration permit.  If
re-inspection is not requested by the owner or his or her agent at the end of
the time period specified in the notice described in division (B), or upon
re-inspection the unit and premises is not approved, any current registration
permit shall be revoked.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner to allow
tenants under a tenancy agreement to occupy a rental unit that does not have
a valid registration permit.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.07  RETALIATORY EVICTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner or his or her
agent to bring or threaten to bring an action for possession for the purpose
of retaliating against a tenant for requesting an inspection as provided for
in § 160.05.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.08  AUTHORITY OF RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER.



   In addition to any penalty that may be imposed pursuant to § 160.99
for violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Rental Housing Officer
may:



   (A)   Declare a rental unit to be unsafe.



   (B)   Issue an emergency order, including an order to vacate the
premises, where immediate action is required to protect the health and safety
of the public or of the occupants of the rental unit.



   (C)   Seek any additional remedy at law or in equity which provides
appropriate action against the person responsible for the violation for the
purpose of ordering him or her to:



      (1)   Restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain
from any further execution of work.



      (2)   Restrain or correct the erection, installation, or
alteration of such structure.



      (3)   Require the removal of work in progress that is in
violation, or part thereof, erected, constructed, installed or altered in
violation of, or not in compliance with, the provisions of this code, or in
violation of a plan or specification under which an approval, permit or
certificate was issued.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.09  RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Building Inspector shall act as the Rental Housing
Officer.  Should funding for the office be provided by the Common Council, a
new position may be established to perform the duties of Rental Housing
Officer exclusively.  In addition, such other staff as are necessary may be
assigned to administer the provisions of this chapter.  Such additional
staff shall either be current employees of the city, or, should funding be
provided by the Common Council, additional positions may be added as required
to assist in the administration of this chapter.



   (B)   The decisions of the Rental Housing Officer may be appealed to
the Board of Public Works and Safety on petition filed with the Board within
20 days after the Rental Housing Officer's decision.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.10  APPELLATE BODY; APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any landowner in receipt of a written notice issued pursuant
to § 160.16 shall have the right to appeal the notice of violation issued.
Such appeal shall be made to the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety
pursuant to the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Within ten days of a notice issued under § 160.16, the
aggrieved landowner shall serve upon the Kokomo Board of Public Works and
Safety a written statement setting forth the landowner’s objections to the
terms of such notices and the reasons for such objections. Receipt of such a
written statement by the President shall stay further action on the notices
pending review by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety sitting as a
whole.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the landowner’s statement of objections, the
Board shall offer the landowner an opportunity for a hearing on the
objections at the Board’s earliest opportunity. At such hearing, the
landowner, or the landowner’s representative, who may be an attorney, shall
be given the opportunity to offer evidence, examine and cross examine
witnesses, and present arguments to show why a notice of violation should be
rescinded or modified.



   (D)   Upon conclusion of the landowner’s presentation, the Board
shall deliberate and may either confirm, modify and confirm, or rescind any
notices issued pursuant to this section. The decision of the Board shall be
final.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 6849, passed 12-12-16)



§ 160.11  RENTAL HOUSING CODE.



   There is established the Rental Housing Code, the purpose of which is
to protect community neighborhoods and the public health, safety, and welfare
in all existing and new rental units and their premises by:



   (A)   Establishing minimum maintenance standards for rental units
and their premises; for basic equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for space,
use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of rental units;



   (B)   Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
of rental units; and



   (C)   Providing for administration, enforcement, and penalties.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.12  INTENT.



   (A)   This provisions of the of the Rental Housing Code shall be
construed liberally to insure public health, safety and welfare insofar as
they are affected by the maintenance of structures and premises.



   (B)   The provisions of the Rental Housing Code shall not be
construed to prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided herein.



   (C)   All other provisions of the Municipal Code relating to
building maintenance, including but not limited to, Chapter 152 of the
Municipal Code, entitled "Housing", are incorporated herein by reference as
if fully set forth herein.



   (D)   Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or changes of use
therein, which may be caused directly of indirectly by the enforcement of
this chapter shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions
of the Rental Housing Code and the Municipal Code of the city.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as
abolishing or impairing existing remedies available to the city relating to
the removal or demolition of any buildings that are deemed dangerous, unsafe,
or unsanitary.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.13  STRUCTURES.



   (A)   This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial
and continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises as rental
units and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise established by
ordinance which may be additional to or more stringent than the provisions
contained herein for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of
structures, equipment or facilities.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all rental units whether or not
existing at the time this chapter is adopted.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.14  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Officer.  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Rental Housing Officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Relief from personal liability.  Any Rental Housing Officer
or other city employee acting as designee who acts in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of the duties of enforcement of this chapter is
relieved of all personal liability for any damage or costs that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act.  Any
such liability shall be assumed by the city.



   (C)   Official records.  An official record shall be kept of all
business and activities of the Rental Housing Officer specified in the
provisions of this code, and all such records shall be open to public
inspection at all appropriate times and under reasonable regulations
established by the Rental Housing Officer to maintain the integrity and
security of such records.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.15  DUTIES AND POWERS OF RENTAL HOUSING OFFICER.



   (A)   General.  The Rental Housing Officer shall enforce all the
provisions of this chapter relative to the maintenance of structures and
premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by other
regulations, ordinances, or laws.



   (B)   Notices and orders.  The Rental Housing Officer shall issue
all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to
insure compliance with the code requirements for the safety, health, and
general welfare of the public.



   (C)   Inspections.  In order to safeguard the safety, health and
welfare of the public, a Rental Housing Officer is authorized to enter any
structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making
inspections and performing duties under this chapter in accordance with §
160.05 hereof.  Provided that, should consent to enter not be voluntarily
given, application for an inspection warrant shall be made pursuant to the
provisions of § 160.05 hereof.



   (D)   Coordination of enforcement.  Whenever, in the opinion of a
Rental Housing Officer it is deemed necessary or desirable to have
inspections made by any other city department, the Rental Housing Officer
shall arrange for such inspections.  He or she shall make reasonable effort
to arrange for the coordination of inspections to minimize the number of
visits by inspectors, and to confer with the other departments for the
purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued.  A
department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any emergency order,
notice or citation which it determines must be issued.



   (E)   Rule making authority.  Upon the recommendation of the Rental
Housing Officer, the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety shall have those
powers as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health and
general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret
and implement the provisions of this chapter to secure its intent, but such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided
in this chapter or of violating accepted practice involving public safety. 
Prior to taking effect, such rules and regulations must be approved by the
Kokomo Common Council by resolution.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.16  NOTICES AND ORDER.



   (A)   Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. 
Whenever a Rental Housing Officer determines that there has been a violation
of this chapter, or has reasonable cause to believe that a violation has
occurred, the Rental Housing Officer shall give notice to the owner or the
person or persons responsible for the property in the manner described below.



   (B)   Form.  Such notice prescribed in § 160.15 shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Shall include a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification;



      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is
being issued;



      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time
for the repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with provisions of this chapter; and



      (5)   Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek
modification or withdrawal of the notice by petition to the Kokomo Board of
Public Works and Safety.



   (C)   Service.  The notice prescribed in §§ 160.15 and 160.16
shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or such person or
persons responsible for the property if a copy thereof is delivered to the
person personally; or by leaving the notice at the person's usual place of
abode; or by mailing certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person's last
known address; or if the letter is returned because it could not be
delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.17  SCOPE; TENSE AND DEFINITION OF TERMS.



   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this
section.



   (B)   Interchangeability.  Words used in the present tense include
the future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.



   (C)   Terms defined in other codes.  Where terms are not defined in
this chapter and are defined in the building, electrical, plumbing and/or
mechanical codes otherwise adopted by this code they shall have the same
meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.



   (D)   Terms not defined.  Where terms are not defined under the
provisions of this chapter or under the provisions of the building,
electrical, plumbing and/or mechanical codes they shall have ascribed to them
their ordinarily accepted meaning, or such as the context herein may imply.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.18  APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
minimum standards for maintenance of rental property within the city.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the premises shall maintain
such properties in compliance with these requirements.  A person shall not
let to another for occupancy or use premises which do not comply with the
following requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.19  PREMISES CONDITION.



   (A)   Sanitation.  All exterior property areas and premises shall
be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.  Should a tenant vacate the premises
leaving an accumulation of abandoned furniture, appliances, clothing and the
like, it shall be the responsibility of the landlord to dispose of the
same.  Such materials shall not be set out for collection by city crews, nor
shall they be left in any place visible from a public street.



   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water, or within any
structure located thereon.



   (C)   Weeds.  All areas shall be kept free from weeds or plant
growth that are noxious or detrimental to the public health and welfare.



   (D)   Grass height.  All grass and weeds over eight inches in
height shall be mowed and the trimmings raked and disposed of properly.



   (E)   Accessory structures.  All accessory structures, including
detached garages, fences, and walls, shall be structurally sound; shall be
properly surface coated when required to prevent deterioration; and shall be
free of all electrical and fire hazards and harmful insects and rodent
infestation.



   (F)   Outdoor furniture, vending machines and appliances.  All
furniture placed outside the rental unit shall be waterproof and shall be
maintained in good repair.  Vending machines, if any, shall be in an
enclosed area not visible from the public street.  No appliances shall be
visible from the public street.



   (G)   Parking.  All rental units must have parking which complies
with the Zoning Ordinance of the city.  No parking will be allowed on lawns
or on public sidewalks.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06; Am. Ord. 6849, passed 12-12-16)



§ 160.20  EXTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be structurally
sound and sanitary and shall not pose a threat to the health and safety of
the occupants.  The structure shall protect the occupants from the
environment.



      (1)   Where the Rental Housing Officer has ordered the
exterior to be painted, compliance shall be within a period of six months
from the date the inspection report and order are mailed.  It shall be the
responsibility of the owner or agent to schedule a re-inspection with the
Rental Housing Officer during, or at the end of, the six-month period.



      (2)   Where the Rental Housing Officer has ordered repairs to
correct exterior violations other than painting, an extension of time to
complete the repairs may be granted for a period not to exceed six months
from the date that the inspection report and order are mailed; provided, no
such extension shall be granted where, in the opinion of the Rental Housing
Officer, the violations are life threatening in nature.



   (B)   Structural members.  All supporting structural members of all
structures shall be kept structurally sound, substantially free of
deterioration and be capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads
imposed upon them.



   (C)   Exterior surfaces (foundations, walls and roof).  Every
foundation, exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in a workman-like state of maintenance and repair.



   (D)   Foundation walls.  All foundation walls shall be maintained
to carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
maintained free from open cracks and breaks.



   (E)   Exterior walls.  Every exterior wall shall be substantially
free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other
conditions that might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the
walls or to occupied spaces in the building.  All exterior surface material
including wood, composition, or metal siding, shall be maintained
weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated when required to prevent
deterioration.



   (F)   Roofs.  The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and not
have defects, which might admit rain or moisture. Roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rainwater or other moisture from causing dampness in the
walls or interior portion of the building.



   (G)   Overhead extensions.  All canopies, metal awnings, stairways,
fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall
be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored.  They shall be
protected from the elements and against decay and rust by the periodic
application of weather-coating material such as paint or similar surface
treatment.



   (H)   Chimneys.  All chimneys and similar appurtenances shall be
structurally safe, sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal
or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating material such as paint or similar
surface treatment.



   (I)   Stairs and porches.  Every stair, porch, balcony, and all
attached appurtenances shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and
capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.



   (J)   Window and doorframes.  Every window, door, and frame shall
be constructed and maintained to exclude rain as completely as possible, and
to substantially exclude air infiltration.



   (K)   Weather tight.  Every window and exterior door shall be
fitted in its frame, be weather tight, substantially exclude air infiltration
and rain, and be kept in sound condition and repair.



   (L)   Operable windows.  Every habitable room shall have at least
one operable window which provides a route for emergency escape.  The window
shall be capable of being easily opened.



   (M)   Insect screens.  From May 15 to October 15 of each year every
window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes shall be
supplied with approved screening.  Every screen door shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition, except that such screens shall
not be required for outside doors of rental units that are air-conditioned,
or provide access to common hallways of multi-family rental facilities.



   (N)   Door hardware.  Every door which connects a rental unit with
any area exterior to the unit shall have a functioning locking device, door
hinge, and door latch and shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks
in rental units shall be capable of tightly securing the door.



   (O)   Basement hatchways.  Every basement or cellar hatchway shall
be constructed and maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain, and
surface drainage water into the structure.



   (P)   Guards for basement windows.  Every basement or cellar window
which is openable shall be supplied with rodent-proof shields, storm windows
or other material affording protection against the entry of rodents.



   (Q)   Exterior handrails.  Every stairwell and every flight of
stairs, which is more than three steps high, shall have handrails or railings
which shall be located as required by the Building Code, and every open
portion of a stair, porch, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches
above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Every handrail and
guardrail shall be maintained in good condition, be firmly fastened, and be
capable of bearing normally imposed loads.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.21  INTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General.  The interior of a structure and its equipment shall
be structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat
to the health and safety of the occupants and to protect occupants from the
environment.



   (B)   Structural members.  The supporting structural members of
every building shall be structurally sound, and not show any evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads.



   (C)   Interior surfaces.  Floors, walls, including windows and
doors, ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good,
clean, and sanitary condition.  Peeling paint, substantially cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood, peeling or loose wallpaper, and other defective
surface conditions shall be eliminated.  All lead based interior painted
surfaces shall be maintained in good condition. Chalky, or peeling lead based
paint surfaces will be repaired.



   (D)   Bathroom and kitchen floors.  Every toilet, bathroom and
kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained to be substantially
impervious to water and to permit such floor to be easily kept in clean and
sanitary condition.  This does not preclude carpet, provided that it is
devoid of mildew, mold, or other unsafe or unsanitary conditions.



   (E)   Free from dampness.  In every building, cellars, basements
and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure.



   (F)   Sanitation.  The interior of every structure shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of
rubbish, refuse or garbage.  Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be
properly kept inside temporary storage facilities.



   (G)   Storage.  Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to
accumulate or be stored in public halls or stairways.



   (H)   Exit doors.  Every door available as an exit shall be capable
of being opened easily from the inside and without the use of a key.



   (I)   Stairs, porches and railings.  Stairs and other exit
facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in § 152.35.



   (J)   Exit facilities.  All interior stairs and railings and other
exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or
are broken, warped or loose.  Every inside stair shall be constructed and
maintained to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.



   (K)   Handrails.  Every flight of stairs which is more than three
steps high shall have handrails located as required by the building code, and
every open portion of a stair, porch, landing and balcony which is more than
30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails.  Every
handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.22  LIGHT, VENTILATION AND SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum conditions and standards for the light, ventilation and space for the
occupancy of a structure.  All light, ventilation and space conditions shall
comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such light and ventilation and space conditions in compliance with
these requirements.  A person shall not let to another for occupancy or use
any premises which does not comply with the following requirements of this
section.



   (C)   Access to the outside.  All structures shall have access to
the outside.  Such access means shall be unobstructed.



   (D)   Light, general.  All spaces and rooms shall have sufficient
light to prevent endangerment to health and safety.



   (E)   Common halls and stairways.  Every common hall and stairway
in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall have adequate light
which shall conform to the requirements of § 152.61.



   (F)   Other spaces.  All other spaces shall be provided with
natural or artificial light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to
permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe use of the space
and the appliances, equipment and fixtures contained therein.



   (G)   Ventilation, general.  Ventilation in all spaces or rooms
shall conform to the requirements of § 152.57.



   (H)   Habitable rooms.  Every habitable room shall have at least
one window which can be easily opened or another device as will adequately
ventilate the room.



   (I)   Toilet rooms.  Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply
with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required
by this section except that a window shall not be required in bathrooms or
toilet rooms equipped with a natural or approved mechanical ventilation
system.



   (J)   Cooking facilities.  Cooking shall not be permitted in any
sleeping room, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to
be present in a sleeping room.



   (K)   Basement rooms.  Basement rooms shall conform to the
requirements of § 152.31.



   (L)   Space requirements; dwelling units.  All dwelling units shall
comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Kokomo,
Indiana.



   (M)   Space requirements; sleeping areas.  Sleeping rooms of every
dwelling unit of two or more rooms shall conform to the requirements of §
152.33.



   (N)   Prohibited use.  It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping
purposes any kitchen, non-habitable space, or public space.



   (O)   Minimum ceiling heights.  Ceiling heights shall conform to
the requirements of § 152.36.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.23  PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum plumbing facilities and fixtures to be provided.  All plumbing
facilities and fixtures shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed
insofar as they are applicable.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain plumbing facilities in compliance with these requirements.  A
person shall not let to another for occupancy or use any structure or portion
thereof or premises which does not comply with this section.



   (C)   Required facilities.



      (1)   Dwelling units.  Every dwelling unit shall include its
own plumbing facilities which shall be maintained in proper operating
condition, can be used in privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness
and the disposal of human waste.  The following minimum plumbing facilities
set forth in this section shall be supplied and maintained in a sanitary,
safe working condition.



      (2)   Toilet and bath facilities.  Toilet and bath facilities
shall conform to the requirements of § 152.42.



      (3)   Kitchen.  Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen
conforming to the requirements of § 152.41.



      (4)   Rooming houses.  At least one toilet, lavatory basin
and bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system and in good working condition shall be supplied for each five adults
within a rooming house wherever bathroom facilities are shared. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold
water at all times.



      (5)   Plumbing fixtures.



         (a)   General.  All plumbing fixtures shall be
maintained in a safe and useable condition.  All plumbing fixtures shall be
of approved non-absorbent material.



         (b)    Fixtures.  Water supply lines, plumbing
fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and
maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which they are
designed.  All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with
applicable ordinance requirements.



         (c)   Maintenance.  All plumbing facilities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to
breed insects and rodents or produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.24  WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   General.  Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, toilet, or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to a private water system approved the appropriate
health agency.  All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.



   (B)   Contamination.  The water supply shall be maintained free
from contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the overflow rim of the fixture.



   (C)   Supply.  The water supply systems shall be installed and
maintained to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures,
devices, and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to
enable them to function satisfactorily.



   (D)   Water heating facilities.  Where hot water is provided, water
heating facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly
maintained, and properly connected with hot water piping.  Water heating
facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to
permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin bathtub, shower, and laundry facility or other similar
units, at a temperature of not less than 120°F.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.25  SEWAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   General.  Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking
fountain, toilet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to a private sewage disposal system approved by the
appropriate health authorities.  Nothing in this section shall be construed
as limiting the city's prerogative of requiring connection to municipal
sewers.



   (B)   Maintenance.  Every plumbing stack, waste, and sewer line
shall be installed and maintained to function properly and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration or
health hazards.  All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance
with applicable ordinance provisions.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.26  MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
All mechanical and electrical facilities shall comply with these requirements
herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance
with these requirements.  A person shall not let to another for occupancy or
use any premises which do not comply with the requirements of this section.



   (C)   Heating facilities.



      (1)   Residential buildings.  Every rental unit and guest
room shall be provided with heating facilities which conform to the
requirements of § 152.60.



      (2)   Cooking and heating equipment.  All cooking and heating
equipment, components, and accessories and every heating, cooking, and water
heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions, and kept
functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health, and accident
hazards.  All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the building code, or other applicable laws or ordinances. 
Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited, except for approved
residential type food trays or salvers heated by a candle or alcohol lamp.



      (3)   Installation.  All mechanical equipment shall be
properly installed and safely maintained in good working condition, and be
capable of performing the function for which it was designed and intended.



      (4)   Fuel.  All fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to
an approved chimney, flue, or vent.



      (5)   Clearances.  All required clearances between fuel
burning devices, heating equipment, and combustible materials, as determined
by the manufacturer of any building code adopted by the city, shall be
maintained.



      (6)   Safety controls.  All safety controls for fuel-burning
equipment shall be maintained in operable condition.



      (7)   Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion
of the fuel in the fire burning equipment and for ventilation of the space
shall be provided.



      (8)   Fireplace.  Fireplaces, and other construction and
devices intended for use similar to a fireplace, shall be stable and
structurally safe; connected to approved chimneys; and equipped with a damper
or other approved device capable of substantially excluding air infiltration.



      (9)   Climate control.  When facilities for interior climate
control (heating cooling, and/or humidity) are integral functions of
structures that are used as dwelling units or other occupancies, such
facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous manner in
accordance with the designed capacity.



   (D)   Electrical facilities:



      (1)   Electric service.  Electric service and installation
shall conform to the requirements of § 152.64.



      (2)   Defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of
the Rental Housing Officer, that the electrical system in a structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure by reason of unsafe
service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or
installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, defects shall
be required to be corrected.  If electrical violations are cited which
require the existing electrical system of a structure to be substantially
upgraded, the Rental Housing Officer, owner, or tenant may have the city
Electrical Inspector conduct an inspection of the electrical system.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.27  FIRE SAFETY.



   (A)   Scope.  The provisions of this section shall govern the
minimum fire safety facilities and equipment required.  All structures shall
be constructed and maintained to prevent and avoid fire hazards, and in a
manner conducive to fire safety.  All fire safety facilities and equipment
shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are
applicable.



   (B)   Responsibility.  The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such fire facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements and the Fire Prevention Code.  A person shall not let to
another for occupancy or use any premises which do not comply with the
following requirements of this section.



   (C)   Means of egress.



      (1)   General.  A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of
egress shall be provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior to
a street, a yard, court, or passageway leading to a public open area at grade.



      (2)   Direct exits. Every rental unit shall have access
directly to the outside or to a public corridor, and every sleeping room
shall have an approved direct means of egress to the outside.



      (3)   Locked doors.  All doors in the required means of
egress shall be readily openable from the inner side without the use of keys.
Exits from dwelling units, shall not lead through other such units, or
through toilet rooms or bathrooms.



      (3)   Fire escapes.  All required fire escapes shall be
maintained in working condition and be structurally sound.



      (4)   Exit signs. If required, all exit signs shall be
illuminated and visible.



   (D)   Accumulations and storage.



      (1)   Accumulations.  Waste, refuse, or other materials shall
not be allowed to accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire
escapes, or other means of egress.



      (2)   Flammable matter.  Highly flammable or explosive
matter, such as paints, volatile oils, and cleaning fluids, or combustible
refuse, such as waste paper, boxes, and rags shall not be accumulated or
stored on residential premises except in reasonable quantities consistent
with normal usage.



      (3)   Residential unit.  A dwelling unit or rooming unit
shall not be located within a structure containing an establishment handling,
dispensing, or storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110°F. or
lower.



   (E)   Fire resistance ratings:



      (1)   General.  Floors, walls, ceilings, and other elements
and components required to develop a fire resistance rating shall be
maintained so that the respective fire resistance rating of the enclosure,
separation, or construction is preserved.



      (2)   Furnaces and water heaters located in sleeping rooms and
basements with sleeping rooms.  All petrochemical furnaces and petrochemical
water heaters located in sleeping rooms, or in basements containing sleeping
rooms, shall be separated from the sleeping rooms by an enclosure which shall
consist of 5/8-inch type X gypsum wallboard taped and spackled on both sides
of all walls of the enclosure.  The enclosure shall extend from floor to
ceiling and shall be constructed to eliminate all openings in the
enclosure.  Access doors and panels shall be solid-core or shall be covered
on both sides with 5/8-inch gypsum wallboard.  If combustion air cannot be
supplied from the exterior of the structure or from another interior area of
the structure, it shall be permissible to install louvered grills in the
door, access panel or wall of the enclosure.



   (F)   Fire protection systems.



      (1)   General.  All fire protection systems and equipment
shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all times.



      (2)   Fire alarms.  Fire alarms and detecting systems shall
be maintained and be suitable for their respective purposes.



      (3)   Sprinkler heads.  Sprinkler heads of fire suppression
systems, if required, shall be clean, free of corrosion and paint, and not
bent or damaged.



      (4)   Standpipe systems.  Hose stations shall be identified
and accessible.  The hose shall be in proper position, ready for operation,
dry, and free of deterioration.



      (5)   Smoke detectors required.  Subject to such exceptions
and conditions for compliance as stated herein, smoke detectors shall be
required in all rental units.



      (6)   Type and placement of smoke detectors. The type,
placement and maintenance of smoke detectors shall conform to the
requirements of IC 22-11-18-1 et seq., and as that statute may, from time to
time, be amended.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.28  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS.



   The provisions of this section shall govern the responsibilities of
persons for the maintenance of rental structures, and the equipment and
premises thereof.



   (A)   Cleanliness.  Every occupant of a rental structure or part
thereof shall keep that part of the structure or premises the individual
occupies, controls, or uses, in a clean and sanitary condition.  Every owner
of a structure containing two or more rental units shall maintain in a clean
and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the structure and
premises thereof.



   (B)   Disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish.  Every occupant of a
structure or part thereof shall dispose of all garbage, refuse and rubbish in
a clean and sanitary manner in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the Code of Ordinances.



   (C)   Garbage, refuse and rubbish storage facilities.  Every owner
of a rental building shall supply refuse containers sufficient to meet the
reasonable needs of the occupants, unless containers are supplied by the
city.  If city refuse collection is not available, the owner shall be
responsible for the removal of the garbage refuse and rubbish.



   (D)   Supplied fixtures and equipment.  The owner or occupant of a
structure or part thereof shall keep the supplied equipment and fixtures
clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable
care in their proper use and operation. Containers shall not be visible from
a public street, except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
normal weekly garbage pickup dates.



   Exception:  The occupant shall be responsible for keeping the supplied
equipment and fixtures clean and sanitary provided that the owner furnishes
the Rental Housing Officer with documentation that the equipment and fixtures
were clean and sanitary prior to the occupant taking possession of dwelling.



   (E)   Extermination.



      (1)   General.  All rental structures and premises shall be
kept free from insect and rodent infestation.  Where insects or rodents are
found, they shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will
not be injurious to human health.  After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.



      (2)   Owner.  The owner of any rental structure shall be
responsible for extermination within the structure.



      (3)   Single-family dwelling.



         (a)   The occupant shall be responsible for
extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests in the structure and
on the premises where:



            1.   The first observable signs of infestation
appear more than 30 days after the occupant takes possession of the premises;



            2.   The first observable signs of infestation
appear within 30 days after the occupant takes possession of the premises,
and the occupant fails to notify the owner of infestation within the 30-day
period; or



            3.   The owner, after being notified pursuant to
subsection (3)(a)1. above, has undertaken extermination which eliminated
infestation within 45 days after the extermination began; or



            4.   Whenever the Rental Housing Officer
determines that infestation was caused by the occupant's violation of
housekeeping provisions of the Rental Housing Code, regardless of when the
infestation occurs or is reported to the owner.



         (b)   The owner shall be responsible for extermination
where:



            1.   The occupant notifies the owner of the
infestation within 30 days of the occupant's occupancy; or



            2.   After the owner has been notified pursuant to
subsection (b)1. above, infestation still exists 45 days after extermination
was commenced; except that if the owner presents the Rental Housing Officer
with proof that a satisfactory effort was made to control the infestation,
then the occupant shall be responsible for further extermination if continued
infestation is attributable to the occupant.



      (4)   Multiple occupancy.  Every owner, agent or operator of
a structure containing two or more rental units shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rodents or other pests in the shared or public
areas of the structure and premises.  The owner shall be responsible for
extermination within each rental unit, except that where an occupant's poor
housekeeping has caused infestation; the occupant shall be responsible for
extermination within the occupant's rental unit.



      (5)   Continued rodent infestation.  Continuing or repeated
incidents of rodent infestation shall require the installation of rat and
vermin resistant walls.  The rat and vermin resistant walls shall be
installed in accordance with building codes.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)  Penalty, see § 160.99



§ 160.29  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES.



   It is the intent of the Common Council of the city, that this chapter
provide a comprehensive regulatory program for rental housing within the
city.  Provisions of this chapter are to be interpreted to be compatible
with all other ordinances of the city, whether in effect as of the date of
the adoption of this chapter, or thereafter adopted. When this chapter
conflicts with other ordinances, private covenants, commitments, permits,
agreements, state laws, federal laws, or other regulations, the greater
restriction shall control.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



§ 160.99  PENALTY.



   Where no other penalty is provided in this chapter for a violation
thereof, violations will be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for
each violation.  Each day that a violation continues will be deemed a
separate offense.



(Ord. 6424, passed 6-12-06)



CHAPTER 161:  STORMWATER EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



Section



   161.01   Introduction; purpose



   161.02   Definitions



   161.03   Permits



   161.04   Review and approval



   161.05   Inspection



   161.06   Enforcement



   161.07   Termination



   161.08   Stormwater permit fees



 



   161.99   Penalty



§ 161.01  INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE.



   (A)   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water.  Eroded soil endangers water resources by
reducing water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish
and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers
and ditches and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading
during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat.



   (B)   As a result, the purpose of this chapter is to safeguard
persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in the
city.  This chapter will also promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of
any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or
results in the movement of earth on land in the city.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BMP - BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE."  Any structural or nonstructural
control measure utilized to improve the quality and, as appropriate, reduce
the quantity of stormwater run-off.  The term includes schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practice, treatment requirements, operation and
maintenance procedures, use of containment facilities, land use planning,
policy techniques, and other management practices.



   "CLEARING."  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   "CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY."  Land disturbing activities associated with
the construction of infrastructure or structures. The term



   "CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY" does not include routine ditch or road
maintenance or minor landscaping projects.



   "CONSTRUCTION PLAN."  An ordered collection of drawings, narratives,
data and documents assembled for review, approval, authorization, and
establishment of guidelines for the imitation, management, and completion of
construction activities at a project site regulated by this chapter.  A
storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) is a part of the construction
plan.



   "CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SITE."  The physical location(s) or legal
boundaries within which a construction activity or a series of construction
activities is planned to be or is being accomplished.



   "CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS."  A stabilized stone surface at all points
of construction related egress from a project site planned and installed in
accordance with specification from an approved reference manual, and
maintained throughout the period of land disturbing activities for the
purpose of capturing and detaining sediment carried by tires, tracks, or
other surface contact components of vehicles, earthmoving equipment, or
material and personnel transport conveyances.



   "DRAINAGE WAY."  Any channel that conveys surface stormwater runoff.



   "DEPARTMENT."  Reference to the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management (IDEM).



   "DEVELOPER."  A project site owner or person financially responsible
for construction activity; or an owner of property who sells, leases, or
offers for sale or lease, any lot(s) in a subdivision or larger common plan
of development or sale.



   "DIRECTOR."  The chief executive officer of IDEM.



   "EROSION CONTROL."  A measure that prevents erosion.



   "POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN."  A set of plans prepared by or under the
direction of a licensed professional engineer or Certified Professional in
Storm Water Quality (CPSWQ) indicating the specific measures and sequencing
to be used to control sediment and erosion on a development site during and
after construction.



   "EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SYSTEM."  Appropriate control measures
combined to prevent or minimize the wearing away of soil, sediment, and rock
fragments by water, wind, or ice, and to intercept detached or suspended
particles to prevent their discharge from or within a project site.



   "FINAL STABILIZATION."  The establishment of permanent vegetative
cover or the application of a permanent, non-erosive material to areas where
all land disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land
disturbing activities are planned under the current plan.



   "GRADING."  Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.



   "INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT."  A single parcel of land in a multi-parcel
development.



   "LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY."  Any manmade change of the land surface,
including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil,
excavating, filling, transporting, and grading.



   "MEASURABLE STORM EVENT."  A precipitation event that results in a
total measured accumulation of precipitation equal to or greater than
one-half inch of rainfall.



   "MS4 - MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM."  A system of stormwater
conveyances either owned or operated or regulated by a governmental agency
that IDEM has designated as responsible to eliminate or minimize pollutant
loadings of the stormwater entering waters of the state.



   "MS4 AREA."  Within this chapter, the corporate limits of the city
under an NPDES Permit regulated by 327 IAC 15-13.



   "MS4 OPERATOR."  The person locally responsible for development,
implementation, or enforcement of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan
(SWQMP) for the city as regulated under 327 IAC 15-13.



   "NOTICE OF PLAN APPROVAL (NPA)."  A notification from the MS4 operator
to the project site owner that the construction plan for a project site has
been reviewed and approved by the MS4 operator. The project site owner must
insert the NPA with the notice of intent sent to the Director of IDEM at
least 48 hours prior to initiating land disturbing activities at the
construction project site.



   "NPDES."  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, a
program administered by IDEM to reduce or eliminate the pollutant loadings
into public waters.



   "PEAK DISCHARGE."  The maximum rate of flow from a point of stormwater
discharge during or immediately following a storm event, usually in reference
to a specific return period or 'design storm'.



   "PERIMETER CONTROL."  A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a
site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.



   "PERMANENT STABILIZATION."  The establishment, at a uniform minimum of
70% across the disturbed areas, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive
material that ensures the resistance of the underlying soil to erosion,
sliding, or other movement.



   "PHASING OF CONSTRUCTION."  Sequential development of smaller portions
of a large project site, stabilizing each portion before initiating land
disturbing activities on the next portion, to minimize exposure of land to
erosion.



   "RUNOFF."  An accumulation of stormwater flow that is moving across
the surface of the earth as sheet flow or concentrated flow in natural
surface watercourses, drains, or waterways.



   "SEDIMENT."  Solid material, both organic and mineral, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.



   "SEDIMENTATION."  The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated
sediment carried by stormwater runoff.



   "SEDIMENT CONTROL."  Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.



   "SITE."  A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   "SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT."  A permit issued by the municipality for
the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff, and grading.



   "START OF CONSTRUCTION."  The first land-disturbing activity
associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing,
grading, and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for
basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and
installation of accessory buildings such as garages.



   "STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3)."  A plan developed to
minimize the impact of stormwater pollutants resulting from construction and
post-construction activities.



   "STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE."  A practice or combination of practices
to control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater runoff.



   "TEMPORARY STABILIZATION."  The covering of soil to ensure its
resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement.  The term includes
vegetative cover, anchored mulch, or other non-erosive materials applied at a
uniform minimum density of 70% across the disturbed areas of a project site.



   "TRACKING."  The movement and re-depositing of dirt, mud, aggregate,
sediment, or other stormwater pollutants from a project site by the actions
of wheels, tires, skids, tracks, or other surface contact components of cars,
trucks, heavy equipment, or material and personnel transport conveyances.



   "WATERCOURSE."  Any body of water, including, but not limited to
lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated within the city.



   "WATERWAY."  A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or
to the public storm drainage system.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.03  PERMITS.



   (A)   No responsible party may commence a land disturbing
construction activity subject to this chapter without first receiving prior
approval of a site development permit.



   (B)   The Pollution Prevention Plan submitted to the MS4 operator or
designated representative shall include all documents and information
required within 327 IAC 15-5 and 327 IAC 15-5-6.5.



   (C)   No developer shall be granted a site development permit
without the approval of a Pollution Prevention Plan by the city MS4 operator,
or designated representative for land-disturbing activity that:



      (1)   Would require the uncovering of one or more acres of
land, except individual building lots that contain less than one acre, but is
a part of a multi-lot construction project site that is permitted shall
follow the provisions of division (D) of this section.



      (2)   Is an individual building lot containing less than one
acre but is part of a multi-lot construction project site permitted in
division (C)(1) above.



      (3)   In the opinion of the MS4 operator, is likely to result
in runoff that exceeds the safe capacity of the existing drainage facilities
or receiving body of water, that causes undue channel erosion, that increases
water pollution by scouring or the transportation of particulate matter or
that endangers property or public safety.



   (D)   The developer of an individual building lot containing less
than one acre, but which is a part of a multi-lot construction project shall
be required to complete a Declaration of Responsibility for Erosion and
Sediment Control for a Small Residential Lot prior to receipt of an
Improvement Location Permit.  This declaration assigns responsibility for
conformance to the Construction Plan as required in 327 IAC 15-5-7.5 to the
individual building lot developer.



   (E)   No site development permit is required for the following
activities:



      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property, or natural resources.



      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted
as a permitted main or accessory use.



   (F)   Each site development permit application shall bear the
name(s) and address(es) of the developer of the site and of any consulting
firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's
principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a plan review fee.
The developer or his or her authorized agent shall sign the application.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.04  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   The MS4 operator, or designated representative, will review
each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.  Within 28 days after receiving an
application, the MS4 operator or designated representative shall approve,
approve with conditions, or disapprove the application. Possible actions are
further defined as:



      (1)   Approve.  The permit application is found to be
completely consistent with the requirement within this chapter, therefore,
the MS4 operator shall issue a Notice of Plan Approval (NPA);



      (2)   Approve with conditions.  The permit application is
generally consistent with the requirements within this chapter, but specific
minor modifications are required to meet all of the applicable
requirements.  Therefore, the MS4 operator shall issue the permit subject to
these written conditions along with a Conditional Notice of Plan Approval
(CNPA); or



      (3)   Disapprove.  The permit application does not meet the
requirements of this chapter and requires modifications that would result in
significant changes to the construction plan.  Therefore, the MS4 operator
shall disapprove the application indicating the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.



   (B)   Failure of the MS4 operator or designated representative to
act on an original or revised application within 28 days of receipt shall
authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed
unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the MS4
operator.



   (C)   The developer must include the NPA or CNPA as verification of
plan approval with the Notice of Intent (NOI) sent to the Director of IDEM in
accordance with 327 IAC 15-5-5 or 327 IAC 15-5-6 at least 48 hours prior to
land-disturbing activities.



   (D)   The developer shall be required to submit a copy of the NOI to
the MS4 operator.  The permit shall be valid until:



      (1)   The permit is terminated under § 161.07.



      (2)   The permit is transferred under § 161.06(C).



      (3)   The permit is revoked under § 161.06(A)(2).



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.05  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the approved Pollution
Prevention Plan on site.



   (B)   Every active site having a Pollution Prevention Plan should be
inspected by the MS4 operator, or designated representative, for compliance
with the plan.



   (C)   Inspectors shall prepare written reports after every
inspection.



   (D)   Inspectors shall notify the on-site personnel or the developer
in writing when violations are being observed, describing items to address
and actions to be taken.



   (E)   It shall be a condition of every site development permit that
the MS4 operator or designated inspection representative has the right to
enter the construction project site periodically to inspect for compliance
with the site development permit and this chapter.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations.  In the event that any person holding a site
development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit
or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely
affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to prosperity or improvements in the
neighborhood, the MS4 operator may issue a:



      (1)   Written warning indicating actions deemed contrary to
the permit which are required to be corrected and brought into compliance
within 48 hours, or



      (2)   Stop-work order; revocation of permit in writing to any
persons engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done, and all
persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the MS4 operator
to proceed with the work.



   (B)   Appeals.  Upon receipt of a written violation resulting in
penalties against a site development permit, the developer may, within 30
days of receipt of such violation, file a written appeal to the Board of
Public Works and Safety for review of the penalties.



      (1)   The Board shall complete its review within 60 days of
receipt of said request for appeal. The Board's determination on the appeal
shall be in writing and set forth in detail the reason for its decision.



      (2)   In evaluating the appeal, the Board shall be bound by
the standards and review criteria contained or referenced herein.



      (3)   All determinations of the Board arising out of this
section shall be final.



   (C)   Transfer of permit.  Prior to termination of the permit, if
all or part of the construction site transfers from one MS4 area to another
through annexation or other means, the site development permit, bond, and
enforcement authority shall transfer through a notice of transfer between the
two MS4 entities.  This shall not indemnify the permit holder from any
pending enforcement action.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.07  TERMINATION.



   Upon completion of all construction activities associated with the site
development permit, the applicant shall submit a Notice of Termination (NOT)
letter to the MS4 operator.  Termination of permit will be issued by the MS4
operator only if the following conditions are met:



   (A)   All land disturbing activities, including construction on all
building lots, have been completed and the entire site has been stabilized.



   (B)   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures have been
removed.



   (C)   All public and common improvements, including infrastructure,
have been completed and permanently stabilized and have been transferred to
the appropriate local entity.



   (D)   The applicant may submit an NOT letter to obtain early release
from compliance with this rule if the following conditions are met.



   (E)   The remaining, undeveloped acreage does not exceed five acres,
with contiguous areas not to exceed one acre.



   (F)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all remaining
undeveloped lots, is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be accompanied
by a list of names and addresses of individual lot owners or individual lot
operators of all undeveloped lots.



   (G)   All public and common improvements, including infrastructure,
have been completed and permanently stabilized and have been transferred to
the appropriate local entity.



   (H)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat to
the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties, or water quality.



   (I)   All permanent stormwater quality measures have been
implemented and are operational.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



§ 161.08  STORMWATER PERMIT FEES.



   Schedule of fees and charges. The Department of Engineering, Traffic
and Inspection Services is authorized to implement the following schedule of
fees for services provided.



 


Type

 
Fees


Residential

   Single-family dwelling

   Multi-family dwelling

   Demolition

   Additions

   Declaration of responsibility for individual lots
 
 

$325

$550 per building

$150

$150

$50


Subdivision

   2-4 lots

   5 lots or more

   Planned unit development
 
 

$450

$300 + $50/lot

$300 + $50/lot


Commercial/Industrial

   Principal
 
 

$950 + $50/acre


Utility

   Per acre disturbed
 
 

$150


Pond

   Per acre disturbed
 
 

$150


Notes

   * Returned check fee.

   * Please make check or money orders payable to the City of Kokomo.

   * If a check is returned due to insufficient funds, the plan will not
be reviewed.

   * Any land disturbing activity requiring its own NOI (Notice of Intent)
will be subject to the above fees.

   * Fees are non-refundable.

   * Fees cover costs of plan reviews and inspections for life of the
permit and MS4 Software System Maintenance.
 
 



 



(Ord. 6932, passed 4-29-19)



§ 161.99  PENALTY.



   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any
grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this chapter.  Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense.  In
addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration.



(Ord. 6471, passed 4-9-07)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY



      II.   ANNEXATIONS



      III.   FRANCHISES



      IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



      V.   HISTORIC SITES



      VI.   VACATIONS



      VII.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TARGET AREAS



TABLE I.  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




4800
 
12-11-78
 
Lots 17 and 18 in John O. Heaton's second addition, lots 13 and 19 in Heaton
Albright and James' addition, and the vacated alley between lot 18 and lots
13 and 19 for operation of a day-care center.


4819
 
3-12-79
 
Real estate for the purpose of building and maintaining a radio tower to be
sold to WZWZ Radio Station.  Part of the northwest quarter of section 2,
township 23 north, range 3 east, containing approximately 2.89 acres.


5190
 
6-28-82
 
Lots 85 through 94 in Oakland Addition for civic purposes.


5190
 
6-28-82
 
The vacated alley lying between lots 85 through 89 on the west and lots 90
through 94 on the east in Oakland Addition for civic purposes.


5438
 
2-25-85
 
Lots 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103 in Englewood
Park Addition conveyed to the city for civic purposes.


6749
 
3-24-14
 
Authorizing the purchase of the land, facilities and infrastructure relating
to the sewage works system of Prairie Utilities, Inc.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II.  ANNEXATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




4337
 
10-22-74
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 11, township 23N, range 3E, containing 87.95
acres.


4345
 
11-25-74
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 14, township 23N, range 3E, containing 2.42
acres.


4353
 
12-9-74
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 12, township 23 N, range 3E, containing 1.1
acres.


4354
 
12-9-74
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 26, township 24N, range 3E, containing 15.44
acres.


4419
 
9-8-75
 
A part of the east ½ of section 30, township 24N, range 4E, containing 16.29
acres.


4438
 
9-29-75
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 8, township 23N, range 4E, containing 13.231
acres.


4469
 
1-12-76
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, containing 0.62
acre.


4493
 
2-23-76
 
 


4499
 
4-12-76
 
Section 2, Western Woods subdivision.


4611
 
2-28-77
 
The SW 1/4 of section 11, township 23N, range 3E, containing approximately
160 acres.


4623
 
4-11-77
 
Section 8, Terrace Meadows subdivision.


4626
 
4-25-77
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 69.707
acres.


4626
 
4-25-77
 
A part of lot 227, Vinton Woods subdivision, section 6.


4655
 
7-25-77
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, containing 3.662
acres.


4703
 
3-13-78
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 18 and part of the SW 1/4 of section 17, all
in township 23N, range 4E, containing 123.642 acres.


4709
 
3-27-78
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 12.28
acres.


4755
 
8-28-78
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 19, township 24N, range 4E, containing 25.23
acres.


4806
 
12-26-78
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, containing .9
acre.


4808
 
l-29-79
 
The E 1/2 of the NE-1/4 of the SW 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E,
containing 20 acres.


4869
 
7-9-79
 
The S 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of section 10, township 23N, range 3E, containing 80
acres.


5005
 
10-6-80
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 32, township 24N, range 4E, containing 38.65
acres.


5187
 
7-12-82
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, containing 2.915
acres, also known as the Gillam-Union Bank Subdivision.


5234
 
10-25-82
 
The E 1/2 of the NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of section 29, township 24N, range 4E,
Center Township.


5476
 
8-26-85
 
Part of the SE 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing
approximately 24.361 acres; lots l, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 in Haynes Mall
Subdivision; and lots 7, 8, 9, and 10, section 2 in Haynes Mall Subdivision.


5741
 
5-14-90
 
Part of the SW ¼ of section 8, township 23N, range 4E, Center Township.


5746
 
5-21-90
 
Three parcels of land, as follows:


 
 
 
 
(1) A part of the SW ¼ of section 34, township 24N, range 3E in Center
Township, containing approx. 80 acres; also


 
 
 
 
(2) A part of the SW ¼ of section 34, township 24N, range 3E in Center
Township, containing approx. 60 acres; also


 
 
 
 
(3) A part of the NW ¼ of section 3, township 23N, range 3E in Center
Township, containing approx. 38 acres.


5759
 
9-24-90
 
Part of the west half of the SW ¼ of section 26, township 24N, range 3E,
Center Township, containing approx. 65 acres; and subject to all legal
highway rights-of-way.


5774
 
11-26-90
 
Four parcels of land, as follows:


 
 
 
 
(1) A part of the SW ¼ of section 8, township 23N, range 4E, in Center
Township, containing approx. 39 acres; also


 
 
 
 
(2) A part of the SE ¼ of section 8, township 23N, range 4E in Center
Township, containing approx. 22 acres; also


 
 
 
 
(3) A part of the SE ¼ of section 8, township 23N, range 4E in Center
Township, containing approx. three acres; also


 
 
 
 
(4) A part of the south half of the right-of-way of Southway Boulevard in the
NE and NW ¼ of section 17, township 23N, range 4E in Taylor Township,
containing approx. 0.97 acres.


5817
 
2-11-92
 
Part of section 5, township 23N, range 4E in Center Towhisp, containing
approx. 27 and 477/1000 acres.


5818
 
3-30-92
 
Part of the southeast quarter of section 12, township 23N, range 3E, Center
Township, and the south 40 foot right-of-way of Lincoln Road and the east 40
foot right-of-way of Webster Street which abuts along the entire north and
west side, containing, in all, 54.766 acres, more or less.


5852
 
1-11-93
 
A part of the northeast quarter of section 34, township 24 north, range 3
east, Center Township, containing 0.72 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the northeast quarter of section 34, township 24 north, range 3 east,
Center Township, containing 0.808 acres;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the northeast quarter of section 34, township 24 north, range 3 east,
Center Township, containing 1.827 acres.


5854
 
1-11-93
 
A tract of land containing exactly 100 acres and of even width off the entire
south side of the following described real estate:


 
 
 
 
A part of the southeast quarter of section 13, township 23 north, range 3
east, containing 1 acre, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the southwest quarter of section 13, township 23 north, range 3 east;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
The west one-half of the west one-half of the southeast quarter of section
13, township 23 north, range 3 east.


5855
 
1-11-93
 
Part of the southwest quarter of section 32, township 24 north, range 4 east,
Center Township, containing 45.00 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the fractional northwest quarter of section 5, township 23 north,
range 4 east, Center Township, containing 20.00 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the southwest quarter of section 32, township 24 north, range 4 east,
Center Township, containing 2.13 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the fractional northwest quarter of section 5, township 23 north,
range 4 east, Center Township, containing 2.50 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the fractional northeast quarter of section 5, township 23 north,
range 4 east, Center Township, containing 0.91 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the fractional northeast quarter of section 5, township 23 north,
range 4 east, Center Township, containing 0.16 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Part of the southeast quarter of section 32, township 24 north, range 4 east,
Center Township, containing 0.07 acres, more or less.


5858
 
2-8-93
 
A part of lot 450 in Terrace Meadows Subdivision, section 5, being located in
the southeast quarter of section 7, township 23 north, range 4 east, Center
Township.


5872
 
5-10-93
 
Part of the northwest quarter of section 32, township 24 north, range 4 east,
Center Township, containing 3.20 acres, more or less.


5886
 
9-28-93
 
Part of the west half of the northeast quarter of section 34, township 24
north, range 3 east, Center Township, containing 1.98 acres, more or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
A part of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section 34,
township 24 north, range 3 east, Center Township, containing 1.98 acres, more
or less;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
All of State Road 22 right-of-way between the centerline and the north
right-of-way line, which lies south of and adjoins the above described real
estate.


5893
 
10-25-93
 
Lots 1 and 2, Bellaire Gardens.


5908
 
2-28-94
 
Lot 1 in Big "R" Estates Subdivision and Lot 1 in Fleet Acres Subdivision.


5917
 
6-13-94
 
317 West Alto Road.


5932
 
8-8-94
 
Part of Tract One, Shopping Center, as platted in Indian Heights Subdivision.


5955
 
1-30-95
 
Part of the southeast quarter of section 5, township 23 north, range 4 east.


5956
 
2-27-95
 
Part of the west half of the southeast quarter of section 8, township 23
north, range 4 east.


5960
 
4-10-95
 
Lots 1, 2, 8, 12, 13, 14, and 15 in Adam's C Subdivision of  replat of
Woody's Subdivision of part of Tract 1 in Indian Heights Subdivision.


5967
 
4-10-95
 
Part of the fractional northeast quarter of section 5, township 23 north,
range 4 east in Center Township.


5968
 
4-10-95
 
Lots 9, 10, 11 and 16 in Adam's C. Subdivision of a replat of Woody's
Subdivision of part of Tract No. 1 in Indiana Heights Subdivision.


5969
 
4-10-95
 
Parts of the southwest quarter of section 12, township 23 north, range 3
east, Center Township.


5977
 
9-11-95
 
Part of the west half of section 17, township 23 north, range 4 east.


5993
 
2-13-96
 
Part of the north half of section 26, township 24 north, range 3 east.


5994
 
3-12-96
 
Lot 1 in the Sweet Caroline Subdivision, section 3 (Recorder's plat book 10,
page 92)


6024
 
12-16-96
 
Part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 34 and part of the
east half of the southeast quarter of Section 34, all in Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6026
 
1-13-97
 
Part of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section 26, Township 24
North, Range 3 East, Center Township.


6071
 
11-25-97
 
Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East, Harrison Township.


6072
 
11-25-97
 
Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 8, Township 23 North, Range
4 East, Center Township.


6085
 
3-9-98
 
Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 20, Township 23 North,
Range 4 East, Taylor Township.


6108
 
12-14-98
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 19, Township 23 North,
Range 4 East, Taylor Township.


6121
 
5-10-99
 
Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East of the Second Principal Meridian, Center Township.


6122
 
5-24-99
 
Annexing the north half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 19, Township 24 North, Range 4 East.


6123
 
6-14-99
 
Annexing the east half of the northwest quarter and the west half of the
northeast quarter of Section 29, Township 24 North, Range 4 East, Center
Township.


6129
 
7-12-99
 
Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 23 North, Range
4 East, Center Township.


6130
 
7-12-99
 
Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 34, Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6131
 
7-26-99
 
Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6160
 
8-14-00
 
Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East in Harrison Township.


6161
 
8-14-00
 
Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 24 North,
Range 4 East of the Second Principal Meridian, Center Township.


6166
 
10-16-00
 
Annexing part of the fractional northwest quarter and the southwest quarter
of Section 18, Township 24 North, Range 4 East, Howard Township.


6174
 
12-18-00
 
Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 8, Township 23 North, Range
4 East, Center Township.


6175
 
2-26-01
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6176
 
4-9-01
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 30, Township 24 North,
Range 4 East, Center Township.


6193
 
8-13-01
 
Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6223
 
6-25-02
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 24, Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6267
 
10-27-03
 
Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East, Harrison Township.


6268
 
11-10-03
 
Annexing part of the south half of Section 29, Township 24 North, Range 4
East and part of the north half of Section 32, Township 24 North, Range 4
East, Center Township.


6269
 
11-10-03
 
Annexing the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 5,
Township 23 North, Range 4 East in Center Township; also a part of the
southeast quarter of Section 5, Township 23 North, Range 4 East, Center
Township.


6314
 
10-11-04
 
Annexing part of the north half of Section 24, Township 23 North, Range 3
East, Harrison Township.


6341
 
2-14-05
 
Annexing a part of the southwest quarter of Section 12, Township 23 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township; and a part of the northwest quarter of Section
13, Township 23 North, Range 3 East, Harrison Township.


6356
 
3-14-05
 
Annexing a part of Section 27, Township 24 North, Range 3 East, Center
Township.


6459
 
3-26-07
 
Annexing a part of the northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6460
 
6-21-07
 
Annexing a part of the northwest quarter of Section 34, Township 24 North,
Range 3 East, Center Township.


6541
 
8-25-08
 
Annexing certain territory in the West Side Annexation Territory in Harrison
Township, Taylor Township, Clay Township, and Center Township.


6542
 
8-25-08
 
Annexing certain territory in the East Side Annexation Territory consisting
of 18 sub-territories consisting of approximately 2661.71 acres.


6575
 
7-13-09
 
Annexing certain territory in accordance with the Act, the Speedway
SuperAmerica Annexation Territory, approximately 1.67 acres, to the city and
is included within the city’s corporate boundaries.


6637
 
4-11-11
 
Amending Ord. 6541 to change the effective date to January 1, 2012.


6691
 
11-26-12
 
Annexing certain territory contiguous to the city, the Southeast Annexation
Territory as set forth in Exhibit A.


6692
 
11-19-12
 
Annexing certain territory contiguous to the city, the Cotswold Hills
Annexation Territory as set forth in Exhibit A.


6898
 
9-10-18
 
Annexing certain territory contiguous to the city, the Kenwood Gardens
Addition territory as set forth in Exhibit A.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III.  FRANCHISES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION


 
 



 



[Editor's note: References to ordinances regarding the franchise granted for
community antenna television service can be found in Ch. 112.]



TABLE IV.  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




4302
 
7-8-74
 
Lot 60 section 2 of Sycamore Village addition from R-l to R-2.


4303
 
7-8-74
 
Lots 172 through 181 in Gateway Garden's addition from R-2 to B-l.


4314
 
8-26-74
 
Lots 112 and 113 of Hocker addition from R-4 to B-l.


4315
 
8-26-74
 
Lots 25 through 30 in Markland Heights addition from R-2 to B-l.


4325
 
9-23-74
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E, from R-l to B-l.


4326
 
9-9-74
 
Lots 30 and 31 in Faulkner's addition from R-4 to B-l.


4327
 
9-9-74
 
Lots l, 2, and 3 in Milner's subdivision from R-3 to B-l.


4331
 
10-7-74
 
Lot 36 in R.G. Smith's third addition from R-2 to B-l.


4332
 
10-22-74
 
Lot 45 in the Lennox addition from R-l to B-l.


4333
 
10-7-74
 
Lots 241 through 245 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4350
 
12-9-74
 
Lot 199 in Fairlawn extension to Fairlawn addition from R-2 to I-l.


4351
 
12-30-74
 
Lot 33 in the Countryside addition from R-2 to R-4.


4352
 
12-30-74
 
Lots 105 and 106 in R.G. Smith's addition from R-2 to R-4.


4391
 
4-14-75
 
A part of land in the NE 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E,
containing 6.79 acres from R-4 to B-l.


4392
 
4-28-75
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 4.869
acres from R-l to B-l.


4404
 
5-19-75
 
The south half of lot 13 in Countryside addition from R-2 to R-4.


4405
 
5-19-75
 
Lot 37 and parts of lots 36, 38, and 39 in Countryside addition from R-2 to
R-4.


4406
 
5-19-75
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E,
containing 1.11 acres from R-l to B-l.


4407
 
5-19-75
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E,
containing l.2 acres from R-l to R-4.


4412
 
7-14-75
 
Lots 29, 30, and 31 in Western Heights addition from R-2 to B-l.


4425
 
8-25-75
 
A part of lot 2 in the NE 1/4 of section 31, township 24N, range 4E, from R-2
to C-l.


4437
 
10-6-75
 
A part of the S 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E,
containing .55 acre from R-l to R-2.


4440
 
10-20-75
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 8, township 23N, range 4E, containing 12.70
acres from R-l to R-3.


4446
 
11-10-75
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 19, township 23N, range 4E, from R-l to B-l.


4447
 
11-10-75
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 2, township 23N, range 3E, containing l.59
acres from R-l to B-l.


4448
 
12-29-75
 
Lots 143 and 144 in Lenox's addition from R-l to B-l.


4453
 
12-8-75
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, containing .75
acre from R-l to B-l.


4459
 
12-8-75
 
Lots 22 and 23 in Countryside addition from R-2 to C-l.


4460
 
12-29-75
 
Lot 374 in Bon Air Vista addition and the vacated alley connected thereto
from B-l to C-l.


4461
 
12-29-75
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 16, township 23N, range 4E, containing 29.25
acres from A-l to R-3.


4462
 
12-29-75
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 16, township 23N, range 4E, containing 0.89
acre from A-l to I-l.


4465
 
l-12-76
 
A part of the S 1/2 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 17.44
acres from A-l to R-4.


4466
 
l-12-76
 
A part of the S 1/2 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 36.46
acres from A l and B-l to R-l.


4467
 
l-12-76
 
A part of the S 1/2 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 17.42
acres from A-l and R-l to B-l.


4473
 
2-23-76
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 5, township 23N, range 4E, from R-l to B-l.


4474
 
2-9-76
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 12, township 23N, range 3E, containing 46.158
acres from R-l to B-l.


4490
 
3-8-76
 
The east 3 acres of the west 5 acres of lot 9 in the SE 1/4 of section 30,
township 24N, range 4E, containing 3 acres from R-l to C-l.


4491
 
3-29-76
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 26, township 24N, range 3E, containing 2.72
acres from R-l to R-2.


4498
 
4-19-76
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 5, township 23N, range 4E, containing 2.712
acres from R-l to B-l.


4540
 
7-12-76
 
Lots 129 through 134 in the Gateway addition from R-2 to R-4.


4541
 
7-12-76
 
Lots 15 through 23 in Mason's addition from R-2 to R-4.


4575
 
10-18-76
 
Lots 99, 100, and 104 through 108 in Lenox addition from R-l to B-l.


4581
 
12-13-76
 
Lot 91 in the Lenox addition from R-l to B-l.


4588
 
12-13-76
 
A part of lot 5 in the NE 1/4 of section 35, township 24N, range 3E,
containing 3/8 acre from R-l to R-4.


4591
 
l-11-77
 
The NW corner of the SE 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, from R-l
to R-2.


4607
 
2-28-77
 
Lot 109 in Lenox addition from R-l to B-l.


4608
 
2-28-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 5, township 23N, range 4E, containing 26.34
acres from R-l to B-l.


4612
 
4-11-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, containing 3.18
acres from A-l to R-4.


4613
 
4-25-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, containing 7.46
acres from A-l to R-4.


4614
 
4-11-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, containing 6.65
acres from A-l to R-l.


4615
 
4-11-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, containing ll.80
acres from A-l to R-4.


4616
 
4-11-77
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section ll, township 23N, range 3E, containing ll.80
acres.


4619
 
5-9-77
 
Lot l and the west 1/2 of lot 2 in Sycamore Garden's addition from R-4 to B-l.


4619
 
5-9-77
 
Lot 3 and the east 1/2 of lot 2 in Sycamore Garden's addition from R-l to B-l.


4624
 
5-23-77
 
A part of the S 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E,
containing .62 acre from R-l to R-2.


4630
 
7-11-77
 
Lot 20 in George Breedlove's subdivision, a part of lot 5 in the NE 1/4 of
section 35, township 24N, range 3E, from R-4 to B-l.


4631
 
6-13-77
 
Lots 29 and 30 in Kirkpatrick and Scott's second addition from R-4 to C-l.


4632
 
6-13-77
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 13, township 24N, range 3E, containing 12.655
acres from R-l to R-3.


4633
 
6-13-77
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 9.836
acres from R-l to B-l.


4645
 
7-11-77
 
Westbrook subdivision on the W 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of section ll, township 23N,
range 3E, containing 72.8 acres from A-l and B-l to R-l.


4647
 
7-11-77
 
Lots 7 and 8 in Van Arsdale's addition from R-l to B-l.


4648
 
7-11-77
 
Lot 9 in Van Arsdale's addition from R-l to B-l.


4651
 
8-8-77
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section l, township 23N, range 3E, containing
approximately 1/4 acre.


4653
 
8-29-77
 
A part of lot 114 in E.M. Bloomfield's addition from R-2 to B-l.


4654
 
8-29-77
 
Lots 33, 34, and 35 in Markland Heights addition from R-2 to B-l.


4658
 
9-26-77
 
Lot 167 in R.G. Smith's addition and alley from R-3 to A-l.


4659
 
8-29-77
 
Lot 2 in section I of West Berkley Place addition from R-l to R-4.


4660
 
9-26-77
 
Block B in the Vitatoe Village subdivision from B-l to C-l.


4666
 
10-17-77
 
Lot 17 in the Countryside addition except 83.75 feet off the entire west side
from R-2 to R-3.


4667
 
10-17-77
 
A part of the N 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing l.73
acres from R-1 to B-1.


4668
 
10-17-77
 
Lots 73 and 74 in the Elm Tree subdivision from R-3 to R-4.


4676
 
11-28-77
 
Lots 110 and 111 in the Lenox addition from R-1 to B-l.


4677
 
11-28-77
 
Lots 70, 71, and 72 in the Elm Tree addition from R-3 to R-4.


4678
 
11-28-77
 
Lot 31 in the L.S. Fish addition from R-2 to B-l.


4693
 
2-27-78
 
Lots 136, 137, and 138 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4697
 
2-27-78
 
50 feet off the entire east end of block A in Vitatoe Villa subdivision from
B-l to C-l.


4710
 
4-10-78
 
Lot 15 in Brunei's Loretta addition from R-2 to R-4.


4711
 
4-10-78
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, from A-l to R-l.


4718
 
5-8-78
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 8, township 23N, range 4E, lying NE of the
P.C.C. and St. L Railroad, containing l.5 acres from B-l to I-l.


4724
 
5-22-78
 
Out lot 166 from R-4 to B-l.


4725
 
5-22-78
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 18 and part of the SW 1/4 of section 17, all
in township 23N, range 4E, containing 60.80 acres from A-l to R-l.


4726
 
5-22-78
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 18 and part of the SW 1/4 of section 17, all
in township 23N, range 4E, containing 37.50 acres from A-l to R-3.


4748
 
8-14-78
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 35, township 24, range 3E, containing 0.362
acre from R-l to R-4.


4749
 
8-14-78
 
Lot 8 in Sycamore Garden from R-l to R-4.


4770
 
10-30-78
 
Lots 131 through 134 in Gateway's addition from R-4 to B-l.


4771
 
10-2-78
 
Lot 59 in section 2 West Berkley Place from R-l to R-4.


4784
 
11-13-78
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 31, township 24N, range 4E, from R-l and B-l
to C-l.


4785
 
11-13-78
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 19, township 24N, range 4E, containing 25.23
acres from R-l to R-2.


4786
 
11-13-78
 
A part of the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 4E, from R-l to R-2.


4805
 
l-8-79
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 34, township 24N, range 3E, from R-l to R-2.


4826
 
4-23-79
 
A part of lot 168 in Hall's Highland Park addition from R-2 to I-l.


4834
 
5-14-79
 
Lots 355 through 360 and lots 299 through 303 in Farmer's Trust addition from
R-l to B-l.


4835
 
5-21-79
 
Lots 76 and 77 in the Lenox addition from R-l to R-4.


4857
 
7-9-79
 
Lots 2, 3, and 4 in the Tuxedo addition from R-2 to B-l.


4858
 
7-9-79
 
Lot 2 in Banner Minor subdivision from R-l to R-2.


4859
 
7-9-79
 
A part of lot 6 in the NW 1/4 of section 35, township 24N, range 3E,
containing .15 acre from R-l to B-l.


4859
 
7-9-79
 
A part of lots 6 and 7 in the NW 1/4 of section 35, township 24N, range 3E,
containing l.636 acres.


4860
 
7-9-79
 
Beginning at the NW corner of section 35, township 24N, range 3E, containing
l.3 acres from A-l to R-4.


4861
 
7-9-79
 
A part of lot 4 in the NE 1/4 of section 2, township 23N, range 3E,
containing 2.02 acres from R-l to I-l.


4862
 
7-9-79
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, containing 3.27
acres from B-l to C-l.


4873
 
8-13-79
 
Lots 209 and 210 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4888
 
10-l-79
 
Lots 207 and 208 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4889
 
10-l-79
 
Lots 211 and 212 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4890
 
10-l-79
 
Lot 6 in Van Arsdale's addition from R-l to B-l.


4895
 
11-19-79
 
Lots 122, 123, and 124 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to B-l.


4899
 
11-26-79
 
A part of the SE 1/4 and the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23N, range 3E,
containing 8.98 acres from R-l to B-l.


4900
 
11-26-79
 
Lots 273, 274 and 275 in Farmer's Trust addition from R-l to C-l.


4916
 
l-28-80
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 35, township 24N, range 3E, containing 4.04
acres from R-l to B-l.


4966
 
7-28-80
 
A part of the NE 1/4 of section 31, township 24N, range 4E, from R-2 to B-l.


5000
 
10-6-80
 
Parts of lots 111 and 112 in Franklin's addition from R-1 to R-2.


5013
 
11-10-80
 
Lots 10 and 11 and a part of lot 12 in the Western addition from B-1 to R-4.


5023
 
12-8-80
 
Lot 110 in Motz and Grether's addition, at 906 North Apperson Way from R-3 to
B-l.


5038
 
2-9-81
 
A part of the SE 1/4 of section 12, township 23N, range 3E, from R-l to R-4.


5039
 
l-26-81
 
A part of the NW 1/4 of section 13, township 23N, range 3E, from R-l to R-3.


5062
 
6-8-81
 
Property located at 1620 and 1624 W. Deffenbaugh St. a part of lot 4 in the
NE 1/4 of section 2, township 23N, range 3 east, from R-1 to I-1.


5063
 
5-18-81
 
Lot 41 in Corydon Richmonds addition and part of the vacated alley adjoining
the north side of 1212 North Washington St.


5086
 
8-24-81
 
Property located at 1434 S. Park Ave. a part of lot 4 in the NE 1/4 of
section 2, township 23N, range 3 east, from R-l to I-l.


5094
 
9-29-81
 
Property located at 1819 Apperson Way, lot 35 and ten feet off the entire
south side of lot 36 in the Parkview Addition, from R-2 to B-l.


5150
 
2-8-82
 
Property located at 1627 E. Jefferson St. a part of NE 1/4 of section 31,
township 24N, range 4 east, from B-l to C-l.


5181
 
6-15-82
 
Property located at 600 East Boulevard, lots 73 and 74 in Elm Tree Addition,
from R-4 to I-l.


5198
 
8-9-82
 
Property located at 315 West Markland Ave., lot 64 in M.M. Markland Second
Addition, from R-4 to B-l.


5264
 
l-24-83
 
Property located at 2703 South Park Ave., a part of NE 1/4 of SE 1/4 of
section ll, township 23N, range 3 east, from R-l to R-4.


5307
 
8-8-83
 
Property located 813 East Hoffner St. a part of S 1/2 of SW 1/4 of section 6,
township 23N, range 4 east, from R-2 to R-4.


5312
 
9-12-83
 
Property located at 601 E. Alto Rd. a part of SW 1/4 of section 18, township
23N, range 4 east, from R-l to C-l.


5351
 
2-6-84
 
Property located on lot 34 in J.B. Carter's Second Addition, 922 Apperson Way
South from R-2 to B-l.


5355
 
2-13-84
 
Property located in a part of the NE 1/4 of section 35, township 24 N, range
3 east, from R-l to R-4.


5356
 
2-13-84
 
Property located at 1703 East Hoffer St., lots 141 and 142 in Lennox
Addition, from R-l to B-l.


5372
 
5-21-84
 
Lots 186 through 189 in the Farmer's Trust Addition at 2144 North Plate
Street from R-l to C-l.


5373
 
5-21-84
 
Part of the NW 1/4 of section 2, township 23N, range 3 east from R-l to I-l.


5376
 
5-21-84
 
Property located at lot 26 in W.A. Russel's 2nd addition at 603 West Markland
Avenue from R-2 to B-l.


5385
 
7-9-84
 
Property located on lot 13 in Sharp's 1st addition, and 30 feet off of the
west side of lot, at the northeast corner of Carter and Elizabeth Streets
from R-3/FF to R-4.


5418
 
11-19-84
 
Property located on lots 271, 272, 270, and part of 269, except 5 feet off
north side, Farmers Trust Addition, 2135 N. Elizabeth St., from R-l to C-l.


5419
 
11-19-84
 
Property located on part of the NW 1/4 of section 7, township 23 north, range
4 east, from R-4 to B-l.


5427
 
l-28-85
 
Property located in a part of the NW 1/4 of section 35, township 24 north,
range 3 east, from R-l to B-l.


5445
 
5-13-85
 
Lots 217 and 218 in Charles M. Steele's Addition, at the 2500 block of North
Main St., from R-2 to I-l.


5446
 
5-13-85
 
Part of the S 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 23 north, range 4
east, from R-l and R-2 to B-l.


5465
 
8-12-85
 
Lots 219 through 225 in Charles M. Steele's Addition, on the east side of the
2500 block of North Main St., from R-2 to I-l.


5477
 
9-23-85
 
Lot 18 in D.C. Metsker's 2nd Addition, except 64 feet off the west end
thereof, at 312 West Jackson St., from R-4 to B-1.


5478
 
9-9-85
 
Lots 117, 118, and l19 in Lenox Addition, at 1621 East Wheeler St., from R-l
to B-l.


5524
 
2-24-86
 
Parts of lots 13, 15, and 16 of Welsh and Risinger's Addition, and part of
Outlot 155, at 708 North Webster St., from R-4 to C-l.


5551
 
9-29-86
 
Two tracts in section 35 township 21 north, range 3 east from A-l to R-4.


5597
 
9-14-87
 
Lots 47, 55, 56, and 57 in McClure's Rose Farm Addition, also the vacated
alley 15 feet in width from R-2 to C-l.


5598
 
8-24-87
 
Lot 47 in J.B. Carter's Second Addition, at 929 South Bell Street, from R-2
to B-1.


5599
 
8-10-87
 
Property located in part of the northwest quarter of section 13, township 23
north, range 3 east from R-1 and R-3 to R-3.


5600
 
8-10-87
 
Property located as part of the northwest quarter of section 13, township 23
north, range 3 east from R-1 and R-3 to C-1.


5607
 
10-26-87
 
Property located in part of the southeast quarter of section 36, township 24
north, range 3 east from R-4 to B-1.


5608
 
10-26-87
 
Property located in part of the southeast quarter of section 36, township 24
north, range 3 east from R-4 to B-1.


5609
 
10-12-87
 
Property located on lot 92 and 93 in Lennox Addition at 1728 and 1730 East
Wheeler St. from R-l to B-1.


5622
 
12-7-87
 
Lot 6 in the northeast quarter of section 35, township 24 north, range 3
east, located at 1526 W. Sycamore St., from R-1 to R-2.


5624
 
2-22-88
 
Lot 4 W.A. Russell First Addition at 1014 South Leeds Street from R-2 to B-1.


5625
 
2-22-88
 
Lots 42 and 43 in Markland Heights at 1201 and 1203 South 17th St. from R-2
to B-1.


5626
 
2-23-88
 
Lot 83 in Diamond Plate Glass Addition at 1217 E. Vaile Ave. from R-2 to C-1.


5639
 
6-13-88
 
Lots 36 and 37 in Markland Heights Addition at 1121 - 1125 South 17th St.
from R-1 to B-1.


5640
 
6-13-88
 
Lot 5 in the southeast quarter of section 25, township 24 north, range 3
east, at 400 East Broadway St. from R-2 to B-1.


5660
 
10-11-88
 
Lot 128 in Gateway Addition and 16 feet vacated alley adjacent to the west
side at 615 E. Wheeler, lot 130 in Gateway Addition at 1706 Home Ave., and
lot 129 in Gateway Addition at 1700 Home Ave. from R-4 to B-1.


5666
 
11-29-88
 
Lots 109 and 110 in Marott Park Addition at 1807 South Webster from R-2 to
B-1.


5675
 
2-6-89
 
Lot 413 in Hamlins Highland Addition at 1519 South Market from R-3 to B-1.


5676
 
2-13-89
 
Lots 123, 124, and 125 in Charles M. Steele's Subdivision at 2550 N.
Washington St. from B-1 to C-1.


5677
 
2-13-89
 
Lot 6 in Rodkey and Webb Addition at 316 West Walnut Street from R-4 to B-1.


5680
 
4-11-89
 
Lot 12 in J.E. Moores First Addition at 415 and 417 West Park Avenue from R-2
to B-1.


5684
 
4-24-89
 
Property at 1307 East Markland Avenue from R-1 to B-1.


5695
 
6-26-89
 
Lots 51, 52, 53, and 54 in Markland Heights Addition at 1235, 1239, 1245, and
1247 South Seventeenth Street from R-1 to B-1.


5702
 
8-28-89
 
Lots 4 and 5 in Homestead Addition at 1706 East Markland Avenue from R-1 to
B-1.


5703
 
10-30-89
 
Property located in the southwest quarter of section 18, township 23 north,
range 4 east from B-1 to C-1.


5719
 
12-11-89
 
Lots 71 and 72 in Elmtree Addition located at 520 E. Boulevard from R-4 to
B-1.


5720
 
11-11-89
 
Lots 162 through 171 in Gateway Addition located at 1014 East Hoffer Street,
from R-2 to B-1.


5722
 
1-29-90
 
Property at 916 South Home Ave., from R-4 to B-1.


5723
 
2-26-90
 
Property at 2337 West Lincoln Road, from R-1 to R-4.


5732
 
4-23-90
 
Part of Lots 1 and 2 in J.O. Heaton's First Addition, at 618 E. Jefferson,
from R-2 to R-4.


5733
 
4-23-90
 
Lot 58 in Markland Heights Addition from R-2 to B-1.


5734
 
4-23-90
 
Lot 1 and 55 feet 8 inches off the east side of Lot 2 in J. Johnson's
Addition at 311 W. Walnut Street, from R-4 to B-1.


5758
 
9-10-90
 
Property at 917 and 921 E. Hoffer Street, from R-4 to B-1.


5766
 
10-15-90
 
Property located at 2900-3000 block of South Dixon Road, from R-1 to R-4.


5778
 
12-10-90
 
Property located t 816 E. Hoffer, from R-1 and R-2 to B-1.


5779
 
1-28-91
 
Property located at 1305 E. Markland Avenue, from R-1 to B-1.


5790
 
4-8-91
 
Property located at 1325 and 1419 S. Plate Street, from R-2 to R-4.


5796
 
7-8-91
 
Property located at 1930 S. Goyer Road, from R-2 to R-4.


5802
 
9-23-91
 
Property located at 2504 N. Apperson Way, from R-2 to B-1.


5804
 
10-28-91
 
Property located at 913 and 915 S. Plate Street, from R-2 to R-4.


5805
 
10-28-91
 
Property located at 312                                   
            W. Jackson, from B-1 to                       
                        R-4.


5819
 
3-30-92
 
Property located at 721 E. Markland Avenue, from R-4 to B-1.


5820
 
4-27-92
 
Property located at 700 - 734 S. Cooper and 1609 - 1613 E. Vaile Avenue from
R-1 to R-4.


5832
 
8-10-92
 
Property located at 2020 East Boulevard, from R-1 to B-1.


5847
 
11-9-92
 
Property located at 915 S. Plate St. from R-4 to B-1.


5848
 
11-23-92
 
Property located at 1601 E. Dodge St. from R-1 to B-1.


5849
 
11-9-92
 
Property located at 1501 W. Markland Avenue, from R-1 to C-1.


5850
 
11-23-92
 
Property located at 316 E. Sycamore St., from R-4 to B-1.


5860
 
2-22-93
 
Property located at 1730 S. Union St., from R-3 to B-1.


5865
 
3-29-93
 
Property located at the intersection of West Blvd. and Dixon Rd., in the 1900
block of S. Dixon Rd., from R-1 to B-1.


5873
 
5-24-93
 
Property located at 528 S. Washington St., from R-2 to B-1.


5875
 
6-14-93
 
Property located at 2111 N. Main St., from R-2 to B-1.


5877
 
7-12-93
 
Property located at 2144 N. Plate St., from R-1 to C-1.


5894
 
11-29-93
 
Property located at 2222 N. Plate St., from R-1 to B-1.


5899
 
12-13-93
 
Property located at 1403 S. Courtland Ave., from R-2 to B-1.


5900
 
12-13-93
 
Property located at 321 W. Walnut St., from R-4 to B-1.


5901
 
12-14-93
 
Property located as 200 Block North - 300 West, from B-1 to R-1.


5902
 
12-14-93
 
Property located at 3109 W. Sycamore, from R-1 to B-1.


 
 
8-8-94
 
Property located at 607 E. Markland Ave., from R-2 to B-1.


5944
 
9-12-94
 
Property located at 1304 E. Hoffer, from R-2 to B-1.


5948
 
11-9-94
 
Property located at 2828 S. Lafountain, from R-1 to B-1.


5958
 
3-13-95
 
Property located in 2200 block of East Markland Ave., from R-1 to B-1.


5973
 
9-25-95
 
Property located at 416 - 416½ Rainbow Dr., from R-1 to B-1.


5981
 
10-16-95
 
Property located at 917 S. Appersonway, from R-2 to B-1.


5987
 
2-27-96
 
West half of section 17, township 23 north, range 4 east:  Tract A, from A-1
to R-1; Tract B, from A-1 to R-4; Tract C, from A-1 to R-3.


5992
 
2-13-96
 
Property located at 1353 S. Delphos Street, from R-2 to B-1.


5997
 
5-22-96
 
Property located at 219 S. Cooper Street, from R-1 to B-1.


5999
 
7-30-96
 
Property located at 917 S. Cooper Street, from R-2 to B-1.


6000
 
7-30-96
 
Property located at 924 S. Lafountain, from R-2 to B-1.


6006
 
7-30-96
 
Property located at 1801 N. Webster, from R-4 to B-1.


6012
 
9-24-96
 
Property located at 510 Park Avenue, from R-2 to B-1 and FF.


6013
 
9-24-96
 
Property located at 701 S. Reed Road, from R-1 to C-1.


6015
 
10-21-96
 
Property located at 1526 S. Market Street, from R-3 to I-1.


6016
 
10-29-96
 
Property located at 204 Wickersham Drive East, from R-1 to R-4.


6018
 
11-19-96
 
Property located at 2100 S. Washington Street, from R-1 to B-1.


6029
 
1-13-97
 
Property located at 315 N. Calumet Street, Center Township, from R-2 to B-1.


6036
 
3-24-97
 
Property located at 314 E. Mulberry St., from B-1 to R-4.


6037
 
3-24-97
 
Property located at 1402 S. Elizabeth Street, from R-1 to C-1.


6040
 
5-13-97
 
Property located at 241 N. Union Street, from R-2 to B-1.


6045
 
6-9-97
 
Property located at 1814 W. Deffenbaugh Street, from R-1 to I-1.


6046
 
7-14-97
 
Property located at 1216 W. Jefferson Street, from R-4 and R-2 to B-1.


6054
 
7-29-97
 
Property located at 1729 E. Dodge Street, from R-1 to R-3.


6058
 
7-28-97
 
Property located at 2004 - 2012 Lafountain, 401 - 421 East Morgan, and 2011 -
2023 North Apperson Way, from B-1 and R-2 to B-1.


-
 
10-27-97
 
Property located at 1512 S. Dixon Rd., from R-1 and I-1 to B-1.


-
 
2-23-98
 
Property located at 1801 Zartman Road, from R-1 and A-1 to R-4.


6086
 
3-9-98
 
Property located at 310 W. Alto Rd., from R-1 to B-1.


6087
 
3-9-98
 
Property located at 814 S. Home Ave., from R-4 to B-1.


6092
 
6-8-98
 
Property located at 2800 South Dixon Rd., from R-1 to R-4.


6096
 
7-27-98
 
Property located at 1200 W. Sycamore St., from R-1 to R-4.


6097
 
7-27-98
 
Property located in the 3000 block of Pine Ridge Rd., from R-1 to R-3.


6107
 
11-23-98
 
Property located at 1230 S. Dixon Rd., from R-1 to C-1.


6144
 
11-8-99
 
Property located on Lots 139 and 140 in Lennox Addition, from R-1 to B-1.


6154
 
4-24-00
 
Property located at 913 South Apperson Way, from R-2 to B-1.


6155
 
4-24-00
 
Property located at 914 and 916 South Market Street, from R-2 to B-1.


6163
 
5-22-00
 
Property located at 1301 N. Apperson Way, from R-2 to B-1.


6164
 
5-22-00
 
Property located at the 1600-1900 blocks of South Dixon Road, from R-1 to B-1.


6168
 
8-28-00
 
Property located at 821 North Dixon Road, from R-4 to B-1.


6177
 
1-29-01
 
Property located at 801 East Hoffer Street, from R-2 to B-1.


6178
 
1-29-01
 
Property located at 1251 South Seventeenth Street, from R-2 to B-1.


6189
 
5-14-01
 
Properties located at 925 and 927 South Washington Street, from R-4 to B-1.


6211
 
1-15-02
 
Property located at 315 West Lincoln Road, from R-1 to B-1.


6213
 
2-12-02
 
Properties located at 1621 and 1625 East Firmin, and 1624 East Wheeler, from
R-1 to B-1.


6214
 
2-12-02
 
Property located at 2139 North Elizabeth Street, from R-1 to C-1.


6218
 
2-12-02
 
Property located at 917½ South Apperson Way, from R-2 to B-1.


6219
 
1-29-02
 
Property located at 3110 South LaFountain, from R-1 to C-1.


6231
 
5-21-02
 
Properties located at 2024 and 2028 East Boulevard, from R-1 to B-1.


6234
 
6-25-02
 
Property located at 701 North Webster, from R-1 to C-1.


6240
 
8-27-02
 
Property located at 2136 North Cooper from, R-2 to B-1.


6241
 
8-27-02
 
Properties located in the 2000 Block of East Boulevard Rd., from R-1 to B-1.


6242
 
8-27-02
 
Properties located at 3201 Pine Ridge Drive, from R-1 to R-3, and the 3000
Block of Pine Ridge Drive, from R-3 to B-1.


6247
 
11-19-02
 
Property located at 2818 South Dixon Road, from R-1 to R-4.


6251
 
1-13-03
 
Properties located at 393 West Rd., 300 North and 2864 Amberwood Place from
R-1 to R-4.


6280
 
9-29-03
 
Property located at 1208 North Washington Street from R-4 to B-1.


6281
 
9-8-03
 
Property located at 900 block of South Apperson Way from R-2 to B-1.


6287
 
12-8-03
 
Property located at 1140 North Phillips Street from R-2 to OC.


6288
 
11-24-03
 
Property located at 502 South Berkley Road from R-4 to B-1.


6292
 
4-12-04
 
Lot #38 & Lot #39 in Diamond Plate Addition, Center Township, at 1300 East
Vaile Avenue, from R4 to NC.


6293
 
3-29-04
 
Property located at 734 West Morgan Street, from MI to LI.


6294
 
3-29-04
 
Property located at 1459 South 17th Street, from C2 and MI to MI.


6298
 
4-26-04
 
Property located at 2625 North Washington Street, from LI to C2.


6303
 
5-24-04
 
Property located at 1901 East Sycamore Road, from M1 to PD-M1.


6304
 
5-24-04
 
Property located at 1306 North Phillips Street, from R4 to NC.


6305
 
5-10-04
 
Property located at 1121 South 17th Street, from R5 to C1.


6307
 
5-24-04
 
Property located at 1127 East Markland Avenue, from HI to LI.


6308
 
5-24-04
 
Property located at 1135 South 17th Street, from R5 to C1.


6312
 
6-14-04
 
Property located at 1515 South 17th Street, from R4 to C1.


6318
 
8-9-04
 
Property located at 3033 Westmor Drive, from R1 to IS.


6319
 
7-26-04
 
Property located at 900 block of Riverview Drive, from R1 to M1.


6320
 
7-26-04
 
Property located at 1236 West Walnut Street, from R3 to OC.


6321
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 311 W. Walnut Street, from C1 and M1 to C1.


6324
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1023 S. Union Street, from R4 to C2.


6325
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at the northwest corner of Hoffer Street and Lafountain
Street, from R4 to C1.


6326
 
8-9-04
 
Property located at 1212 W. Jackson Street, from R4 to C1.


6327
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1540 E. Monroe Street, from R4 to LI.


6328
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1729 S. Lafountain, from R4 to C1.


6329
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1021 N. Washington, from R4 to C2.


6330
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1435 S. Main Street, from R4 to NC.


6331
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1007/1009 N. Webster, from R5 to M1.


6332
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 225-225 ½ N. Phillips, from R4 to M1.


6333
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1429 and 1432 S. Main, from R4 to C1.


6334
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 1322 and 1326 N. Delphos, from R1 to M1.


6335
 
7-12-04
 
Property located at 2106 N. Ohio, 1244 E. Morgan, and 2110 N. Diamond, from
R4 to C2.


6336
 
8-30-04
 
Property located at 2300 North Elizabeth Street, from R4 to C2.


6337
 
8-9-04
 
Property located at 1523 W. Sycamore, from R4 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2323 W. Jefferson Street, from OC to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2325 N. Appersonway, from R4 to NC;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1428 S. Main Street, from R4 to OC;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 208 W. Elm, from R5 to M1.


6338
 
8-9-04
 
Property located at 1033 and 1035 S. 17th Street, from R5 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1125 S. 17th Street, from R5 to C1.


6339
 
8-9-04
 
Property located at 403-405 E. Sycamore, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 614 N. Morrison, from R3 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1913 N. Main Street, from R4 to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1014 E. Hoffer, from R5 and C1 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at SW corner of Deffenbaugh and Berkley, from PR to HI;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1621 S. Home Avenue, from R5 to C1.


6340
 
8-30-04
 
Property located at 413 and 415 S. Washington, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with
FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 401 to 405 W. Sycamore, from R5 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2605 W. Jefferson, from R1 to OC.


6343
 
9-13-04
 
Property located at 2152 North Plate Street, from R4 to LI.


6344
 
9-13-04
 
Property located at 405/407 W. Taylor, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 400 W. Morgan, from R4 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2123 N. Market, from MI to R4;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 201 E. Defenbaugh, from NC to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 520 N. Ohio, from C1 to LI.


6345
 
9-13-04
 
Property located at 314 W. Walnut, from M1 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 412-414 W. Sycamore Street, from R3 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1228 W. Taylor, from R3 to C1.


6349
 
10-11-04
 
Property located at 1256 E. Morgan, from R4 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 417 N. Market Street, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1599 E. Sycamore, from R3 to IS;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1225 E. Laguna, from M1 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 900 E. Vaile, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 904 E. Vaile, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 510 N. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 221 E. Murden, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL.


6350
 
10-11-04
 
Property located at 518 N. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 619/621 S. Main, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 317/319 N. Lindsay, from R3 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 709 W. Monroe, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 719 S. Union, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 523/525 E. Walnut, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 408-410 S. Union, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 416 W. Butler, from R5 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 302 E. Walnut, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2206 and 2208 Executive Drive, from R1 to M1.


6351
 
10-25-04
 
Property located at the 900 block of Riverview Drive, from M1 to PD-M1.


6352
 
10-25-04
 
Property located at 619 East Markland Avenue, from R5 to C1.


6357
 
11-8-04
 
Property located at 200 E. Hoffer, from R4 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 627 S. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 822 S. Home, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 305-329 W. Morgan, from R5 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 412 S. Union, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2004 N. Delphos, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 505 W. Jefferson, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 509 S. Main, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 924 N. Webster, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1725 S. Purdum, from R4 to R5;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 201 W. Morgan, from R3 to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 700 S. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at Greentree Lane and Greentree Court, from R1 to R3.


6358
 
11-8-04
 
Property located at 322 S. Union, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL.


6360
 
11-29-04
 
Property located at NW Main and Foster, from C1 to LI.


6361
 
12-13-04
 
Property located at 401 W. Morgan, from C2 to LI;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 416 W. Sycamore, from R3 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2507 Locust Lane, from R1 to R3.


6363
 
12-13-04
 
Property located at 1500 South 17th Street, from R4 to C1.


6365
 
1-24-05
 
Property located at 2814 Greentree Court, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 100 E. North Street, from C2 to MI; also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1826 N. Apperson, from NC to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2511 Locust Ln., from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 911/913 N. Leeds, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 712 S. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 724 S. Main, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 718 S. Main, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1200 W. Taylor, from R3 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 703 W. Taylor, from R4 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at707 W. Taylor, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 711 W. Taylor, from R4 to M1; also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 708/710 W. Walnut, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 624/626 E. Walnut, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 908 Pahara Village Road, from M1 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2808 Locust Court East, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2815 Greentree Court, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 212 E. Murden, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 413 S. Union, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 618-620 S. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 708 N. Union, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 715 N. Union, from C1 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 720 N. Union, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 803 N. Union, from R4 to M1.


6369
 
2-7-05
 
Property located at 502-504 E. Sycamore, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 4203 to 4245 Colter Dr., from C2 to R1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2603 Locust Ln., from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2515 Locust Ln., from R1 to R3; also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 424 S. Main, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 404 S. Union, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 410 S. Main, from R5 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1008 E. Hoffer, from R5 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 600 W. Walnut, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 406 W. Walnut, from M1 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 405 W. Walnut, from M1 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1209 W. Taylor, from R3 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 528 W. Taylor, from R4 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1320 W. Markland, from C2 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1201 W. Taylor, from R3 to M1; also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2806 Locust Ct. East, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 607 W. Sycamore, from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 326 W. Markland Ave., from R4 to OC;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 332 W. Markland Ave., from R4 to OC;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2605 Locust Ln., from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2811 Locust Ct. West, from R1 to R3.


6374
 
3-28-05
 
Property located at 415 W. Sycamore, from OC to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 409 W. Mulberry, from R5 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2419 N. Locke, from R4 to IS;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 810 Millbrook Dr., from C2 to LI.


6377
 
5-9-05
 
Property located at 1301, 1315 and 1319 West Jefferson Street, from NC and R5
to C2.


6380
 
6-27-05
 
Property located at 800 block of St. Joseph Drive, from C1 to M1.


6381
 
6-13-05
 
Property located at 719 N. Main, from MI to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 801 E. Hoffer, from R3 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2808 and 2813 Plum Ct., 2503 Greentree Ln., 2804 and 2805
E. Locust Ct., 2815 W. Locust Ct., 2512 and 2516 Locust, all from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1001 and 1005 E. Firmin St., from R5 to IS;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1504 W. Markland Ave., from R4 to LI.


6386
 
7-12-05
 
Property located at 1334 N. Delphos St., from R3 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1520 N. Apperson Way, from R4 to IS;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 121 W. Markland, from R4 to C1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1010 E. Hoffer, from R5 to C1.


6387
 
8-8-05
 
Property located at 2030 N. Apperson Way, from C1 to C2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2601 Locust Ln., from R1 to R3.


6401
 
11-14-05
 
Property located at 3712 Southlea Dr., from R3 to OC.


6402
 
11-14-05
 
Property located at 2803 Locust Ct. East, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 2509 Greentree Ln., from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 407 E. Richmond St., from R4 to IS;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 512 E. Sycamore, from R5 to M2;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1920 N. Ohio Ave., from LI with R4 to HI;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1029 S. Washington St., from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 112 W. Lordeman St., from R5 to LI;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 508/510 W. Lordeman St. and 1709/1709-1/2/1711/ 1711-1/2
N. Webster St., all from R4 to M1;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 414 W. Mulberry St., from R4 to OC.


6406
 
12-12-05
 
Property located at 1560 S. Plate St., from M2 to NC.


6407
 
12-12-05
 
Property located at 715 South Reed Rd., from R3 to C2.


6408
 
12-12-05
 
Property located at 1210 E. Jefferson St., from M1 to NC.


6409
 
2-13-06
 
Property located at 329 E. Firmin Street from R4 to L1.


6410
 
2-13-06
 
Property located at 2412 Greentree Lane, from R1 to R3;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 429 S. Main Street, from R4 with FH-OL to M1 with FH-OL;


 
 
 
 
also


 
 
 
 
Property located at 1081/2, 1101/2, 110 and 108 E. Jefferson Street, from R5
to C2.


6416
 
3-13-06
 
Property located at 2020 Bent Creek Road from C2 and C2/FH Flood Hazard to M1
and M1/FH Flood Hazard.


6417
 
3-13-06
 
Property located at 1700 South 17th Street from R4 to C1.


6418
 
3-27-06
 
Property located at 1910 N. Ohio Street from R4 to OC.


6425
 
5-8-06
 
Property located at 1717 North Ohio Avenue from R4 to M1.


6433
 
6-12-06
 
Property located at 2018 Bent Creek road from M1 to PD-M1.


6442
 
8-28-06
 
Property located at 502 West Jefferson Street from R3 to NC.


6443
 
8-28-06
 
Property located at 1200 South Main Street from R4 to M1.


6448
 
8-28-06
 
Properties located at 1015 through 1027 S. Apperson Way, from C1 to C2.


6451
 
10-16-06
 
Property located at 820 - 822 West Walnut Street from R3 to M1.


6452
 
2-26-07
 
Property located at 840 Daniel Drive from C2 to PD-C2.


6453
 
10-30-06
 
Property located at 200 Pipeline Way from C2, M1 and L1 to C2.


6461
 
12-11-06
 
Property located at the southeast corner of South Weber Drive and Rainbow
Drive from C1 to M2.


6462
 
2-12-07
 
Property located at 1550 East Dodge Street from MI to M2.


6463
 
2-12-07
 
Property located at 1803 East Vaile Avenue from C1 and C2 to IS


6466
 
4-9-07
 
Property located at 1015 S. Purdum Street from R5 to C1.


6467
 
3-26-07
 
Property located at 1248 S. Plate Street from R4 to C1.


6468
 
3-26-07
 
Property located at 1621 and 1625 E. Firmin Street and 1624 E. Wheeler Street
from R4 to C1.


6469
 
4-9-07
 
Property located at 2400 W. Sycamore Street from IS to C1.


6480
 
5-21-07
 
Property located at 2122 N. Plate Street from R4 to M1.


6481
 
5-21-07
 
Property located at 216 Corwin Lane from OC to LI.


6506
 
10-8-07
 
Property located at 414 West Taylor Street from R4 to NC.


6507
 
10-8-07
 
Property located at 2222 and 2224 West Sycamore Street from IS to C1.


6512
 
11-19-07
 
Property located at 2100 North Webster Street from C1 to C2.


6519
 
12-10-07
 
Property located at 615 North Webster Street from R3 to NC.


6523
 
1-28-08
 
Property located at 700 St. Joseph Drive from C1 to M2.


6525
 
2-25-08
 
Property located at 535 West Jefferson Street from R5 to M1.


6526
 
2-11-08
 
Property located at 415 South Washington Street from M1 to C1.


6531
 
4-14-08
 
Property located at 342 E. Morgan Street and 2117 N. Apperson Way from C1 to
IS.


6537
 
5-12-08
 
Property located at 1023 and 1025 North Armstrong Street from R4 to IS.


6538
 
5-12-08
 
Property located at 1504 and 1502 West Defenbaugh Street from R2 to R4.


6543
 
6-23-08
 
Property located at 215 and 217 South Cooper Street from R5 to IS.


6552
 
9-29-08
 
Property located at 1154 and 1156 East Foster Street from R4 to C2.


6553
 
9-29-08
 
Property located at 1897 South Berkley Road from HI to IS.


6555
 
10-27-08
 
Property located at 424 North Apperson Way from LI to IS.


6559
 
11-10-08
 
Property located at 1109, 1111 and 1113 East Markland Avenue from R5 to C1.


6560
 
11-10-08
 
Property located at 503 N. Market and 506, 510 and 518 N. Union from R5 and
M1 to IS.


6583
 
7-27-09
 
Property located at Lots 130 and 131 in Bell’s Addition, at 913 South Jay
Street from IS to C2.


6585
 
7-13-09
 
Property located at Lot 24 in Walnut Hills Addition, at 919 South Union
Street from R5 to DC.


6592
 
10-13-09
 
Property located at Lot 10 in J.E. Smith’s Addition, at 1010 North
Washington Street from R4 to C1.


6607
 
3-9-10
 
Property located at Lot 18 in Vitatoe Villa Subdivision Section 10, at 508
East Center Road from C2 to IS.


6610
 
3-11-10
 
Property located at 1618 South Berkley Road from MI to IS.


6611
 
5-11-10
 
Property located at Braun’s Subdivision of Lot 17 3rd in Rodkey and
Lehman’s Addition Lot 5 at 1703 North Davis Road from C1 to C2.


6617
 
7-13-10
 
Property located at Lots 1 through 5 in Edgewater Heights Addition at 2205
South Washington St. from R1 to M2.


6623
 
9-14-10
 
Property located at Lots 1, 2, and 3 in J.R. Morgan’s Addition and Lots
5-12 and 38-44 in Kirkpatrick and Scott’s First Addition at 1495 North
Webster Street from MI to M2.


6640
 
6-14-11
 
Lots 55 and 56 in Kirkpatrick and Scott’s First Addition, containing 0.36
acres, Center Township Howard County, Indiana, at 1423 North Courtland Avenue
from R4 to M1.


6643
 
7-26-11
 
Lots 5 and 6 in J.R. Hall’s Addition and Lots 71 and 72 in Corydon
Richmond’s Addition to the city, Center Township, Howard County from R4,
R5, and M1 to IS.


6647
 
8-8-11
 
Lot 8 and seven feet off the south side of Lot 7 in Rebecca A. Sharp’s
First Addition, containing 0.17 acres, more or less, Center Township at 2114
North Armstrong Street from R4 to NC.


6649
 
9-26-11
 
Lots 6, 7 and 8 in Mills and Richmond’s Addition from DC to M2.


6650
 
9-13-11
 
Lot 1 in Brock Minor Subdivision containing 0.77 acres at 1802 West Monroe
Street from R2 to R4.


6658
 
11-29-11
 
Part of Lot 1 in Fleet Acres Subdivision, containing 6.28 acres, more or less
at 1900 East North Street from LI to HI.


6659
 
12-12-11
 
Lots 6, 7, 8 and 20 through 30 containing 1144.80 at 1407 South Belmont
Avenue from R4 to IS.


6661
 
12-13-11
 
Amending the zoning map to incorporate the inclusion of the division of all
parcels annexed into the city by Ord. 6541 and as amended by Ord. 6637.


6665
 
3-12-12
 
Lots 3A, 3B, 4A and 4B in Cobblestone Villas, Section 1 and Lots 24A, 24B,
25A and 25B in Cobblestone Villas, Section 2 from M1 to R4.


6668
 
4-9-12
 
322 East Jackson Street from LI to M2.


6669
 
4-9-12
 
2315 and 2317 West Jefferson Street from M2 to C2.


6671
 
5-14-12
 
1220 South Plate Street from LI to M1.


6677
 
6-11-12
 
2020 South Washington Street from R4 to NC.


6678
 
6-11-12
 
3506 South Dixon Road from C2 to IS.


6682
 
7-9-12
 
110 East Morgan Street from MI to LI.


6686
 
8-13-12
 
570 East 400 South from R1 to C1.


6687
 
8-13-12
 
1105 North Touby Pike from LI to C2.


6693
 
9-10-12
 
2200 South Dixon Road from OC to M2.


6698
 
10-15-12
 
2020 South Washington Street from NC to C2.


6699
 
10-15-12
 
5811 South Park Road from AR and PR to M2.


6700
 
11-19-12
 
301 East Morgan Street from C1 to C2.


6712
 
2-25-13
 
2626 South Webster Street from IS to OC.


6715
 
3-25-13
 
704 South Bell Street from R4 to NC.


6716
 
4-8-13
 
1914 West Sycamore Street from R3 to C1.


6723
 
6-11-13
 
1423 and 1425 North Cortland Avenue form M1 to R5.


6724
 
6-24-13
 
2100 Center Street from R1 to LI.


6729
 
8-12-13
 
5725 S. Park Road from A/R to P/R.


6734
 
9-23-13
 
117 West Markland Avenue from R4 to C1.


6735
 
9-23-13
 
1101 North Buckeye Street from LI to M1.


6736
 
10-22-13
 
502 E. Jefferson St., 509 - 529 E. Jefferson St., 424 - 512 N. Apperson Way,
508 - 528 E. Jackson St., 415 N. Bell St. from R4 to C1.


6740
 
11-25-13
 
903 South Main Street from DC to NC.


6741
 
11-25-13
 
3806 South Albright Road from AR to IS.


6742
 
1-27-14
 
1539 East Co. Rd. 100 North from RI to OC.


6745
 
1-27-14
 
840 Daniel Drive from LI to IS.


6753
 
4-28-14
 
917 Silver Charm Drive from R3 to AG.


6754
 
4-28-14
 
1308 South Home Avenue from LI to C1.


6755
 
5-12-14
 
3813 South Lafountain Street from LI to C2.


6763
 
7-14-14
 
311 South 00 East West from C1 to C2.


6765
 
7-22-14
 
703, 705 and 707 St. Joseph Drive from C1 to M2.


6775
 
10-27-14
 
110 East Morgan Street and 2200 North Washington Street from LI and R5 to M2.


6780
 
11-24-14
 
1500 West Markland Avenue from MP to M2.


6790
 
3-9-15
 
3030 South LaFountain Street from C1 and R1 to L1.


6791
 
3-9-15
 
321 East Taylor Street from R5 to OC.


6793
 
4-13-15
 
3405 and 3407 Woodhaven Trail from PR to M1.


6796
 
4-27-15
 
400 South Union Street from R4 with FH-OL, R5 with FH-OL, and M1 with FH-OL
to PR with FH-OL.


6797
 
6-8-15
 
321 East Walnut Street from R5 to OC.


6798
 
6-8-15
 
1425 South Plate Street from IS to M2.


6799
 
6-8-15
 
122 Creekside Drive from C2 with WH-OL to IS with WH-OL.


6801
 
6-29-15
 
1700 and 1704 East Wheeler Street from R4 to C1.


6809
 
10-26-15
 
408 South Washington Street from C2 with FH-OL to M2 with FH-OL.


6811
 
12-14-15
 
2904 South Albright Road from AR to M2.


6824
 
3-28-16
 
304-308, 312, 320, 322, 326, 330, 400, 410, 412, 414, 418, and 424 South Main
Street; 309-315, 319-325, 327, 401, 406, 407, 415, 417-429, and 431 South
Union Street; Lot No. 7 in J.B. Carter’s First Addition; from DC with FH-OL
to DC-PD with FH-OL.


6823
 
4-11-16
 
1510 - 1600 East Jefferson Street from R1 with WH-OL and LI with WH-OL to MI
with WH-OL.


6826
 
4-25-16
 
300 South 200 West from AG with FH-OL to R-1 with FH-OL.


6827
 
4-25-16
 
615 North Washington Street from C-1 to C-2.


6830
 
6-27-16
 
45.38 acres, at 2515 East 00 North South, from R-1 to AG.


6835
 
7-18-16
 
0.63 acres at 220 East Sycamore Street, from M2 to PD-M2.


6841
 
9-12-16
 
0.735 acres at 500 East Harrison Street, from PR to M2.


6845
 
10-12-16
 
0.151 acres at 2442 North Washington Street, from R4 to LI.


6854
 
11-28-16
 
3.05 acres at 3000 Timber Valley Drive, from PR with FH-OL to R-1 with FH-OL.


6856
 
1-13-17
 
4.13 acres at 4410 South 150 East, from AG to R1.


6861
 
3-72-17
 
711 S. Reed Road, from C2 to IS.


6864
 
6-15-17
 
1025 East 400 South, from AG and AR to IS.


6873
 
10-24-17
 
1124 S. Union, 1215 S. Union, 610 E. Ricketts and 720 E. Boulevard from HI,
PR and R4, respectively, to M2.


6877
 
11-27-17
 
218 N. Apperson Way, from C1 to R5.


6878
 
11-27-15
 
218 N. Apperson Way, from C1 to IS.


6879
 
12-13-17
 
0.99 acres, more or less at 1300 W. Markland Avenue (Cart Minor Subdivision),
1 Lot, from C1 to C2.


6883
 
1-10-18
 
31.68, more or less at 1275 W 300 S. from PR to R3.


6886
 
3-26-18
 
Rezoning a tract of land at 150 S. Reed Road by Ord. 6886 from R1 WH OL (Very
Low Density Residential in a Well Head Overlay and Flood Hazard Overlay) to
C2 WH OL (Medium to Large Scale General Commercial in a Well Head Overlay and
Flood Hazard Overlay).


6887
 
3-26-18
 
Rezoning property located at 1007 S. Ohio Avenue from R5 (High Density
Residential) to C2 (Medium to Large Scale General Commercial).


6888
 
3-26-18
 
Rezoning land located at 3078 S. 200 W. from PR (Parks and Recreation) to R1
(Very Low Density Residential).


6889
 
3-26-18
 
Rezoning 726 N. 200 W. from AG (Agriculture) to IS (Institutional Uses).


6891
 
4-12-18
 
Rezoning 234 South Dixon Road from R1 (Very Low Density Residential) to R5
(High Density Urban Residential).


6894
 
5-21-18
 
Rezoning 2110 La Fountain Street from R1 (Very Low Density Residential) to M2
(General Multifamily Residential).


6895
 
5-21-18
 
Rezoning 612 North Webster Street from C1 (Small to Medium Scale General
Commercial) to R4 (Medium Density Urban Residential).


6896
 
5-21-18
 
Rezoning 215 and 305 Pipeline Way from C1(Small to Medium Scale General
Commercial) to L1 (Low Intensity Industrial/Business Park).


6899
 
6-25-18
 
Rezoning 2101 N. Webster Street from L1(Low Intensity Industrial/Business
Park) to HI (High Intensity Industrial/Heavy Manufacturing).


6900
 
6-25-18
 
Rezoning 711 North Purdum Street from R4(Medium Density Urban Residential) to
M2 (General Multi-family Residential).


6904
 
7-24-18
 
Rezoning 910 North Washington Street from LI (Low Intensity/Business Park) to
M2(General Multi-family Residential).


6905
 
7-24-18
 
Rezoning 910 North Washington Street from M2 (General Multi-family
Residential) to M2-PUD (General Multi-family Residential Plan Unit
Development).


6906
 
7-30-18
 
Rezoning 1560 South Plate Street from NC (Neighborhood Commercial) to M2
(General Multi-family Residential).


6907
 
7-30-18
 
Rezoning 708 West Alto Road from C1 (Small to Medium Scale General
Commercial) to LI (Low Intensity Industrial/Business Park)


6915
 
9-24-18
 
Rezoning 679 N. Purdum Street from IS (Institutional Use) to R5 (High Density
Urban Residential)


6916
 
9-24-18
 
Rezoning 657 N. Purdum Street from IS (Institutional Use) to R5 (High Density
Urban Residential)


6917
 
9-24-18
 
Rezoning 645 N. Purdum Street from IS (Institutional Use) to R5 (High Density
Urban Residential)


6918
 
10-29-18
 
Rezoning 713 and 723 North Elizabeth Street from IS (Institutional Use) and
R4 (Urban Residential)to LI(Low Intensity Industrial/Business Park)


6919
 
10-29-18
 
Rezoning 110 East Morgan Street from M2 (General Multi-Family Residential) to
LI (Low Intensity Industrial/Business Park)


6922
 
11-14-18
 
Rezoning 401, 503, 507 and 511 East Sycamore Street from M1 (Low-Density
Multi-Family Residential and R5 (Urban Residential) to M2 (General
Multifamily Residential)


6923
 
11-14-18
 
Rezoning 1308 W. Jackson Street from R5 (Urban Residential) to NC
(Neighborhood Commercial)


6924
 
1-14-19
 
Rezoning Sycamore Plaza Section 2, Lots 2 and 3, Kokomo Indiana, Center
Township, Howard County, at 122 Creekside Drive, from IS (Institutional Uses)
to C2 (Medium to Large Scale General Commercial)


6925
 
1-28-19
 
Rezoning property described as Cedar Knoll Apartments Subdivision Replat PT,
Lots 4 & 5 and Lots 7 & 8, at 125 Southway Boulevard, from C1 (Small to
Medium Scale General Commercial) to C2 (Medium to Large Scale General
Commercial)


6930
 
2-25-19
 
Rezoning property described as Countryside Addition, Lot 33, containing 0.5
acres more or less, at 1424 South Plate Street, from R3 (Medium Density
Residential) to NC (Neighborhood Commercial)


6931
 
3-25-19
 
Rezoning property described as Fairlawn Addition, Lots 31 and 32, containing
0.24 acres more or less, at 919 E. Markland Avenue, from C1 (Small to Medium
Scale General Commercial) to C2 (Medium to Large Scale General Commercial)


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V.  HISTORIC SITES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




5195
 
7-12-82
 
Property located at 121 East Sycamore Street.


5196
 
7-12-82
 
Property located at 116 North Main Street.


5261
 
4-25-83
 
Property located at 107-111 East Sycamore Street.


5268
 
4-25-83
 
Property located at 105 East Sycamore Street.


5270
 
4-25-83
 
Property located at 113-119 East Sycamore Street.


5271
 
4-25-83
 
Property located at 1218 West Superior Street.


5273
 
4-25-83
 
Property located at 401 West Walnut Street.


5280
 
4-25-83
 
Properties located at 1014 West Walnut, 111 North Indiana, 503 North
Washington, 417 West Mulberry.


5375
 
4-23-84
 
Properties located at 524 West Sycamore Street and 114 East Jefferson Street.


5393
 
7-30-84
 
Property located at 1324 East Hoffer Street.


5690
 
5-9-89
 
Property located at 427 West Boulevard and 802 East Sycamore Street.


5716
 
11-20-89
 
Property located at 606 South Main Street.


5724
 
2-12-90
 
Property located at 814 South Home Avenue.


5725
 
2-12-90
 
Property located at 606 West Mulberry Street.


5726
 
2-12-90
 
Property located at 208 North Main Street.


5727
 
2-12-90
 
Property located at 212 West Walnut Street.


5728
 
3-12-90
 
Property located at 603 North Union Street.


5729
 
3-12-90
 
Property located at 1119 West Mulberry Street.


5735
 
4-9-90
 
Property located at 44 West Mulberry Street.


5736
 
4-9-90
 
Property located at 110 East Boulevard.


5748
 
6-11-90
 
Property located at 520 Mulberry Street.


5782
 
2-25-91
 
Property located at 1915 South Webster Street.


5783
 
2-25-91
 
Property located at 111 West Sycamore Street.


5794
 
5-20-91
 
Property located at 107-109 West Mulberry                       
                          Street.


5833
 
9-14-92
 
Property located at 316 Kingston Road.


5834
 
9-14-92
 
Property located at 1019 West Sycamore Street.


5859
 
2-8-93
 
Property located at 206 North Main Street.


5895
 
11-29-93
 
Property located at 1320 West Markland Avenue.


5896
 
11-29-93
 
Property located at 1201 West Maple Street.


5897
 
11-29-93
 
Property located at 507 West Walnut Street.


5909
 
2-28-94
 
Property located at 911 West Walnut Street.


5916
 
5-23-94
 
Property located at 324 South Berkley Road.


5923
 
7-11-94
 
Property located at 731 South Courtland Street.


5938
 
9-26-94
 
Property located at 718 West Mulberry Street.


5939
 
9-26-94
 
Property located at 512 West Taylor Street.


5940
 
9-26-94
 
Property located at 518 West Taylor Street.


5947
 
11-28-94
 
Property located at 512 West Taylor Street.


5949
 
12-12-94
 
Property located at 822 West Jackson Street.


5972
 
9-11-95
 
Property located at 1212 West Walnut Street.


5990
 
12-11-95
 
Property located at 525 West Walnut Street.


6003
 
7-29-96
 
Property located at 906 West Superior Street.


6004
 
7-30-96
 
Property located at 219 West Mulberry Street.


6009
 
8-27-96
 
Property located at 319 North Main Street.


6010
 
8-27-96
 
Property located at 1403 South Courtland Avenue.


6014
 
10-22-96
 
Property located at 110 East Boulevard.


6039
 
4-14-97
 
Property located at 107 West Sycamore Street.


6077
 
1-13-98
 
Property located at 1501 West Jefferson Street.


6099
 
8-24-98
 
Property located at 535 Walnut Street.


6120
 
5-10-99
 
Property located at 1635 West Sycamore Street.


6137
 
9-27-99
 
Property located at 907 West Sycamore Street.


6165
 
7-10-00
 
Property located at 1005 West Mulberry Street.


6190
 
6-11-01
 
Property located at 112 South Western Ave.


6227
 
5-14-02
 
Property located at 920 Apperson Way.


6253
 
2-10-03
 
Property located at 1310 South Market Street.


6254
 
2-10-03
 
Property located at 618 West Walnut Street.


6262
 
5-12-03
 
Property located at 502 West Jefferson Street.


6389
 
9-12-05
 
Property locate at 809 West Sycamore Street.


6390
 
8-29-05
 
Property located at 1101 East Sycamore Street.


6432
 
6-26-06
 
Property located at 821 East Dixon Street.


6483
 
6-11-07
 
Property located at 1231-1235 West Walnut Street.


6557
 
10-27-08
 
Property located at 500 West Mulberry Street.


6585
 
7-27-09
 
Property located at 531 West Mulberry Street.


6606
 
5-25-10
 
Property located at 1420 West Sycamore Street.


6621
 
9-13-10
 
Property located at 316 North Washington Street.


6628
 
12-14-10
 
Property located at 205 Westmorland Drive.


6660
 
12-12-11
 
Designating property located at 900 Block West Defenbaugh as a historical
site.


6676
 
5-21-12
 
Designating property located at 1008-1028 South Main Street as a historical
site.


6695
 
9-10-12
 
Designating property located at 200 block of North Buckeye Street as a
historical site.


6748
 
3-24-14
 
Designating property located at 201 South McCann Street as an historic site.


6770
 
8-25-14
 
Designating the Lake Erie & Western Historic Depot District as a local
historic district.


6794
 
3-30-15
 
Designating property located at 1220 West Maple Street as an historic site.


6795
 
3-30-15
 
Designating property located at 507 North Buckeye Street as an historic site.


6806
 
7-27-15
 
Designating property located at 1020 West Jefferson Street as an historic
site.


6810
 
11-9-15
 
Designating property located at 215 South Phillips Street as an historic site.


6834
 
6-27-16
 
Designating property located at 922 South Main Street as an historic site.


6857
 
1-30-17
 
Designating property located at 1223 West Superior Street as an historic site.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI.  VACATIONS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
DESCRIPTION




5395
 
8-13-84
 
A portion of Lordeman St. beginning at the southeast corner of lot 204 in the
Parkview Addition.


5442
 
4-29-85
 
A 16-foot alleyway between Fischer St. and Gerhart St.


5451
 
5-20-85
 
An alley 15 feet in width between Main St. and Buckeye St.


5464
 
7-8-85
 
An alley between Washington St. and Buckeye St.


5596
 
7-13-87
 
A portion of Haynes Mall Boulevard.


5628
 
4-11-88
 
Portions of 17th St., Superior St., Maple St., and an alley, all in the
Pittsburgh Plate Glass Addition.


5638
 
6-27-88
 
An alley commencing at the southeast corner of lot 24 in William H. Turner's
Addition.


5649
 
8-8-88
 
An alley beginning at the southwest corner of lot 17 in Laynes Addition.


5687
 
4-10-89
 
The north-south alley in the 1500 block between North Washington Street and
North Buckeye Street.


5699
 
7-24-89
 
The east-west alley located between Buckeye Street on the east, Washington
Street on the west, Sycamore Street on the south, and Walnut Street on the
north.


5742
 
5-22-90
 
The alley commencing at the southeast corner of Lot 104 in Commissioners
Western Addition.


5749 (as amended)
 
7-9-90
 
The alley commencing at the southeast corner of lot 52E in Mills and Richmond
Addition.


5775
 
8-13-90
 
The alley commencing at the southeast corner of lot 15 in the original plat
of the City of Kokomo.


5771-A
 
11-12-90
 
That portion of an alley between lot 12 and lot 13, in T.C. Malaby's First
Addition.


5777
 
11-26-90
 
The alley commencing at the southwest corner of lot 9 in D.C. Metsker's First
Addition.


5784               
 
2-25-91 
 
The alley commencing at  the west side of lots 27 and 14 in Foster's East
Addition. 


5816
 
1-27-92
 
The alley commencing at the northwest corner of lots 42 in J.O. Heatons's
Second Addition.


5821
 
5-19-92
 
The alley commencing at the north east corner of lot 57 B of the Original
Plat.


5827
 
6-29-92
 
The alley beginning at the south east corner of lot 1 of the Mills and
Richmond Addition.


5831
 
7-27-92
 
The alley beginning at the northeast corner of lot 2 of Bill's Subdivision.


5837
 
10-5-92
 
A portion of Stellite Street and Haynes Mall Boulevard.


5871
 
4-26-93
 
A portion of Jasper Street between Courtland Avenue and the north/south alley
between Courtland Avenue and Webster Street.


5892
 
9-27-93
 
North/south public alley beginning at the northwest corner of lot 131 in Oak
Grove Addition.


5921
 
7-25-94
 
East/west public ways beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 38 in
Richmond, Corydon Addition.  Also, beginning at the northwest corner of Lot
35 in Richmond, Corydon Addition.  Also, beginning at the northwest corner
of Lot 10 in Richmond, Corydon Addition.


5922
 
7-11-94
 
Certain portions of alleys located in Pittsburg Plate Glass Addition.


5978
 
11-13-95
 
An alley located in Farmers Trust Addition.


5982
 
10-30-95
 
Portion of the alley running east and west between lots 140, 141, 125, and
124 in R.G. Smith's Fifth Addition to the city.


5989
 
2-27-96
 
Proposed Co. Road 250 South from Brooke Road to 150 East and Co. Road 150
East from 300 South to Stoney Brooke.


6020
 
11-26-96
 
Elm Street right of way, east of Ohio Street and between Lot 13 in Thomas S.
Armstrong's Addition.


6061
 
9-30-97
 
Portion of an alley located in Parkview First Addition.


6028
 
2-24-97
 
An alley platted in Jones and Shirk's Subdivision of Lots 5, 6, 11 and 12 in
Avery's Addition.


6034
 
2-10-97
 
An alley in Farmers Trust Addition.


6098
 
8-10-98
 
An alley platted in Foster's Addition of Lots 54 and 55.


6104
 
10-19-98
 
An alley west of Buckeye Street between Sycamore and Superior Streets.


6109
 
1-11-99
 
Part of an alley east of Market Street from Deffenbaugh Street to Firmin
Street.


6119
 
5-10-99
 
A portion of North Elizabeth Street north of Gano Street between U.S. 31 and
North Calumet Street.


6134
 
8-31-99
 
An unused utility and drainage easement north of West Boulevard between Dixon
and Park Roads.


6136
 
9-13-99
 
An alley north of Markland Avenue, between Plate and Elizabeth Streets.


6146
 
10-20-99
 
Sewer and utility easement at the Wal-Mart store on Markland Avenue.


6147
 
1-24-00
 
A 16-foot alley lying between North and Tate Street and west of Ann Street.


6149
 
2-14-00
 
A utility easement along the northern boundary of Lot Number 2, Section 2,
Southland Plaza Subdivision.


6173
 
11-27-00
 
Certain portions of alleys located adjacent to 714 East Gerhart Street.


6224
 
4-30-02
 
Certain portions of alleys located adjacent to and south of 1236 North Main
Street.


6235
 
9-23-02
 
A portion of an alley located adjacent to and west of 818 North Apperson Way.


6237
 
8-13-02
 
A portion of an alley located at 1824 East Hoffer Street.


6249
 
1-27-03
 
A portion of an alley in Howe's Subdivision in a part of Sunnyside Addition.


6274
 
9-8-03
 
A portion of an alley located at 226 South Union Street.


6355
 
11-29-04
 
An alley in Commissioner’s Western Addition.


6372
 
4-11-05
 
Alley located in Berne Tate’s Subdivision of Lot 37 in Avery’s Addition
to the city.


6373
 
4-11-05
 
Alley located in Bell’s Addition to the city.


6400
 
10-17-05
 
A certain portion of an alley east of Armstrong Street, between Broadway
Street and Elm Street; and a certain portion of an alley north of Elm Street,
between Washington Street and Armstrong Street.


6478
 
5-21-07
 
A certain portion of an alley within the Vinton Woods Subdivision, Section 3,
Harrison Township, beginning at the southwest corner of Lot F.


6491
 
7-30-07
 
A certain portion of an alley located in a part of Lot 1 in Century Minor
Subdivision, being a part of the Southeast Quarter of Section 12, Township 23
North, Range 3 East.


6545
 
7-28-08
 
A part of Lindsay Street right-of-way in the Armstrong Sunnyside Addition, as
Platted in Recorders Plat Book 2, Page 53, an Addition to the City of Kokomo,
Center Township.


6599
 
1-11-10
 
A portion of a 12-foot wide alley situated between Lots 265 and 266 to the
Miller Harbaugh’s Argo Addition.


6609
 
6-28-10
 
A portion of the alley located in J.R. Hall’s Highland Park Addition.


6636
 
4-11-11
 
Vacating a portion of an alley located between North Buckeye Street and North
Washington Street.


6639
 
6-27-11
 
Vacating a public way in Conradt’s Addition.


6641
 
7-25-11
 
Vacating two alleys and portion of a street located in Corydon Richmond’s
Addition.


6653
 
12-12-11
 
Vacating a portion of Defenbaugh Street and Ohio Avenue.


6655
 
12-12-11
 
Vacating a portion of an alley located in Corydon Richmond’s Addition.


6680
 
7-30-12
 
Vacating a portion of unimproved Madison Street.


6683
 
8-13-12
 
Vacating an alley located in Boulevard Park Addition.


6721
 
5-13-13
 
Vacating a portion of Long Street.


6732
 
10-21-13
 
Vacating an alley at the intersection of Apperson Way and Jackson Street.


6747
 
3-10-14
 
Vacating unimproved alley, being part of the south half of the southwest
quarter of Section 6, Township 23 North, Range 4 East Center Township, which
when vacated will be attached to the adjoining real estate.


6762
 
8-25-14
 
Vacating a portion of Jackson Street, a portion of Lafountain Street, and an
alley in Levin Birt’s Addition.


6764
 
8-11-14
 
Vacating a portion of utility and drainage easements between Lots 16 and 17
and 17 and 18 in Jefferson West Subdivision Section 7.


6772
 
10-20-14
 
Vacating certain alleys in Carter and Stewart’s Addition and in David
Foster’s East Addition.


6773
 
10-20-14
 
Vacating an alley in Ruddel’s Addition.


6774
 
10-20-14
 
Vacating Carter Street, Murden Street, and two alleys in Carter and
Stewart’s Addition.


6783
 
6-8-15
 
Vacating an alley in Marott’s Park Addition.


6786
 
6-8-15
 
Vacating certain alleys in Butler’s Addition.


6787
 
6-8-15
 
Vacating an alley in Farmers Trust Addition.


6788
 
6-29-15
 
Vacating certain rights-of-way in Farmers Trust Addition.


6789
 
6-8-15
 
Vacating an alley in A. A. Kennedy’s Addition.


6817
 
5-9-16
 
Vacating portions of a rights-of-way located in J.B. Carter’s First
Addition.


6819
 
5-9-16
 
Vacating a portion of a right-of-way in Little Farm Subdivision.


6833
 
8-29-16
 
Vacating two easements in J.B. Carter’s First Addition.


6837
 
9-12-16
 
Vacating an alley in East Oakland Addition.


6844
 
11-14-16
 
Vacating an alley in G.W. Hocker’s Addition.


6846
 
12-12-16
 
Vacating an alley in Mills and Richmond’s Railroad Addition.


6874
 
12-11-17
 
Vacating right-of-way located south of and adjacent to 503 N. Washington
Street.


6880
 
2-12-18
 
Vacating right-of-way of Philips Street located west of, and adjacent to,
Lots 1 through 9, inclusive, of A.F. Armstrong’s Sunny Side Addition.


6881
 
2-12-18
 
Vacating right-of-way beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 169 in R.G.
Smith’s Sixth Addition to Kokomo.


6901
 
8-13-18
 
Vacating a utility and drainage easement located in along the common lot line
of Lots 119 and 120 in Timber Valley of Woodhaven Section 5 located in the
city.


6912
 
10-8-18
 
Vacating right-of-way located beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 3 in
Carrie M. Miller’s addition.


6920
 
12-10-18
 
Vacating right-of-way located beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 24 in
David Foster’s east addition.


6928
 
3-11-19
 
Vacating that part of Buckeye Street in the James D.K. Kennedy addition lying
adjacent to the west side of Lots 34 through 37 and south of Tate Street.


6929
 
3-11-19
 
Vacating a part of Ricketts Street in the Superior addition lying adjacent to
the south side of Lot 58.


6921
 
5-13-19
 
Vacating 16 foot alley between Lots 20 and 35 in J.O. Heaton’s Second
Addition.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VII.  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TARGET AREAS



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE
 
  DESCRIPTION


5459
 
7-8-85
 
Lot 1 Urich Minor Subdivision, an addition to the city, a part of the NW 1/4
of the NE 1/4 of section 30, township 24 north, range 4 east, Center Township.


5549
 
8-25-86
 
Approximately 33 acres at 1718 East Blvd., on the U.S. 31 bypass, in the S
1/2 of the SE 1/4 of section 6, township 23 north, range 4 east, Center
Township.


6876
 
11-27-17
 
Lots 33 and 40 in David Foster’s East Addition to the city, 20 feet of the
entire east side of Lot 34 and 30 feet off the entire east side of Lot 39 in
David Foster’s East Addition, and part of parcels 34-03-36-278-003.000-002
and 34-03-36-278-006.000-002, all of 34-03-36-278-007.000-02, parcel address:
vacant lot 100 block N. Market Street.


6914
 
9-24-18
 
Part of the Northwest Quarter of Section 7, Township 23 North, Range 5 East,
Center Township, Howard County.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Indiana Code



References to 1975 Code



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO INDIANA CODE



 

IC SECTION
 
CODE SECTION




Trial Rule 6(A)
 
10.05


1-1-1-8
 
10.08


1-1-4-1
 
10.05


1-1-4-5
 
10.04


1-1-7-1
 
95.01


3-13-8
 
31.05


4-21.5
 
33.20


4-21.5-3
 
94.12


4-21.5-3-7
 
150.18


5-1-3-4
 
95.07


5-3-1
 
155.28, 155.37, 160.10


5-3-1-1 et seq.
 
95.07


5-4-1-1.2
 
31.02, 31.04


5-4-1-4
 
31.02


5-4-1-8
 
31.03


5-4-1-9
 
31.03, 31.04


5-4-1-18
 
38.17


5-4-1-18(a)
 
38.17


5-4-1-18(b)
 
38.17


5-14-1.5-1 et seq.
 
30A.03


5-14-3-1 et seq.
 
36.51


5-16-7.2
 
36.47


5-16-9-1 et seq.
 
72.55, 72.59, 72.60, 72.62, 72.63


5-16-9-2
 
72.56, 72.57


5-16-9-4
 
72.57


5-16-9-5
 
72.61, 72.99


5-16-9-9(c)
 
72.63


5-16-9-9(d)
 
72.58


6-1.1-12.1-1 - 6-1.1-12.1-5
 
Ch. 154


6-1.1-12.1-1 - 6-1.1-12.1-6
 
154.41


7.1-3-19-17
 
118.01


7.1-3-20-1
 
133.05


7.1-3-20-7
 
133.05


7.1-3-20-16(d)
 
118.01


8-1-2-103(d)
 
35.16


8-1-26-19
 
97.16


8-1.5-1-9
 
10.04


8-22-2-1 et seq.
 
32.21, 32.23, 32.24


8-22-2-2
 
32.22


8-22-2-3
 
32.23, 32.25, 32.26


8-22-2-4
 
32.27 - 32.29


8-22-2-7(c)
 
32.30


9-13-2-1 et seq.
 
70.01


9-13-2-2.5
 
95.05


9-13-2-105
 
72.55


9-18-18-1 et seq.
 
72.55


9-18-22-1 et seq.
 
72.55


9-21-1-1 - 9-21-20-3
 
70.05


9-21-1-10
 
70.02


9-21-4-18
 
70.06


9-21-8-1
 
70.07


9-21-11-1
 
70.08


9-21-11-1 - 9-21-11-14
 
Ch. 74


9-21-11-2
 
70.03


9-21-16-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 72


9-22-1
 
73.03, 73.04


9-22-1-11
 
70.16


9-22-1-22
 
73.06


9-22-1-30
 
73.11, 73.12


9-24-1-3
 
117.01


10-2-4-1 et seq.
 
37.01


10-2-4-3
 
37.04


10-4-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 93


12-17.4
 
30.18(H)(4)(k)


13-7-8.8-1 et seq. (repealed)
 
95.74


13-11-2-265
 
54.02, 54.26


13-13 et seq.
 
95.74


14-15-1-1 et seq.
 
96.33


14-16-2-1 et seq.
 
96.22


14-28-1
 
159.06


14-28-1-26
 
159.06


15-17-18-8
 
Ch. 90


16-41-37-4
 
130.99


22-9-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 151


22-9-1-12.1
 
33.20, 33.22


22-9-5-6
 
33.10


22-9.5-6-4
 
151.02


22-9.5-6-15
 
151.06, 151.09


22-11-3.1-1 et seq.
 
150.62


22-12-1-4
 
94.06


22-12-1-5
 
94.06


22-12-2-1 et seq.
 
94.06


22-12-7-11 et seq.
 
150.65


22-13-2-7
 
150.18


22-13-2-11
 
94.16


22-14-3 et seq.
 
94.13


22-15-3-1
 
150.03


23-2-6-15
 
Ch. 115


23-14-65-1 et seq.
 
30.47


23-14-65-10
 
92.01


23-14-65-15
 
92.01


25-37-1-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 116


25-37.5-1-0.6
 
Ch. 115


25-37-1-11
 
116.02, 116.05


26-2-7-3
 
38.25


28-7-5-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 115


32-1-6-2
 
95.05


32-11-1.5-3 et seq.
 
Ch. 97


32-30-6
 
54.04


32-30-6-6
 
99.01


34-4-17.5-1 et seq.
 
150.18, 150.66


35-42-2-1
 
99.01


35-42-2-2
 
99.01


35-43-1-2
 
Ch. 130


35-43-2-2
 
Ch. 130


35-43-5 et seq.
 
38.25


35-44-3-3
 
99.01


35-45-1-3
 
99.01


35-45-4
 
99.01


35-45-5-1
 
99.01


35-46-1-8
 
99.01


35-48
 
99.01


35-48-1
 
96.10


36-1-3-1 et seq.
 
37.01


36-1-3-8
 
Ch. 95, Ch. 110, 110.06, Ch. 114, 116.02, 116.05, 117.03


36-1-3-9(a)
 
Ch. 97


36-1-4
 
54.04


36-1-4-5
 
36.01


36-1-5-1 et seq.
 
10.01


36-1-5-4
 
30A.02


36-1-6-2
 
72.60, 99.99


36-1-6-3
 
90.98


36-1-6-9
 
99.37, 151.06


36-1-7-1 et seq.
 
30.51, 33.40


36-1-10.5-1 et seq.
 
36.01


36-1-12-4
 
36.45


36-3-4-10
 
30A.29


36-3-4-16
 
30A.30


36-3-4-18
 
30A.20


36-4-5-1 et seq.
 
30.10


36-4-5-2
 
31.01


36-4-5-5
 
110.11, 116.15


36-4-6-2
 
30.32, 31.01


36-4-6-2 - 36-4-6-5
 
30A.02


36-4-6-3
 
30.31


36-4-6-7
 
30A.03, 30A.04, 30A.05


36-4-6-8
 
30A.06


36-4-6-9
 
31.22


36-4-6-11
 
30A.29


36-4-6-13
 
30A.27


36-4-6-14
 
30A.28


36-4-6-16
 
30A.30


36-4-6-17
 
10.14


36-4-6-18
 
36.01


36-4-8-14
 
33.03


36-4-9-7
 
30.21


36-4-9-12
 
30.12


36-4-10-2
 
30.36, 31.21


36-4-10-4
 
31.22


36-4-10-4 - 36-4-10-6
 
30.36


36-4-10-5
 
30.13


36-4-11-4
 
31.22


36-7-1-2
 
155.02


36-7-2-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 153, Ch. 154


36-7-2-2
 
Ch. 152, Ch. 155, Ch. 156


36-7-2-3
 
Ch. 150, 152.04


36-7-2-5
 
Ch. 150, Ch. 152


36-7-3-1 et seq
 
Ch. 155


36-7-4
 
54.04, 159.01


36-7-4 et seq.
 
155.03


36-7-4-200 et seq.
 
30.49


36-7-4-201 et seq.
 
154.05


36-7-4-217
 
154.08


36-7-4-218
 
154.08


36-7-4-220
 
154.09, 154.10


36-7-4-301 et seq.
 
154.13


36-7-4-303
 
154.14


36-7-4-304
 
154.15


36-7-4-306
 
154.11


36-7-4-307
 
154.12


36-7-4-401 et seq.
 
154.16


36-7-4-500
 
155.02


36-7-4-700
 
155.02


36-7-4-705
 
155.31


36-7-4-900 et seq.
 
30.50


36-7-9
 
99.01


36-7-9 et seq.
 
150.99


36-7-9-1 et seq.
 
150.45, 150.46, 150.50, 150.60, 150.62, 150.65, 150.69


36-7-9-2
 
150.46


36-7-9-4
 
150.46, 150.50


36-7-9-5
 
150.50


36-7-9-14
 
150.52


36-7-9-16
 
160.05


36-7-12-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 154


36-7-12-5
 
154.25, 154.26


36-7-12-11
 
154.30


36-7-12-12
 
154.31


36-7-12-13
 
154.27 - 154.29


36-7-14-1 et seq.
 
154.01


36-7-14-6.1
 
154.01


36-7-14.5
 
36.01


36-7-15.1
 
36.01


36-7-17-1 et seq.
 
36.01


36-7-18-1 et seq.
 
30.53


36-7-25-1 et seq.
 
154.01


36-8-2
 
54.04


36-8-2-2
 
Ch. 130, 53.02


36-8-2-3
 
32.01, Ch. 94, 53.02


36-8-2-4
 
Ch. 95, Ch. 130


36-8-2-6
 
Ch. 90


36-8-2-9
 
75.02


36-8-2-10
 
Ch. 110, Ch. 114, 114.15, Ch. 115, 116.02


36-8-2-11
 
Ch. 110


36-8-3-10
 
Ch. 115


36-8-4-2
 
32.03


36-8-7-1 et seq.
 
32.04


36-8-12
 
53.02


36-8-17 et seq.
 
94.15, 94.19


36-8-17-9
 
94.12, 94.13


36-9-2-4
 
Ch. 110, Ch. 117


36-9-2-5
 
71.02; Ch. 156


36-9-2-7
 
71.02


36-9-2-15
 
Ch. 95


36-9-2-16
 
Ch. 95


36-9-6.1-1 et seq.
 
156.06


36-10-2-2
 
Ch. 96


36-10-3-1 et seq.
 
30.17, 32.50, 96.01


36-10-3-10 - 36-10-3-12
 
32.51


36-10-3-17
 
32.52


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE



 

1975 CODE
 
1981 CODE




1-1
 
10.01(A)


1-2
 
10.04, 10.05


1-4
 
10.01(B)


1-6
 
10.13


1-7
 
10.14


1-8
 
10.15


1-9
 
10.06


1-10
 
10.99


1-11
 
10.16


1-12
 
10.02, 10.17


2-1
 
35.01


2-16
 
31.01


2-17
 
31.02


2-18
 
31.03


2-19
 
31.04


2-20
 
31.05


2-21
 
31.06


2-22
 
31.07


2-51
 
30A.01


2-53
 
30A.03


2-54
 
30A.04


2-55
 
30A.05


2-56
 
30A.06


2-57
 
30A.07


2-58
 
30A.08


2-66
 
30A.20


2-67
 
30A.21


2-68
 
30A.22


2-69
 
30A.23


2-70
 
30A.24


2-71
 
30A.25


2-72
 
30A.25


2-73
 
30A.25


2-74
 
30A.25


2-75
 
30A.25


2-76
 
30A.26


2-77
 
30A.26


2-78
 
30A.27


2-79
 
30A.28


2-80
 
30A.29


2-81
 
30A.30


2-97
 
31.31(C)


2-110
 
31.21


2-111
 
31.22


2-181
 
31.46


2-214
 
32.21(A)


2-215
 
32.21(B)


2-216
 
32.21(C)


2-218
 
32.23(A)


2-219
 
32.23(B)


2-220
 
32.24


2-221
 
32.25


2-222
 
32.26


2-223
 
32.27(A)


2-224
 
32.27(B)


2-225
 
32.27(C)


2-226
 
32.28(A)


2-227
 
32.28(B)


2-228
 
32.29


2-268
 
33.10


2-271
 
33.12(A)


2-272
 
33.12(B)


2-273
 
33.13


2-274
 
33.12(C)


2-275
 
33.12(D)


2-276
 
33.14


2-277
 
33.15


2-278
 
33.16


5-1
 
150.02


5-2
 
150.03


5-3
 
150.04


5-4
 
150.05


5-5
 
150.06


5-6
 
150.07


5-7
 
150.08


5-8
 
150.09


5-21
 
150.15


5-26
 
150.18


5-38
 
150.25


5-40
 
150.27


5-41
 
150.28


5-42
 
150.29


5-54
 
150.35


6-16
 
92.01(A)


6-17
 
92.01(B)


6-18
 
92.01(C)


6-19
 
92.01(D)


6-20
 
92.01(E)


6-21
 
92.01(F)


6-22
 
92.01(G)


6-23
 
92.01(H)


6-24
 
92.01(I)


6-25
 
92.01(J)


6-26
 
92.01(K)


7-16
 
93.01


7-17
 
93.02


7-18
 
93.03


7-19
 
93.04


7-20
 
93.05


7-21
 
93.06


7-22
 
93.07


10-29
 
32.01


10-33
 
32.03(A)


10-34
 
32.03(B)


10-35
 
32.03(C)


10-36
 
32.03(D)


10-37
 
32.04


11-17
 
95.15


11-18
 
95.16


11-19
 
95.17


11-20
 
95.18


11-21
 
95.19


11-22
 
95.20


11-31
 
95.25


11-32
 
95.26


11-33
 
95.27


11-34
 
95.28


11-35
 
95.29


11-36
 
95.30


11-37
 
95.31


11-38
 
95.32


11-39
 
95.33


11-40
 
95.34


11-41
 
95.35


11-42
 
95.36


11-43
 
95.37


11-44
 
95.38


11-45
 
95.39


11-46
 
95.40


11-54
 
95.45


11-55
 
95.46


11-56
 
95.47


11-57
 
95.48


11-58
 
95.49


11-59
 
95.50


11-60
 
95.51


11-61
 
95.52


11-62
 
95.53


11-63
 
95.54


11-64
 
95.55


11-65
 
95.56


11-66
 
95.57


11-67
 
95.58


11-68
 
95.59


11-69
 
95.60


11-70
 
95.61


11-71
 
95.62


11-72
 
95.63


12-2
 
95.03


13-1
 
152.01


13-2
 
152.02


13-3
 
152.03


13-4
 
152.04


13-5
 
152.05


13-6
 
152.06


13-7
 
152.07


13-8
 
152.08


13-9
 
152.09


13-10
 
152.10


13-11
 
152.11


13-12
 
152.12


13-24
 
152.15


13-25
 
152.16


13-26
 
152.17


13-27
 
152.18


13-28
 
152.19


13-29
 
152.20


13-30
 
152.21


13-31
 
152.22


13-32
 
152.23


13-33
 
152.24


13-34
 
152.25


13-35
 
152.26


13-47
 
152.30


13-48
 
152.31


13-49
 
152.32


13-50
 
152.33


13-51
 
152.34


13-52
 
152.35


13-53
 
152.36


13-65
 
152.40


13-66
 
152.41


13-67
 
152.42


13-68
 
152.43


13-69
 
152.44


13-70
 
152.45


13-71
 
152.46


13-72
 
152.47


13-73
 
152.48


13-74
 
152.49


13-86
 
152.55


13-87
 
152.56


13-88
 
152.57


13-89
 
152.58


13-90
 
152.59


13-91
 
152.60


13-92
 
152.61


13-93
 
152.62


13-94
 
152.63


13-95
 
152.64


13-107
 
152.70


13-108
 
152.71


13-109
 
152.72


13-110
 
152.73


13-111
 
152.74


13-112
 
152.75


13-113
 
152.76


13-125
 
152.80


13-126
 
152.81


13-127
 
152.82


13-128
 
152.83


13-129
 
152.84


13-130
 
152.85


13-131
 
152.50


14-1
 
110.01


14-2
 
110.02


14-3
 
110.03


14-4
 
110.04


14-5
 
110.05


14-6
 
110.06


14-7
 
110.07


14-8
 
110.08


14-9
 
110.09


14-10
 
110.10


14-11
 
110.11


14-12
 
110.12


14-81
 
114.01


14-82
 
114.02


14-83
 
114.03


14-84
 
114.04


14-85
 
114.05


14-86
 
114.06


14-87
 
114.07


14-88
 
114.08


14-89
 
114.09


14-90
 
114.10


14-91
 
114.11


14-92
 
114.12


14-93
 
114.13


14-94
 
114.14


14-95
 
114.27


14-96
 
114.16


14-103
 
114.20


14-104
 
114.21


14-105
 
114.22


14-106
 
114.23


14-107
 
114.24


14-108
 
114.25


14-109
 
114.26


14-132
 
115.01


14-133
 
115.02


14-134
 
115.03


14-135
 
115.04


14-136
 
115.05


14-148
 
116.01


14-149
 
116.02


14-150
 
116.03


14-151
 
116.04


14-152
 
116.05


14-153
 
116.06


14-154
 
116.07


14-155
 
116.08


14-156
 
116.09


14-157
 
116.10


14-158
 
116.11


14-159
 
116.12


14-160
 
116.13


14-161
 
116.14


14-162
 
116.15


14-163
 
116.16


15-1
 
70.01


15-2
 
70.02


15-3
 
70.03


15-4
 
70.04


15-5
 
70.05


15-6
 
70.06


15-7
 
70.07


15-8
 
70.08


15-21
 
70.15


15-22
 
70.16


15-41
 
70.17(A)


15-42
 
70.17(B)


15-44
 
70.17(C)


15-45
 
70.17(D)


15-82
 
71.01


15-83
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


15-84
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


15-86
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


15-87
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


15-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


15-89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. III


15-90
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


15-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


15-94
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


15-96
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


15-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


15-98
 
71.02


15-111
 
72.01


15-112
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


15-114
 
Ch. 79, Sch. III


15-115
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


15-117
 
72.02


15-118
 
72.03


15-120
 
72.04


15-123
 
72.05


15-125
 
72.06


15-126
 
72.07


15-127
 
72.99(A)


15-134
 
72.20


15-139
 
72.21, 72.99(B)


15-143
 
72.22


15-144
 
72.23


15-156
 
72.40


15-157
 
72.41


15-158
 
72.42


15-159
 
72.43


15-161
 
72.45


15-162
 
72.46


15-163
 
72.99(B)


15-164
 
72.47


16-1
 
130.01


16-2
 
130.02


16-3
 
130.03


16-7
 
130.04


17-24
 
96.01(A)


17-25
 
96.01(B)


17-26
 
96.01(C)


17-27
 
96.01(D)


17-28
 
96.01(E)


17-29
 
96.01(F)


17-30
 
96.01(G)


17-31
 
96.01(H)


17-32
 
96.01(I)


17-33
 
96.01(J)


17-34
 
96.01(K)


17-35
 
96.01(L)


17-36
 
96.01(M)


18-1
 
154.01


18-16
 
154.05


18-17
 
154.06


18-18
 
154.07


18-19
 
154.08


18-20
 
154.09


18-21
 
154.10


18-22
 
154.11


18-23
 
154.12


18-24
 
154.13


18-25
 
154.14


18-26
 
154.15


18-27
 
154.16


18-46
 
154.25


18-47
 
154.26


18-48
 
154.27


18-49
 
154.28


18-50
 
154.29


18-51
 
154.30


18-52
 
154.31


22-4
 
97.02


22-5
 
97.03


22-6
 
97.04


22-9
 
97.07


22-10
 
97.08


22-27
 
97.18


22-33
 
97.24


22-34
 
97.25


22-46
 
97.30(A)


22-47
 
97.30(B)


22-48
 
97.30(C)


22-49
 
97.31


22-50
 
97.30(D)


22-63
 
97.35


22-64
 
97.36(A)


22-65
 
97.36(B)


22-66
 
97.36(C)


22-67
 
97.36(D)


22-68
 
97.37


22-80
 
97.40


22-81
 
97.41


22-93
 
97.50


22-94
 
97.51


22-95
 
97.52


22-96
 
97.53


22-97
 
97.54


23-1
 
117.01


23-2
 
117.02


23-3
 
117.03(A)


23-4
 
117.03(B)


23-5
 
117.04


23-6
 
117.03(C)


23-7
 
117.03(D)


23-8
 
117.05


23-9
 
117.06


23-10
 
117.07


23-11
 
117.08


23-12
 
117.09


23-13
 
117.10


24-1
 
51.01


24-2
 
51.02


App. C, § 1
 
156.01


App. C, § 2
 
156.02


App. C, § 3
 
156.03


App. C, § 4
 
156.04


App. C, § 5
 
156.05


App. C, § 6
 
156.06


App. C, § 7
 
156.07


App. C, § 8
 
156.08


App. C, § 9
 
156.09


App. C, § 10
 
156.10


App. C, § 11
 
156.11


App. C, § 12
 
156.12


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

ORD. NO.
 
DATE PASSED
 
CODE SECTION




3266-1952
 
3-30-53
 
156.03


3848
 
10-25-65
 
152.32, 152.33, 152.42, 152.64


3918
 
10-9-67
 
152.01


3928
 
2-12-68
 
70.17


3938
 
5-13-68
 
33.10, 33.12 - 33.14


3948
 
7-8-68
 
30A.21, 30A.22


3968
 
1-27-69
 
95.15 - 95.20, 95.25 - 95.40, 95.45 - 95.63


3991
 
6-27-69
 
Ch. 93


4016
 
5-25-70
 
Ch. 112


4070
 
8-9-71
 
72.20


4082
 
10-26-71
 
151.02


4084
 
10-26-71
 
97.35 - 97.37


4086
 
12-13-71
 
97.50 - 97.54


4111
 
7-10-72
 
95.27 - 95.31, 95.34, 95.35, 95.37, 95.40, 95.47


4151
 
12-18-72
 
Ch. 156


4157
 
12-11-72
 
30A.04


4171
 
3-12-73
 
72.22


4172
 
3-12-73
 
72.09


4180
 
4-24-73
 
72.99(A)


4182
 
5-14-73
 
72.40 - 72.43, 72.45 - 72.48


4190
 
6-25-73
 
150.25, 150.27 - 150.29


4225
 
8-13-73
 
31.46


4251
 
10-29-73
 
Ch. 114


4302
 
7-8-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4303
 
7-8-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4307
 
7-8-74
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4308
 
7-8-74
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4309
 
7-29-74
 
116.01 - 116.16


4314
 
8-26-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4315
 
8-26-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4325
 
9-23-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4326
 
9-9-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4327
 
9-9-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4331
 
10-7-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4332
 
10-22-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4333
 
10-7-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4337
 
10-22-74
 
T.S.O. II


4339
 
10-22-74
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4345
 
11-25-74
 
T.S.O. II


4350
 
12-9-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4351
 
12-30-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4352
 
12-30-74
 
T.S.O. IV


4353
 
12-9-74
 
T.S.O. II


4354
 
12-9-74
 
T.S.O. II


4391
 
4-14-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4392
 
4-28-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4393
 
4-28-75
 
116.01, 116.02


4395
 
4-28-75
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4403
 
5-12-75
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


4404
 
5-19-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4405
 
5-19-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4406
 
5-19-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4407
 
5-19-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4412
 
7-14-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4419
 
9-8-75
 
T.S.O. II


4425
 
8-25-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4428
 
8-11-75
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


4437
 
10-6-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4438
 
9-29-75
 
T.S.O. II


4440
 
10-20-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4446
 
11-10-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4447
 
11-10-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4448
 
12-29-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4453
 
12-8-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4459
 
12-8-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4460
 
12-29-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4461
 
12-29-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4462
 
12-29-75
 
T.S.O. IV


4465
 
1-12-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4466
 
1-12-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4467
 
1-12-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4469
 
1-12-76
 
T.S.O. II


4473
 
2-23-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4474
 
2-9-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4483
 
3-8-76
 
32.50 - 32.53


4486
 
3-8-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


4490
 
3-8-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4491
 
3-29-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4493
 
2-23-76
 
T.S.O. II


4494
 
3-29-76
 
Ch. 112


4498
 
4-19-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4499
 
4-12-76
 
T.S.O. II


4509
 
4-12-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, VIII


4513
 
4-12-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


4520
 
5-24-76
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4521
 
5-24-76
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I, II, IV


4522
 
5-10-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


4525
 
5-24-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V, VI


4540
 
7-12-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4541
 
7-12-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4554
 
8-9-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4555
 
8-9-76
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4565
 
9-13-76
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4575
 
10-18-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4576
 
11-8-76
 
70.17


4581
 
12-13-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4588
 
12-13-76
 
T.S.O. IV


4591
 
1-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4599
 
2-14-77
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4601
 
2-28-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


4602
 
2-14-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4603
 
2-14-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4604
 
2-14-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


4607
 
2-28-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4608
 
2-28-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4611
 
2-28-77
 
T.S.O. II


4612
 
4-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4613
 
4-25-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4614
 
4-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4615
 
4-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4616
 
4-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4619
 
5-9-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4623
 
4-11-77
 
T.S.O. II


4624
 
5-23-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4626
 
4-25-77
 
T.S.O. II


4627
 
5-9-77
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4630
 
7-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4631
 
6-13-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4632
 
6-13-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4633
 
6-13-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4634
 
6-27-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4637
 
7-11-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


4645
 
7-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4647
 
7-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4648
 
7-11-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4651
 
8-8-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4653
 
8-29-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4654
 
8-29-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4655
 
7-25-77
 
T.S.O. II


4658
 
9-26-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4659
 
8-29-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4660
 
9-26-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4666
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4667
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4668
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4672
 
9-26-77
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


4675
 
11-14-77
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4676
 
11-28-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4677
 
11-28-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4678
 
11-28-77
 
T.S.O. IV


4691
 
11-28-77
 
71.03


4692
 
2-22-78
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4693
 
2-27-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4697
 
2-27-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4703
 
3-13-78
 
T.S.O. II


4709
 
3-27-78
 
T.S.O. II


4710
 
4-10-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4711
 
4-10-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4712
 
3-27-78
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4718
 
5-8-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4724
 
5-22-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4725
 
5-22-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4726
 
5-22-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4748
 
8-14-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4749
 
8-14-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4755
 
8-28-78
 
T.S.O. II


4763
 
9-11-78
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4764
 
8-28-78
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


4770
 
10-30-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4771
 
10-2-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4784
 
11-13-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4785
 
11-13-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4786
 
11-13-78
 
T.S.O. IV


4794
 
11-13-78
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4796
 
11-13-78
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


4800
 
12-11-78
 
T.S.O. I


4805
 
1-8-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4806
 
12-26-78
 
T.S.O. II


4808
 
1-29-79
 
T.S.O. II


4809
 
2-26-79
 
96.10 - 96.38


4819
 
3-12-79
 
T.S.O. I


4820
 
3-26-79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4824
 
4-9-79
 
Ch. 112


4826
 
4-23-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4834
 
5-14-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4835
 
5-21-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4846
 
7-8-79
 
72.20, 72.21, 72.99


4848
 
6-25-79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4850
 
6-25-79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4857
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4858
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4859
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4860
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4861
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4862
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4868
 
8-13-79
 
34.01, 34.02, 34.04 -34.06


4869
 
7-9-79
 
T.S.O. II


4873
 
8-13-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4881
 
9-10-79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


4888
 
10-1-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4889
 
10-1-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4890
 
10-1-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4895
 
11-19-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4899
 
11-26-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4900
 
11-26-79
 
T.S.O. IV


4906
 
12-10-79
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


4914
 
1-28-80
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


4915
 
1-28-80
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I


4916
 
1-28-80
 
T.S.O. IV


4924
 
3-10-80
 
Ch. 153


4948
 
7-28-80
 
Ch. 75


4951
 
7-14-80
 
Ch. 76


4957
 
7-14-80
 
72.47, 72.99(B)


4958
 
7-14-80
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


4959
 
7-14-80
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4966
 
7-28-80
 
T.S.O. IV


4967
 
7-28-80
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


4969
 
7-28-80
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


4995
 
8-26-80
 
71.03


4996
 
9-22-80
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5000
 
10-6-80
 
T.S.O. IV


5005
 
10-6-80
 
T.S.O. II


5008
 
10-6-80
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


5013
 
11-10-80
 
T.S.O. IV


5021
 
12-8-80
 
33.40 - 33.47


5022
 
11-24-80
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5023
 
12-8-80
 
T.S.O. IV


5036
 
1-26-81
 
154.40 - 154.41


5038
 
2-9-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5039
 
1-26-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5053
 
3-30-81
 
36.01


5062
 
6-8-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5063
 
5-18-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5064
 
7-27-81
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5086
 
8-24-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5096
 
8-28-81
 
T.S.O. IV


5095
 
11-23-81
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5102
 
11-9-81
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


5106
 
11-23-81
 
70.25 - 70.27


5146
 
1-25-82
 
Adopting Ordinance


5150
 
2-8-82
 
T.S.O. IV


5153
 
2-8-82
 
95.05 - 95.12


5154
 
1-25-82
 
153.02, 153.03, 153.06, 153.09


5157
 
2-8-82
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5167
 
4-26-82
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5181
 
6-14-82
 
T.S.O. IV


5187
 
7-12-82
 
T.S.O. II


5188
 
7-13-82
 
95.70 - 95.76, 95.99


5190
 
6-28-82
 
T.S.O. I


5195
 
7-12-82
 
T.S.O. V


5196
 
7-12-82
 
T.S.O. V


5198
 
8-9-82
 
T.S.O. IV


5202
 
8-30-82
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5203
 
8-30-82
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5231
 
10-25-82
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5232
 
11-8-82
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


5234
 
10-25-82
 
T.S.O. II


5242
 
11-8-82
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


5254
 
1-24-83
 
154.17


5261
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5264
 
1-24-83
 
T.S.O. IV


5265
 
3-15-83
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5267
 
4-11-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5268
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5270
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5271
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5272
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5273
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5274
 
4-25-83
 
33.02


5275
 
5-9-83
 
30A.09


5276
 
4-25-83
 
74.15 - 74.19


5277
 
4-25-83
 
74.19, Ch. 78, Sch. X


5280
 
4-25-83
 
T.S.O. V


5289
 
8-29-83
 
Ch. 30


5290
 
8-29-83
 
Ch. 119


5291
 
7-11-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5292
 
7-11-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5293
 
7-11-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5294
 
7-11-83
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5296
 
7-12-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5307
 
8-8-83
 
T.S.O. IV


5312
 
9-12-83
 
T.S.O. IV


5339
 
2-6-84
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


5340
 
12-12-83
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5341
 
2-6-84
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5351
 
2-6-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5354
 
2-6-84
 
33.30 - 33.35


5355
 
2-13-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5356
 
2-13-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5361
 
10-29-84
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5363
 
2-13-84
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5372
 
5-21-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5373
 
5-21-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5375
 
4-23-84
 
T.S.O. V


5376
 
5-21-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5385
 
7-9-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5393
 
7-30-84
 
T.S.O. V


5395
 
8-13-84
 
T.S.O. VI


5412
 
10-9-84
 
30.11, 30.15, 30.18


5413
 
10-29-84
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5417
 
11-5-84
 
30.17


5418
 
11-19-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5419
 
11-19-84
 
T.S.O. IV


5425
 
11-5-84
 
150.45 - 150.53, 150.99(B)


5426
 
1-28-85
 
33.75 - 33.80


5427
 
1-28-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5429
 
1-28-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5430
 
1-28-85
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5432
 
4-8-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5433
 
2-25-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5438
 
2-25-85
 
T.S.O. I


5439
 
2-11-85
 
119.04


5442
 
4-29-85
 
T.S.O. VI


5445
 
5-13-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5446
 
5-13-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5451
 
5-20-85
 
T.S.O. VI


5457
 
7-8-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5458
 
7-8-85
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII, VIII


5459
 
7-8-85
 
T.S.O. VII


5464
 
7-8-85
 
T.S.O. VI


5465
 
8-12-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5467
 
7-29-85
 
Ch. 78, Schs. III, VII


5468
 
8-12-85
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, VII, VIII


5476
 
8-26-85
 
T.S.O. II


5477
 
9-23-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5478
 
9-9-85
 
T.S.O. IV


5483
 
10-7-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I, II


5484
 
11-18-85
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5510
 
12-2-85
 
72.13, Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5514
 
2-10-86
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5515
 
12-16-85
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


5519
 
1-27-86
 
Ch. 112


5520
 
2-10-86
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XI; Ch. 79, Sch. I


5523
 
2-24-86
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5524
 
2-24-86
 
T.S.O. IV


5536
 
5-19-86
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V, VII; Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5540
 
7-19-86
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII; Ch. 79, Sch. II


5545
 
8-25-86
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII, VIII


5546
 
8-25-86
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5549
 
8-25-86
 
T.S.O. VII


5551
 
9-29-86
 
T.S.O. IV


5559
 
10-28-86
 
30.15, 150.04, 150.17, 150.18


5560
 
11-3-86
 
150.60 - 150.69, 150.99


5563
 
10-27-86
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5564
 
11-24-86
 
Ch. 79, Schs. II, IV


5571
 
1-26-87
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V, Ch. 79, Sch. II


5574
 
2-9-87
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5579
 
2-23-87
 
Ch.78, Sch. IX


5584
 
4-13-87
 
130.01


5588
 
5-18-87
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5595
 
7-27-87
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5596
 
7-13-87
 
T.S.O. VI


5597
 
9-14-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5598
 
8-24-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5599
 
8-10-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5600
 
8-10-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5606
 
9-28-87
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5607
 
10-26-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5608
 
10-26-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5609
 
10-12-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5622
 
12-7-87
 
T.S.O. IV


5624
 
2-22-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5625
 
2-22-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5626
 
2-8-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5627
 
2-8-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


5628
 
4-11-88
 
T.S.O. VI


5630
 
2-22-88
 
150.01, 150.18, 150.63, 150.65


5636
 
4-11-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XI


5637
 
4-25-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5638
 
6-27-88
 
T.S.O. VI


5639
 
6-13-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5640
 
6-23-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5644
 
7-25-88
 
Ch. 79, Schs. I, II


5645
 
7-25-88
 
30.51


5649
 
8-8-88
 
T.S.O. VI


5650
 
8-29-88
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5652
 
9-26-88
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5653
 
9-26-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5660
 
10-11-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5662
 
11-14-88
 
30.18


5666
 
11-28-88
 
T.S.O. IV


5669
 
11-28-88
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


5674
 
12-12-88
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V, VI


5675
 
2-6-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5676
 
2-13-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5677
 
2-13-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5678
 
3-27-89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


5679
 
2-27-89
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII, VIII


5680
 
4-11-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5682
 
3-27-89
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5684
 
4-24-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5685
 
4-24-89
 
Ch. 79, Schs, I, III


5686
 
4-24-89
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5687
 
4-10-89
 
T.S.O. VI


5690
 
5-8-89
 
T.S.O. V


5692
 
5-22-89
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5695
 
6-26-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5699
 
7-24-89
 
T.S.O. VI


5701
 
8-28-89
 
76.03, Ch. 79, Sch. II


5702
 
8-28-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5703
 
10-30-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5704
 
10-30-89
 
72.55 - 72.63, 72.99


5710
 
10-30-89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VI


5711
 
10-30-89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5712
 
11-13-89
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II, III


5713
 
11-13-89
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5716
 
11-20-89
 
T.S.O. V


5719
 
12-11-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5720
 
12-11-89
 
T.S.O. IV


5722
 
1-29-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5723
 
2-26-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5724
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5725
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5726
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5727
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5728
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5729
 
3-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


5731
 
4-9-90
 
Ch. 78, Sch. I (B)


5732
 
4-23-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5733
 
4-23-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5734
 
4-23-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5735
 
4-9-90
 
T.S.O. V


5736
 
4-9-90
 
T.S.O. V


5737
 
4-23-90
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(B)


5740
 
4-23-90
 
Ch. 98


5741
 
5-14-90
 
T.S.O. II


5742
 
5-22-90
 
T.S.O. VI


5744
 
5-21-90
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XI


5746
 
5-21-90
 
T.S.O. II


5748
 
6-11-90
 
T.S.O. V


5749
 
7-9-90
 
T.S.O. VI


5754
 
7-9-90
 
Ch. 79, Schs. I(B), II(A)


5755
 
8-13-90
 
T.S.O. VI


5757
 
8-13-90
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


5758
 
9-10-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5759
 
9-24-90
 
T.S.O. II


5766
 
10-15-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5768
 
11-12-90
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A)


5770
 
10-29-90
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


5771-A
 
11-12-90
 
T.S.O. VI


5774
 
11-26-90
 
T.S.O. II


5775
 
11-26-90
 
Ch. 79, Schs. II(A), III


5777
 
11-26-90
 
T.S.O. VI


5778
 
12-10-90
 
T.S.O. IV


5779
 
1-28-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5780
 
2-11-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, Ch. 79, Sch. II


5782
 
2-25-91
 
T.S.O. V


5783
 
2-25-91
 
T.S.O. V


5784
 
2-25-91
 
T.S.O. VI


5785
 
4-8-91
 
Ch. 79, Sch. V


5786
 
4-8-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX


5787
 
4-8-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, Ch. 79, Sch. II


5790
 
4-8-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5792
 
5-13-91
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5794
 
5-20-91
 
T.S.O. V


5796
 
7-8-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5802
 
9-23-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5804
 
10-28-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5805
 
10-28-91
 
T.S.O. IV


5806
 
11-18-91
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5816
 
1-27-92
 
T.S.O. VI


5817
 
2-11-92
 
T.S.O. II


5818
 
3-30-92
 
T.S.O. II


5819
 
3-30-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5820
 
4-27-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5821
 
5-19-92
 
T.S.O. VI


5822
 
5-18-92
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5823
 
5-18-92
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, VIII


5824
 
5-18-92
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5825
 
6-8-92
 
95.01, 95.02


5826
 
6-29-92
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5827
 
6-29-92
 
T.S.O. VI


5831
 
7-27-92
 
T.S.O. VI


5832
 
8-10-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5833
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


5834
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


5837
 
10-5-92
 
T.S.O. VI


5841
 
11-9-92
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5847
 
11-9-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5848
 
11-23-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5849
 
11-9-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5850
 
11-23-92
 
T.S.O. IV


5853
 
12-14-92
 
30A.02


5852
 
1-11-93
 
T.S.O. II


5854
 
1-11-93
 
T.S.O. II


5855
 
1-11-93
 
T.S.O. II


5858
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. II


5859
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


5860
 
2-22-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5861
 
3-8-93
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5862
 
3-8-93
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5863
 
3-8-93
 
33.03


5865
 
3-29-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5868
 
4-12-93
 
119.08


5869
 
4-26-93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5870
 
4-26-93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. II


5871
 
4-26-93
 
T.S.O. VI


5872
 
5-10-93
 
T.S.O. II


5873
 
5-24-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5875
 
6-14-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5877
 
7-12-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5881
 
9-27-93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII


5882
 
9-27-93
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5883
 
9-27-93
 
Ch. 79, Sch. III


5884
 
9-27-93
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5885
 
9-27-93
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5886
 
9-28-93
 
T.S.O. II


5889
 
10-4-93
 
36.01 - 36.07


5890
 
10-4-93
 
130.15


5892
 
9-27-93
 
T.S.O. VI


5893
 
10-25-93
 
T.S.O. II


5894
 
11-29-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5895
 
11-29-93
 
T.S.O. V


5896
 
11-29-93
 
T.S.O. V


5897
 
11-29-93
 
T.S.O. V


5899
 
12-13-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5900
 
12-13-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5901
 
12-14-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5902
 
12-14-93
 
T.S.O. IV


5904
 
2-14-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5905
 
2-14-94
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5906
 
2-14-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. III


5908
 
2-28-94
 
T.S.O. II


5909
 
2-28-94
 
T.S.O. V


5914
 
4-25-94
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5916
 
5-23-94
 
T.S.O. V


5917
 
6-13-94
 
T.S.O. II


5921
 
7-25-94
 
T.S.O. VI


5922
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. VI


5923
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


5924
 
7-25-94
 
Ch. 151


5925
 
8-29-94
 
33.10 - 33.27


5928
 
7-25-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5932
 
8-8-94
 
T.S.O. II


 
 
8-8-94
 
T.S.O. IV


5935
 
9-12-94
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5936
 
9-12-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


5937
 
9-12-94
 
71.03


5938
 
9-26-94
 
T.S.O. V


5939
 
9-26-94
 
T.S.O. V


5940
 
9-26-94
 
T.S.O. V


5942
 
9-26-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5944
 
9-12-94
 
T.S.O. IV


5947
 
11-28-94
 
T.S.O. V


5948
 
11-9-94
 
T.S.O. IV


5949
 
12-12-94
 
T.S.O. V


5950
 
12-12-94
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5952
 
2-13-95
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5953
 
2-13-95
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5955
 
1-30-95
 
T.S.O. II


5956
 
2-27-95
 
T.S.O. II


5958
 
3-13-95
 
T.S.O. IV


5959
 
3-13-95
 
Ch. 159


5960
 
4-10-95
 
T.S.O. II


5963
 
4-24-95
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, VIII


5964
 
5-22-95
 
95.05, 95.07 - 95.09


5967
 
4-10-95
 
T.S.O. II


5968
 
4-10-95
 
T.S.O. II


5969
 
4-10-95
 
T.S.O. II


5970
 
9-11-95
 
T.S.O. V


5972
 
9-25-95
 
T.S.O. IV


5974
 
9-25-95
 
T.S.O. IV


5975
 
9-25-95
 
95.07


5977
 
9-11-95
 
T.S.O. II


5978
 
11-13-95
 
T.S.O. VI


5979
 
9-25-95
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


5980
 
9-25-95
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I, II


5981
 
10-16-95
 
T.S.O. IV


5982
 
10-30-95
 
T.S.O. VI


5983
 
1-13-95
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5984
 
12-11-95
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


5985
 
12-11-95
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5987
 
2-27-96
 
T.S.O. IV


5989
 
2-27-96
 
T.S.O. VI


5990
 
12-11-95
 
T.S.O. V


5992
 
2-13-96
 
T.S.O. IV


5993
 
2-13-96
 
T.S.O. II


5994
 
3-12-96
 
T.S.O. II


5995
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


5996
 
3-25-96
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


5997
 
5-22-96
 
T.S.O. IV


5998
 
5-22-96
 
Ch. 112


5999
 
7-30-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6000
 
7-30-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6001
 
7-29-96
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6003
 
7-29-96
 
T.S.O. V


6004
 
7-30-96
 
T.S.O. V


6006
 
7-30-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6008
 
8-26-96
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6009
 
8-27-96
 
T.S.O. V


6010
 
8-27-96
 
T.S.O. V


6012
 
9-24-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6013
 
9-24-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6014
 
10-22-96
 
T.S.O. V


6015
 
10-21-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6016
 
10-29-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6017
 
11-18-96
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6018
 
11-19-96
 
T.S.O. IV


6019
 
12-17-96
 
Ch. 99


6020
 
11-26-96
 
T.S.O. VI


6022
 
11-25-96
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6023
 
12-16-96
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


6024
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O. II


6026
 
1-13-97
 
T.S.O. II


6028
 
2-24-97
 
T.S.O. VI


6029
 
1-13-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6030
 
1-27-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6031
 
1-27-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6032
 
1-27-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6033
 
1-27-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


6034
 
2-10-97
 
T.S.O. VI


6035
 
2-24-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XI


6036
 
3-24-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6037
 
3-24-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6039
 
4-14-97
 
T.S.O. V


6040
 
5-13-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6045
 
6-9-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6046
 
7-14-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6047
 
6-23-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. III


6048
 
6-23-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6049
 
5-23-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6051
 
6-23-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


6052
 
5-23-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6054
 
7-29-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6058
 
7-28-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6060
 
8-25-97
 
30.11, 30.14, 34.03, 34.04, 34.05, 34.06


6061
 
9-30-97
 
T.S.O. VI


6065
 
9-29-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


-
 
10-27-97
 
T.S.O. IV


6068
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6069
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6070
 
10-27-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6073
 
12-8-97
 
30.11, 30.15, 30.20, 31.45, 95.01, 99.01, 99.11, 99.13, 150.04, 150.17,
150.18, 150.46, 150.48, 150.49, 150.65, 150.66, 154.41


6074
 
12-8-97
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6075
 
12-8-97
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6071
 
11-25-97
 
T.S.O. II


6072
 
11-25-97
 
T.S.O. II


6077
 
1-13-98
 
T.S.O. V


6078
 
1-26-98
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6079
 
1-26-98
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


-
 
2-23-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6084
 
3-9-98
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6085
 
3-9-98
 
T.S.O. II


6086
 
3-9-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6087
 
3-9-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6091
 
6-8-98
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII, VIII


6092
 
6-8-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6093
 
6-29-98
 
36.20 - 36.32


6096
 
7-27-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6097
 
7-27-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6098
 
8-10-98
 
T.S.O. VI


6099
 
8-24-98
 
T.S.O. V


6101
 
10-19-98
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A),(E)


6102
 
10-19-98
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XI


6104
 
10-19-98
 
T.S.O. VI


6105
 
10-26-98
 
Ch. 79, Schs. I, II


6106
 
10-26-98
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


6107
 
11-23-98
 
T.S.O. IV


6108
 
12-14-99
 
T.S.O. II


6109
 
1-11-99
 
T.S.O. VI


6110
 
1-11-99
 
Ch.78, Sch. VII(A), Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6112
 
3-29-99
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6113
 
4-12-99
 
Ch. 79, Sch. V(A)


6119
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. VI


6120
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. V


6121
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. II


6122
 
5-24-99
 
T.S.O. II


6123
 
6-14-99
 
T.S.O. II


6127
 
7-12-99
 
33.10, 33.18, 33.19


6128
 
7-12-99
 
151.02, 151.03, 151.05, 151.06, 151.07, 151.09


6129
 
7-12-99
 
T.S.O. II


6130
 
7-12-99
 
T.S.O. II


6131
 
7-26-99
 
T.S.O. II


6134
 
8-30-99
 
T.S.O. VI


6136
 
9-13-99
 
T.S.O. VI


6137
 
9-27-99
 
T.S.O. V


6138
 
10-18-99
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A), Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A)


6140
 
10-25-99
 
Ch. 53


6141
 
9-27-99
 
36.33


6142
 
10-25-99
 
154.01


6144
 
11-8-99
 
T.S.O. IV


6146
 
10-20-99
 
T.S.O. VI


6147
 
1-24-00
 
T.S.O. VI


6149
 
2-14-00
 
T.S.O. VI


6150
 
2-14-00
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A)


6153
 
2-29-00
 
73.01 - 73.12


6154
 
4-24-00
 
T.S.O. IV


6155
 
4-24-00
 
T.S.O. IV


6156
 
4-25-00
 
72.09


6157
 
4-24-00
 
120.01 - 120.16, 120.99


6160
 
8-14-00
 
T.S.O. II


6161
 
8-14-00
 
T.S.O. II


6162
 
5-8-00
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XII


6163
 
5-22-00
 
T.S.O. IV


6164
 
5-22-00
 
T.S.O. IV


6165
 
7-10-00
 
T.S.O. V


6166
 
10-16-00
 
T.S.O. II


6168
 
8-28-00
 
T.S.O. IV


6169
 
8-28-00
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV(A) and VII(A)


6170
 
9-11-00
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6172
 
9-25-00
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6173
 
11-27-00
 
T.S.O. VI


6174
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O. II


6175
 
2-26-01
 
T.S.O. II


6176
 
4-9-01
 
T.S.O. II


6177
 
1-29-01
 
T.S.O. IV


6178
 
1-29-01
 
T.S.O. IV


6181
 
2-12-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V(A), VII(A), XI; Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6182
 
3-12-01
 
130.99


6185
 
3-12-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A)


6186
 
3-12-01
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV(A)


6187
 
4-9-01
 
132.01 - 132.04, 132.99


6188
 
5-14-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX(A)


6189
 
5-14-01
 
T.S.O. IV


6190
 
6-11-01
 
T.S.O. V


6191
 
6-25-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IX(A)


6192
 
6-25-01
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6193
 
8-13-01
 
T.S.O. II


6196
 
7-30-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(C) and (D)


6198
 
8-13-01
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6202
 
10-15-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII(A) and IX; Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6203
 
11-12-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A) and (D); Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6205
 
11-26-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V(A) and VII(B)


6206
 
11-26-01
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII(A) and X


6207
 
11-26-01
 
Ch. 79, Sch. VI


6208
 
11-26-01
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V(A)


6209
 
10-29-01
 
37.01 - 37.09


6210
 
11-12-01
 
37.04


6211
 
1-15-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6213
 
2-12-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6214
 
2-12-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6215
 
2-12-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


6216
 
2-12-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A), Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6217
 
2-12-02
 
120.03 - 120.05, 120.10


6218
 
2-12-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6219
 
1-29-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6220
 
3-12-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V, Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6223
 
6-25-02
 
T.S.O. II


6224
 
4-30-02
 
T.S.O. VI


6227
 
5-14-02
 
T.S.O. V


6228
 
5-21-02
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6229
 
5-21-02
 
154.17


6230
 
5-21-02
 
159.03, 159.06


6231
 
5-21-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6234
 
6-25-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6235
 
9-23-02
 
T.S.O. VI


6237
 
8-13-02
 
T.S.O. VI


6240
 
8-27-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6241
 
8-27-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6242
 
8-27-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6243
 
8-27-02
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6244
 
8-27-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(D)


6245
 
8-27-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV, Ch. 78, Sch. VII(B)


6246
 
10-22-02
 
Ch. 78, Sch. IV


6247
 
11-19-02
 
T.S.O. IV


6250
 
12-10-02
 
117.01, 117.03 - 117.05


6249
 
1-27-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6251
 
1-13-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6252
 
1-13-03
 
30.52, 33.10 - 33.17; 33.19, 33.26, 33.27, 151.02


6253
 
2-10-03
 
T.S.O. V


6254
 
2-10-03
 
T.S.O. V


6259
 
4-14-03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V(A), Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A); Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6260
 
4-14-03
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6261
 
5-12-03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(D)


6262
 
5-12-03
 
T.S.O. V


6264
 
5-19-03
 
150.01


6267
 
10-27-03
 
T.S.O. II


6268
 
11-10-03
 
T.S.O. II


6269
 
11-10-03
 
T.S.O. II


6270
 
7-14-03
 
Ch. 79, Sch. III


6272
 
7-28-03
 
72.70 - 72.72, 72.99


6274
 
9-8-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6276
 
9-29-03
 
111.01 - 111.10, 111.99


6277
 
8-25-03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(C)


6278
 
8-25-03
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6279
 
9-29-03
 
157.01


6280
 
9-29-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6281
 
9-8-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6284
 
9-29-03
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6285
 
10-27-03
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A), Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6287
 
12-8-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6288
 
11-24-03
 
T.S.O. IV


6289
 
1-26-04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V(A); Ch. 78, Sch. IX; Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6291
 
3-8-04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A); Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6292
 
4-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6293
 
3-29-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6294
 
3-29-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6297
 
4-12-04
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6298
 
4-26-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6300
 
4-26-04
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6301
 
5-10-04
 
120.10


6303
 
5-24-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6304
 
5-24-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6305
 
5-10-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6307
 
5-24-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6308
 
5-24-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6310
 
6-14-04
 
116.30 - 116.38


6311
 
5-24-04
 
97.03


6312
 
6-14-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6313
 
6-28-04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V(A)


6314
 
10-11-04
 
T.S.O. II


6315
 
7-12-04
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6317
 
7-12-04
 
38.15


6318
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6319
 
7-26-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6320
 
7-26-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6321
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6322
 
7-26-04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V(A); Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6323
 
7-26-04
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII(A); Ch. 78, Sch. VII(B); Ch. 78, Sch. VII(D)


6324
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6325
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6326
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6327
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6328
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6329
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6330
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6331
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6332
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6333
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6334
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6335
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6336
 
8-30-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6337
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6338
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6339
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6340
 
8-30-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6341
 
2-14-05
 
T.S.O. II


6343
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6344
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6345
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6347
 
10-11-04
 
35.15


6348
 
10-11-04
 
35.16


6349
 
10-11-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6350
 
10-11-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6351
 
10-25-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6352
 
10-25-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6355
 
11-29-04
 
T.S.O. VI


6356
 
3-14-05
 
T.S.O. II


6357
 
11-8-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6358
 
11-8-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6360
 
11-29-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6361
 
12-13-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6362
 
12-13-04
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II(A)


6363
 
12-13-04
 
T.S.O. IV


6364
 
1-10-05
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6365
 
1-24-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6366
 
2-7-05
 
119.01, 119.03, 119.04, 119.08, 119.10, 119.13, 119.14, 119.16, 119.18, 119.99


6367
 
2-14-05
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6369
 
2-7-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6371
 
3-14-05
 
30.18


6372
 
4-11-05
 
T.S.O. VI


6373
 
4-11-05
 
T.S.O. VI


6374
 
3-28-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6375
 
5-9-05
 
157.01


6376
 
5-9-05
 
111.01


6377
 
5-9-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6379
 
6-13-05
 
Ch. 79, Schs. III and IV


6380
 
6-27-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6381
 
6-13-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6385
 
7-11-05
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V and VII


6386
 
7-12-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6387
 
8-8-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6388
 
8-29-05
 
154.17


6389
 
9-12-05
 
T.S.O. V


6390
 
8-29-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-6394
 
11-14-05
 
70.01, 70.09, 70.16, 70.99


6395
 
9-26-05
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, V and VII; Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6396
 
9-26-05
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII and VIII; Ch. 79, Sch. II


6400
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. VI


6401
 
11-14-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6402
 
11-14-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6403
 
12-12-05
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6405
 
4-10-06
 
155.01 - 155.17, 155.25 - 155.48, 155.65 - 155.89, Ch. 155, Appendices A - F


6406
 
12-12-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6407
 
12-12-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6408
 
12-12-05
 
T.S.O. IV


6409
 
2-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6410
 
2-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6412
 
2-13-06
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, V and VII


6413
 
2-13-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VIII, Ch. 79, Sch. II


6414
 
2-27-06
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


6415
 
3-13-06
 
32.30


6416
 
3-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6417
 
3-13-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6418
 
3-27-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6420
 
5-8-06
 
72.09, 72.99


6421
 
4-24-06
 
95.05 - 95.07, 95.10, 95.13, 99.03


6422
 
4-24-06
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, V and VII


6423
 
4-24-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII, Ch. 79, Sch. II


6424
 
6-12-06
 
160.01 - 160.29, 160.99


6425
 
5-8-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6426
 
5-8-06
 
157.01


6429
 
6-12-06
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII and XII


6431
 
6-12-06
 
97.03


6432
 
6-26-06
 
T.S.O. V


6433
 
6-12-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6434
 
6-26-06
 
157.01


6435
 
6-26-06
 
157.01


6438
 
7-10-06
 
100.01 - 100.06, 100.99


6439
 
7-24-06
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6442
 
8-28-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6443
 
8-28-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6445
 
8-28-06
 
133.01 - 133.09, 133.99


6446
 
9-25-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XII


6448
 
8-28-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6451
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6452
 
2-26-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6453
 
10-30-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6454
 
11-13-06
 
160.04


6455
 
11-13-06
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6459
 
3-26-07
 
T.S.O. II


6460
 
6-21-07
 
T.S.O. II


6461
 
12-11-06
 
T.S.O. IV


6462
 
2-12-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6463
 
2-12-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6464
 
4-9-07
 
154.17


6466
 
4-9-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6467
 
3-26-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6468
 
3-26-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6469
 
4-9-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6470
 
5-14-07
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6471
 
4-9-07
 
161.01 - 161.07, 161.99


6472
 
4-9-07
 
54.01 - 54.14


6473
 
4-9-07
 
54.25 - 54.31


6474
 
5-14-07
 
101.01 - 101.07


6477
 
4-23-07
 
30.15, 150.65 - 150.68


6478
 
5-21-07
 
T.S.O. VI


6480
 
5-21-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6481
 
5-21-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6483
 
6-11-07
 
T.S.O. V


6484
 
6-11-07
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I


6491
 
7-30-07
 
T.S.O. VI


6492
 
7-30-07
 
30.18


6499
 
8-27-07
 
72.10


6504
 
9-24-07
 
99.12


6505
 
10-29-07
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6506
 
10-8-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6507
 
10-8-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6509
 
11-19-07
 
134.01 - 134.04, 134.99


6511
 
11-19-07
 
35.15


6512
 
11-19-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6517
 
11-26-07
 
72.09


6519
 
12-10-07
 
T.S.O. IV


6523
 
1-28-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6524
 
1-28-08
 
38.16


6525
 
2-25-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6526
 
2-11-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6528
 
2-11-08
 
150.52


6531
 
4-14-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6534
 
4-28-08
 
Ch. 79, Schs. I and IV


6537
 
5-12-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6538
 
5-12-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6539
 
5-19-08
 
72.47, 72.99


6541
 
8-25-08
 
T.S.O. II


6542
 
8-25-08
 
T.S.O. II


6543
 
6-23-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6545
 
7-28-08
 
T.S.O. VI


6549
 
8-25-08
 
99.30 - 99.39, 99.99


6552
 
9-29-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6553
 
9-29-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6555
 
10-27-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6557
 
10-27-08
 
T.S.O. V


6559
 
11-10-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6560
 
11-10-08
 
T.S.O. IV


6567
 
12-8-08
 
97.03, 97.06, 97.15, 97.16, 97.17, 97.19, 97.20, 97.22


6568
 
12-8-08
 
72.47, 72.99


6569
 
12-8-08
 
94.01 - 94.36, 94.50 - 94.65, 94.99


6564
 
1-13-09
 
157.01


6565
 
1-13-09
 
157.01


6566
 
1-13-09
 
157.01


6571
 
2-11-09
 
157.01


6572
 
2-11-09
 
157.01


6574
 
4-14-09
 
157.01


6575
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. II


6577
 
4-14-09
 
157.01


6578
 
4-27-09
 
154.50 - 154.56


6580
 
4-27-09
 
95.01


6584
 
8-10-09
 
115.01 - 115.08


6585
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. IV


6583
 
7-27-09
 
T.S.O. IV


6585
 
7-28-09
 
T.S.O. V


6592
 
10-13-09
 
T.S.O. IV


6595
 
10-26-09
 
99.01


6596
 
10-26-09
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII and IX


6597
 
11-10-09
 
157.01


6599
 
1-11-10
 
T.S.O. VI


6601
 
4-13-10
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6602
 
2-23-10
 
35.02


6604
 
4-13-10
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6606
 
5-25-10
 
T.S.O. V


6607
 
3-9-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6609
 
6-28-10
 
T.S.O. VI


6610
 
3-11-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6611
 
5-11-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6613
 
6-8-10
 
157.01


6616
 
8-9-10
 
35.03


6617
 
7-13-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6619
 
1-28-13
 
55.001 - 55.007, 55.015 - 55.024, 55.035 - 55.053, 55.065 - 55.091, 55.100 -
55.110, 55.120 - 55.123, 55.135 - 55.138, 55.150 - 55.157, 55.170 - 55.177,
55.190 - 55.203, 55.215, 55.216, 55.225, 55.230, 55.240 - 55.247, 55.255 -
55.258, 55.270 - 55.276, 55.290 - 55.292, 55.305, 55.306, 55.315 - 55.319


6620
 
8-30-10
 
Ch. 78, Sch. XII


6621
 
9-13-10
 
T.S.O. V


6623
 
9-14-10
 
T.S.O. IV


6624
 
10-26-10
 
Ch. 79, Sch. IV


6625
 
10-25-10
 
38.25


6628
 
12-14-10
 
T.S.O. V


6630
 
1-24-11
 
36.45 - 36.51


6634
 
4-12-11
 
Ch. 79, Sch. I, Ch. 79, Sch. II


6635
 
3-28-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V, Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6636
 
4-11-11
 
T.S.O. VI


6637
 
4-11-11
 
T.S.O. II


6639
 
6-27-11
 
T.S.O. VI


6640
 
6-14-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6641
 
7-25-11
 
T.S.O. VI


6643
 
7-26-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6644
 
8-8-11
 
96.16, 96.20


6647
 
8-9-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6649
 
9-26-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6650
 
9-13-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6652
 
10-24-11
 
72.09, 73.01


6653
 
12-12-11
 
T.S.O. VI


6654
 
10-24-11
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6655
 
12-12-11
 
T.S.O. VI


6656
 
4-23-12
 
90.01 - 90.08, 90.98, 90.99


6657
 
12-13-11
 
157.01


6658
 
11-29-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6659
 
12-12-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6660
 
12-12-11
 
T.S.O. V


6661
 
12-13-11
 
T.S.O. IV


6663
 
2-27-12
 
157.01


6664
 
2-27-12
 
Ch. 79, Sch. VI


6665
 
3-12-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6666
 
4-9-12
 
30A.28


6668
 
4-9-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6669
 
4-9-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6670
 
4-23-12
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6671
 
5-14-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6672
 
5-14-12
 
70.01, 70.09, 70.10, 70.99


6674
 
5-21-12
 
95.05, 95.08


6675
 
5-21-12
 
96.19


6676
 
5-21-12
 
T.S.O. V


6677
 
6-11-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6678
 
6-11-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6679
 
6-25-12
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, VII; Ch. 79, Sch. II


6680
 
7-30-12
 
T.S.O. VI


6682
 
7-9-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6683
 
8-13-12
 
T.S.O. VI


6686
 
8-13-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6687
 
8-13-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6690
 
8-13-12
 
30.18


6691
 
11-26-12
 
T.S.O. II


6692
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. II


6693
 
9-10-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6695
 
9-10-12
 
T.S.O. V


6697
 
9-10-12
 
Ch. 78, Sch. VII


6698
 
10-15-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6699
 
10-15-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6700
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. IV


6701
 
11-20-12
 
157.01


6703
 
11-19-12
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, XI


6704
 
12-11-12
 
157.01


6705
 
11-27-12
 
157.01


6707
 
12-10-12
 
Ch. 78, Schs. IV, VII


6708
 
12-10-12
 
Ch. 79, Schs. I, IV


6710
 
3-11-13
 
Ch. 78, Schs. V, VII, VIII, IX


6711
 
3-11-13
 
Ch. 78, Schs. III, VI; Ch. 79, Sch. II


6712
 
2-25-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6713
 
3-11-13
 
97.03


6715
 
3-25-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6716
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6717
 
4-8-13
 
Ch. 79, Sch. II


6719
 
5-13-13
 
157.01


6720
 
5-13-13
 
72.09, 72.11, 72.99, 99.03, 150.46, 150.53, 150.99


6721
 
5-13-13
 
T.S.O. VI


6722
 
6-24-13
 
Ch. 78, Schs. VII, IX


6723
 
6-10-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6724
 
6-24-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6725
 
6-8-13
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


6729
 
8-12-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6732
 
10-21-13
 
T.S.O. VI


6733
 
9-9-13
 
36.01


6734
 
9-24-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6735
 
9-23-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6736
 
10-22-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6740
 
11-25-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6741
 
11-25-13
 
T.S.O. IV


6742
 
1-27-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6745
 
1-27-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6747
 
3-10-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6748
 
3-24-14
 
T.S.O. V


6749
 
3-24-14
 
T.S.O. I


6751, As Amended
 
3-24-14
 
95.01


6753
 
4-28-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6754
 
4-28-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6755
 
5-12-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6756, As Amended
 
4-28-14
 
95.01


6759, As Amended
 
7-14-14
 
115.02 , 115.03 , 115.09


6763
 
7-14-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6765
 
7-22-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6762
 
8-25-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6764
 
8-11-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6769
 
9-8-14
 
90.01 - 90.05, 90.07, 90.99


6770
 
8-25-14
 
T.S.O. V


6772
 
10-20-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6773
 
10-20-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6774
 
10-20-14
 
T.S.O. VI


6777
 
11-24-14
 
119.01 - 119.18, 119.99


6778
 
11-10-14
 
Ch. 78, Sch. V


6779
 
11-6-14
 
30A.02


6780
 
11-24-14
 
T.S.O. IV


6785
 
1-12-15
 
159.01 - 159.07, 159.99


6783
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. VI


6786
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. VI


6787
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. VI


6788
 
6-29-15
 
T.S.O. VI


6789
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. VI


6790
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6791
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6793
 
4-13-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6794
 
3-30-15
 
T.S.O. V


6795
 
3-30-15
 
T.S.O. V


6796
 
4-27-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6797
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6798
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6799
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6801
 
6-29-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6802, As Amended
 
6-29-15
 
30A.02


6806
 
7-27-15
 
T.S.O. V


6808
 
9-14-15
 
38.35


6809
 
10-26-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6810
 
11-9-15
 
T.S.O. V


6811
 
12-14-15
 
T.S.O. IV


6812
 
12-14-15
 
38.17


6815
 
2-22-16
 
157.01


6818
 
2-22-16
 
157.01


6820
 
3-14-16
 
33.10 - 33.27


6821
 
3-14-16
 
30.21


6824
 
3-28-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6823
 
4-11-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6825
 
4-25-16
 
99.01, 99.02, 99.11, 99.13, 99.99


6826
 
4-25-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6827
 
4-25-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6817
 
5-9-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6819
 
5-9-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6828
 
5-9-16
 
38.18


6829
 
6-27-16
 
151.02, 151.03, 151.05


6830
 
6-27-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6831
 
6-27-16
 
157.01


6832
 
6-27-16
 
157.01


6833
 
8-29-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6834
 
6-27-16
 
T.S.O. V


6835
 
7-18-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6837
 
9-12-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6841
 
9-12-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6844
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6845
 
10-12-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6846
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. VI


6849
 
12-12-16
 
160.10, 160.19


6850
 
12-12-16
 
97.17


6851
 
12-12-16
 
150.04


6852
 
12-19-16
 
55.004, 55.103, 55.105, 55.107


6854
 
11-28-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6855
 
11-28-16
 
157.01


6856
 
1-13-16
 
T.S.O. IV


6857
 
1-30-16
 
T.S.O. V


6861
 
3-27-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6864
 
6-15-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6871
 
10-12-17
 
157.01


6873
 
10-24-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6874
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. VI


6876
 
11-27-17
 
T.S.O. VII


6877
 
11-27-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6878
 
11-27-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6879
 
12-13-17
 
T.S.O. IV


6880
 
2-12-18
 
T.S.O. VI


6881
 
2-12-18
 
T.S.O. VI


6883
 
1-10-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6885
 
2-26-18
 
38.01


6886
 
3-26-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6887
 
3-26-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6888
 
3-26-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6889
 
3-26-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6891
 
4-12-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6894
 
5-21-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6895
 
5-21-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6896
 
5-21-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6897
 
5-21-18
 
30.18


6898
 
9-10-18
 
T.S.O. II


6899
 
6-25-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6900
 
6-25-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6901
 
8-13-18
 
T.S.O. VI


6903
 
7-9-18
 
118.01 - 118.04


6904
 
7-24-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6905
 
7-24-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6906
 
7-30-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6907
 
7-30-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6912
 
10-8-18
 
T.S.O. VI


6914
 
9-24-18
 
T.S.O. VII


6915
 
9-24-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6916
 
9-24-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6917
 
9-24-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6918
 
10-29-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6919
 
10-29-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6920
 
12-10-18
 
T.S.O. VI


6921
 
5-13-19
 
T.S.O. VI


6922
 
11-14-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6923
 
11-14-18
 
T.S.O. IV


6924
 
1-14-19
 
T.S.O. IV


6925
 
1-28-19
 
T.S.O. IV


6928
 
3-11-19
 
T.S.O. VI


6929
 
3-11-19
 
T.S.O. VI


6930
 
2-25-19
 
T.S.O. IV


6931
 
3-25-19
 
T.S.O. IV


6932
 
4-29-19
 
161.08


Table of Contents
Article One: Basic Provisions Page#
I.I Title .......................................................................................................................................... 1-2
12 Defined Words ......................................................................................................................... 1-2
13 Authority .................................................................................................................................. 1-2
1.4 Purpose .................................................................................................................................... 1-2
1.5 Applicability ............................................................................................................................. 1-2
1.6 Severability ............................................................................................................................... 1-2
1.7 Interpretation ............................................................................................................................ 1-2
I .8 Ordinance Jurisdiction .........•.............................................. : ..................................................... 1-3
1.9 Conflicting Regulatory Documents .......................................................................................... 1-3
I.JO Actions Pending ....................................................................................................................... 1-3
I.I 1 Repealer ....................................................................... ; ......... : .................•................................ 1-3
1.12 Transition Rules ....................................................................................................................... 1-3
1.13 Administrative Officer .............................................................................................................. 1-3
1.14 Effect on Annexation or Vacation on Zoning .•.............•...........................•............................... 1-4
1.15 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Common Council ......................................................... 1-4
1.16 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Plan Commission ......................................................... 1-4
1.17 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals ............................................ 1-5
1.18 Planning Commission Certification .......................•..........................................•........................ 1-6
1.19 Effective Date ........................................................................................................................... 1-7
Article Two: General Zoning Districts
2.1 Establishment of Districts ......................................................................................................... 2-2
22 Standard Zoning District Permitted and Special Exception Land Uses ............................ , ....... 2-3
23 Establishment of Overlay Districts .........................................................................................•. 2-3
2.4 Overlay Zoning District Permitted and Special Exception Land Uses ...................................... 2-3
2.5 Establishment of Planned Development Districts .................................................................. · ... 2-3
2.6 Unlisted Land Uses ...•.................................................................•.............••.............•.......... , .... 2-4
2.7 Questionable Land Uses .......................................................................................................... 2-4
Article Three: Zoning Districts
3.1 AG District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses .............................................. 3-2
32 AG District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-3
33 PR District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ................................ ~ .............. 3-4
3.4 PR District Development Standards ......................................................................................... 3-5
3.5 RI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................... 3-6
3.6 Rl District Development Standards .......................................................................................... 3-7
3.7 R2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses .............................................•. 3-8
3.8 R2 District Development Standards .......................................................................................... 3-9
3.9 R3 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-10
3.10 R3 District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-1 I
3.1 I R4 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-12
3.12 R4 District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-13
3.13 R5 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-14
3.14 R5 District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-15
3.15 Ml District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................ 3-16
3.16 Ml District Development Standards ...................................................................................... 3-17
3.17 M2 District Intent, Pennitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................ 3-18
3.18 M2 District Development Standards ...................................................................................... 3-19
3.19 MP District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ........................................... 3-20
320 MP District Development Standards ...................................................................................... 3-21
321 NC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................ 3-22
322 NC District Development Standards ....................................................................................... 3-23
323 JS District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses .............................................. 3-24
324 IS District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-25
Table of Contents as
amended as of July 27, 2010
iii
3.25 OC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................ 3-26
3.26 OC District Development Standards ............ : .....•.................................................................... 3-27
327 DC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and SpeCial Exception Uses ............................................ 3-28
3.28 DC District Development Standards ....................................................................................... 3-29
3.29 Cl District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-30
330 Cl District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-31
331 C2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-32
332 C2 District Development Standards ...................................•.................................................... 3-33
333 LI District Intent. Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................•. 3-34
3.34 LI District Development Standards ..............................................................•......................... 3-35
335 Ml District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................ 3-36
336 MI District Development Standards ......•........................................•..........•.••...............•......... 3-37
337 HI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses ............................................. 3-38
338 HI District Development Standards ........................................................................................ 3-39
Article Four: Overlay Districts
4.1 AH-OL District Intent. Affect on Uses, and Development Standards ...................................... 4-2
42 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Airport Haz.ard Overlay District .............................................. 4-3
43 Additional Development Standards for the Airport Hazard Overlay District .......................•... 4-3
4.4 WH-OL District Intent. Affect on Uses, and Development Standards ..................................... 4-4
45 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Wellhead Overlay District ...................................................... 4-5
4.6 Additional Development Standards for the Wellhead Overlay District .................................... 4-5
4.7 FH-OL District Intent. Affect on Uses, and Development Standards ...................... : ................ 4-6
4.8 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Flood Haz.ard Overlay District ................................................ 4-7
4.9 Additional Development Standards for the Flood Hazard Overlay District .............................. 4-7
4.10 WR-OL District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards ..................................... 4-8
4.11 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Well Restriction Overlay District ............................................ 4-9
4.12 AC-OL District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards ......................•..•.......... 4-10
· 4.13 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Architectural Control Overlay District .................................. 4-11
Article Five: Zoning Map
5.1 Official Zoning Map Title .................................... : .................................................................... 5--2
52 Official Zoning Map ............ : .................................................................................................... 5--2
53 Location of the Official Zoning Map ........................................................................................ 5-2
5.4 Official Zoning Map Copies ..................................................................................................... 5-2
55 Zoning District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 5-2
5.6 Regular Revisions ..................................................................................................................... 5-2
5.7 Damaged, Destroyed, or Lost Official Zoning Map .................................................................. 5--2
5.8 Official Zoning Map Standards ................................................................................................ 5--3
Article Six: Development Standards
iv
6.1
62
63
6.4
65
6.6
6.7
6.8
6.9
6.10
6.1 I
6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15
6.16
6.17
6.18
6.19
620
Development Standards Applicability ...................................................................................... 6-2
How to Use this Article ............................................................................................................ 6-2
Lot Standards (L0-0 I) ............................................................................................................... 6-3
Setback Standards (SB-0 I ) ....................................................................................................... 6-4
Sewer and Water Standards (SW-01) ........................................................................................ 6-5
Density and Intensity Standards (DI-01) .................................................................................. 6..s
Floor Area Standards(FA-01) ................................................................................................... 6-7
Height Standards (H T-0 I) ......................................................................................................... 6-8
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-01) .................................................................................. 6-9
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-02) .................................................................................. 6-9
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-03) .................................................................................. 6-9
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-04) ................................................................................ 6-10
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-05) ................................................................................ 6-11
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-06) ................................................................................ 6-11
Accessory Structure Standards (AS-07) ................................................................................ 6-11
Fence and Wall Standards (FW-01) ........................................................................................ 6-12
Fence and Wall Standards (FW-02) ........................... . ........................................................ 6-12
Temporary Use/Structure Standards(TU-01) ......................................................................... 6-13
Temporary Use/Structure Standards (TU-02) ......................................................................... 6-13
Temporary Use/Structure Standards (TU-03) ......................................................................... 6-14
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance as
amended as of July 27, 2010
6.21 Home Occupation Standards (H0-01) .................................................................................... 6-15
6.22 Home Occupation Standards (H0-02) .................................................................................... 6-16
6.23 Landscaping Standards (LA-01) ............................................................................................. 6-18
6.24 Landscaping Standards (LA-02) . .-..............................•....................................................... , .... 6-20
6.25 Landscaping Standards (LA-03) ....................................................•.•.........•.........•..... .-............ 6-20
6.26 Landscaping Standards (LA-04) ................................................................................. ~··········· ,6-21
6.27 Landscaping Standards (LA-05) ............................................................................................. 6-21
6.28 Landscaping Standards (LA-06) ............................................................................................. 6-22
6.29 Landscaping Standards (LA-07) ............................................................................................. 6-23
6.30 Landscaping Standards (LA-08) ........................................................................ ~ .................... 6-25
6.31 Environmental Standards (EN-01) .................... , ...................................................................... 6-26
6.32 Performance Standards {PF-01) ............................................... , .............................................. 6-27
6.33 Lighting Standards (LT-01) ........................................................ __ ........................................ 6-28
6.34 Sign Standards (Sl-01) ...................................................................................................... : ..... 6-29
6.35 Sign Standards (SI-02) ............................................................................................................ 6-30
6.36 Sign Standards (Sl-03) ...................................................... ; ..................................................... 6-30
6.37 Sign Standards (Sl-04) ............................................................................................................ 6-31
6.38 Sign Standards (Sl-05) .......................................................................................................... 6-32a
6.39 Sign Standards (Sl-06) .................... : ..................................................................................... 6-32a
6.40 Sign Standards (SI-07) .......................................................................................................... 6-32a
6.41 Sign Standards (Sl-08) ............................................................................................................ 6-33
6.42 Sign Standards (SI-09) ................. ~ ........................................................................................ 6-35a
6.43 Parking Standards {PK-01) .............................................................................................. : ....... 6-37
6.44 Parking Standards (PK-02) ...................................................................................................... 6-37
6.45 Parking Standards (PK-03) ...................................................................................................... 6-37
6.46 Parking Standards {PK-04) ...................................................................................................... 6-37
6.47 Parking Standards (PK-05) ................................................................................ : ..................... 6-38
6.48 Parking Standards {PK-06) ...................................................................................................... 6-38
6.49 Parking Standards (PK-07) ....................................................................................................... 6-40
6.50 Parking Standards {PK-08) ....................................................................................................... 6-41
6.51 Loading Standards (LD-01) .................................................................................................... 6-42
6.52 Entrance and Driveway Standards (ED-01) ............................................................................ 6-43
6.53 Entrance and Driveway Standards (ED-02) ............................................................................ 6-44
6.54 Vision Clearance Standards (VC-01) ....................................................................................... 6-45
6.55 Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC-01) ...................................................................... 6-46
6.56 Corridor Enhancement Standards (CE-01) .............................................................................. 6-49
6.57 Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX-01) ...................................................................... 6-51
6.58 SexuallyOriented BusinessStandards (SX-02) ...................................................................... 6-51
6.59 Special Exception Standards (SE-01) ...................................................................................... 6-53
6.60 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-01) ......................................................................................... 6-54
6.61 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-02) ......................................................................................... 6-54
6.62 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-03) ......................................................................................... 6-54
6.63 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-04) ......................................................................................... 6-55
6.64 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-05) ......................................................................................... 6-55
6.65 Miscellaneous Standards (MS-06) ........................................................................................ , 6-55
6.70 Wind to Energy System. Very Small (WE-01) ......................................................................... 6-56
6.71 Wind to Energy System, Small (WE-02) ............. ; .................................................................... 6-56
6.72 Wind to Energy System, Large (WE-03) ............... ,. ................................................................ 6-57
Article Seven: Planned Developments
7.1 . PD District Intent, Pennltted Uses, and Miscellaneous Standards ........................................... 7-2
7.2 General ...................................................................................................................................... 7-3
7.3 Rezoning to a Planned Development District ........................................................................... 7-3
7.4 Mixed Uses Within Planned Developments ............................................................................. 7-3
7.5 Origination of Proposals ........................................................................................................... 7 4
7.6 Limitation of Rezoning .............................................................................................................. 7 4
7.7 Drafting of a Planned Development Ordinance ........................................................................ 74
Tab le of Contents as
amended as o f May 1. 2009
v
Article Eight: Nonconforming Structures, Lots and Uses
8.1 Intent ........................................................................................................................................ 8-2
82 Distinction Between Nonconforming and Legal-Nonconforming ............................................ 8-2
8.3 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures ................................................................................ 8-2
8.4 Nonconforming Lots of Record ............................................................................... : ................ 8-3
8.5 Nonconforming Uses of Structures, Land, or Structures and Land in Combination ................ 8-3
8.6 Nonconforming Signs ............................................................................................................... 8-4
8.7 Repairs and Maintenance .......... : .............................................................................................. 8-4
Article Nine: Processes, Permits and Fees
9.1 Types of Petitions ..................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.2 Improvement Location Permit ................................................................................................... 9-3
9.3 Certificate of Occupancy .......................................................................................................... 9-5
9.4 Sign Permit ................................................................................................................................ 9-6
9.5 Temporary Sign Permit .............................................................................................................. 9-7
9.6 Development Plan Approval ..................................................................................................... 9-8
9.7 Development Standard Variance ............................................................................................. 9-14
9.8 Special Exception .................................................................................................................... 9-15
9.9 Zoning Amendment ................................................................................................................ 9-17
9.10 Planned Development Approval ............................................................................................. 9-18
9.11 Administrative Appeal ............................................................................................................ 9-23 t 9.12 Questionable Land Use Appeal .............................................................................................. 9-24
9.13 Schedule of Fees .................................................................................................................... 9-25
9.14 Notification for Public Hearing ............................................................................................... 9-26
Article Ten: Enforcement and Penalties
10.1 Authority ................................................................................................................................ l(}-2
10.2 Violations ................................................................................................................................ l(}-2
10.3 Inspection of Property ............................................................................................................. l(}-2
10.4 Responsibility of Violations .................................................................................................... l(}-2
10.5 Liability ................. : ................................................................................................................. l(}-2
10.6 Violations During the Construction/Building Process ............................................................ l(}-3
10.7 Types of Violations ................................................................................................................. la-3
10.8 Procedure for Violations ......................................................................................................... la-4
10.9 Fines and Penalties ................................................................................................................. la-4
10.10 Appeals or Trials .................................................................................................................... la-4
10.11 Enforcement, Remedies, and Injunctive Relief ........................................................................ l(}-5
10.12 Alternate Enforcement Procedures ......................................................................................... l(}-5
Article Eleven: Definitions
vi
11.1 General .................................................................................................................................... 11-2
11.2 Defined Words , ...................................................................................................................... 11-2
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. as
amended as of May 1. 2009
Article One
Basic Provisions
~:ii:Sa~roundlRules website w w w. ground r u I es inc. c om
August 12. 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson. AICP
t ' ' • • I .. '' I '' • ... ' ... ._ • ; - . f ' •J ' . . ' . ' : ' .. i
• ! • j
, • ' ' • " , ~ ~ ·'~ ! ' ' • ~ . I ~ - I ! I • • l • ~
Article One
Basic Provisions
1.1 Title
This Zoning Ordinance shall be formally known as the "Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, 2003" and it may be
cited and referred to as the "Zoning Ordinance," or as the "Zoning Code."
1.2 Defined Words
Words used in a special sense in this Zoning Ordinance are defined in Article Eleven.
1.3 Authority
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted by the City pursuant to its authority under the laws of the State of
Indiana, 36-7-4 et seq. Whenever codes cited in this Zoning Ordinance refer to Indiana Code which has
been amended or superseded, this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed amended in reference to the new or
revised code.
1.4 Purpose
This Zoning Ordinance is intended to guide the growth and development of the City in accordance with the
goals, objectives, and strategies stated within the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan and for the following
purposes:
A. To secure adequate light, air, and convenience of access; and safety fro.m fire, flood, and other
dangers. ·
B. To promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals and general welfare.
C. To plan for the future development of the City to the end:
a. That the community grows only with adequate public ways, utility, health, educational and recreational
facilities;
b. That the need~ of agriculture, industry and business are recognized in future growth;
c. That residential areas provide healthful surroundings for family life;
d. That the growth of the community is commensurate with and promotes the efficient and economical
use of public funds; and
e. That the community strive for high aesthetic value and quality planning and design.
1.5 Applicability
A structure shall not be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, altered, converted, enlarged
or used; nor shall any piece ofland be used; nor shall any existing use be expanded except when in full
compliance with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the permits required by this Zoning Ordinance
have lawfully been issued.
1.6 Severability
If any provision or the application of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance is held unconstitutional or
invalid by the courts, the remainder of the Zoning Ordinance or the application of such provision to other
circumstances shall not be affected.
1.7 Interpretation
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are the minimum requirements necessary for the protection of the
health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare of the people at large. The provisions
are also designed to establish and maintain reasonable community standards to achieve the Purpose
(Section 1.4) of this Zoning Ordinance. lf2 or more provisions within this Zoning Ordinance are in conflict
or are inconsistent with one another, then the provision which is most restrictive shall control.
1-2 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
1.8 Ordinance Jurisdiction
This Zoning Ordinance applies to all land within the corporate limit of the City of Kokomo, Indiana
1.9 Conflicting Regulatory Documents
When this Zoning Ordinance along with private covenants, private contracts, commitments, permits,
agreements, state laws, federal laws or other regulations regulates a structure or parcel of land, the
greater restriction shall control.
1.10 Actions Pending
This Zoning Ordinance shall not be construed as eliminating or reducing any action now pending under an
existing law or previous zoning ordinance. Also, this Zoning Ordinance shall not be construed as discontinuing,
reducing, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue.
1.11 Repealer
The City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance of 1972, Ordinance No. 4153; Zoning Ordinance Amendment
number 5067; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 6124; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 5959; and Zoning
Ordinance Amendment 6179; and its associated zoning map are hereby repealed. This Kokomo Zoning
Ordinance (2003) and the referenced and updated Official Zoning Map (2003) replace the repealed
ordinances.
1.12 Transition Rules
A. Any application for an Improvement Location Permit that has been filed with the Plan Commission or
its designees and is full and complete, prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be
regulated by the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance that was in place at the time of filing.
The filing fee, ifnot already paid, shall be consistent with the previous zoning ordinance. However, the
administrative procedures shall follow those set forth by this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Any application for an Official Zoning Map Amendment that was filed with the Plan Commission or its
designees, and is full and complete prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall continue
through the process to completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Zoning Ordinance that
was in place at the time of filing. However, ifthe proposed use would no longer be permitted in the
proposed zoning district or the proposed zoning district no longer exists in the new ordinance, then the ·
Planning Director shall amend the application such that the request for rezoning would accomplish the
same end goal for the applicant.
C. Any application before the Board of Zoning Appeals (i.e. special exception, development standards
variance) that has been filed with the BZA or its designees and is full and complete, prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, shall continue the process pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Zoning Ordinances that was in place at the time of filing, provided that:
a. .The application is stiJJ required by the terms of this Zoning Ordinance; or,
b. If the proposed use or development requires additional approvals from the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to the terms of this Zoning Ordinance that were not required under the previous
Ordinances, the application will be amended to include only those additional approvals that are
now required and within the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
D. All new building sites shall meet the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance unless:
a. A Building Permit was issued and is stiJJ valid, or
b. A parcel was approved as a buildable lot by the Plan Commission or the Board of Zoning Appeals
prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance.
1.13 Administrative Officer
The Planning Director wiJJ have the primary responsibility for administration and enforcement (or coordination
of enforcement) of this Zoning Ordinance within the Plan Commission's planning jurisdiction.
Article One: Basic Provisions 1-3
1.14 Effect on Annexation or Vacation on Zoning
A. After the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, areas annexed by the City of Kokomo shall be
changed to the most similar zoning district to its previous county zoning district.
B. Whenever any street, alley, public way, railroad right-of-way, waterway, or other similar area is
vacated by proper authority, the zoning districts adjoining each side of vacated areas shall be extended
automatically to the center of the vacated area. All areas included in the vacation shall then and
henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended zoning districts. In the event of a
partial vacation, the adjoining zoning district, or zoning district nearest the portion vacated, shall be
extended automatically to include all of the vacated area. Any disputes as to the exact zoning district
boundaries shall be determined by the Planning Director.
1.15 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Common Council
The powers and duties of the Common Council are described below. Duties should be interpreted as
activities that are obligations. Powers should be interpreted as activities that are optional to be initiated.
A. Common Council Duties:
a. Adopt, reject or amend the Comprehensive Plan, Strategic Plans, Zoning Ordinance, or Subdivision
Control Ordinance that have been certified and submitted by the Plan Commission.
b. Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal the text of the Comprehensive Plan,
Strategic Plans, Zoning Ordinance, or Subdivision Control Ordinance that has been certified and
submitted by the Plan Commission.
c. Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend the Official Zoning Map certified and submitted by the
Plan Commission.
d. Adopt, reject or amend a fee schedule that has been proposed or amended and submitted by the
Plan Commission.
e. Enforce regulations and procedures of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Subdivision
Control Ordinance to the extent of the local Resolutions, Ordinances, and State of Indiana Law.
f. Other duties as permitted by Indiana State Code.
B. Common Council Powers:
a. Initiate amendments to the text of the Comprehensive Plan, Strategic Plans, Zoning Ordinance, or
Subdivision Control Ordinance by making said proposal to the Plan Commission.
b. Initiate amendments to the Official Zoning Map by making said proposal to the Plan Commission.
c. Other powers as permitted by Indiana State Code.
1.16 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Plan Commission
1-4
The powers and duties of the Plan Commission are described below. Duties should be interpreted as
activities that are obligations. Powers should be interpreted as activities that are optional to be initiated.
A. Plan Commission Duties:
a. Adopt and maintain a Common Council approved Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Control Ordinance as authorized under Indiana State Law.
b. Adopt and maintain rules and procedures for holding meetings, holding public hearings, and
administrating and enforcing the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
c. Maintain complete records of all meetings, hearings, correspondences, and affairs of the Plan
Commission.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
d. Publish and make available to the public all plans, ordinances, and other related material that are
the responsibility of the Plan Commission.
e. Adopt and maintain a permitting process and seal used to certify official or approved documents.
f. Certify and submit recommendations to the Common Council including new versions of and
revisions to the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Control Ordinance, and
Official Zoning Map.
g. Certify and submit recommendations to the Common Council for adopting a Planned Development
District.
h. Maintain monetary and fiscal records of the Plan Commission.
i. Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Common Council.
j. Approve or deny plats or replats of subdivisions.
k. Approve or deny development plans and amendments to development plans.
I. Approve or deny proposed subdivision names in new developments.
m. Establish and maintain a Common Council approved fee schedule that assigns a fee to permits,
processes, and official actions of the Plan Commission in order to defray the administrative costs
of such duties and powers. ·
n. Enforce regulations and procedures of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Subdivision
Control Ordinance to the extent of the local Resolutions, Ordinances, and State oflndiana Law.
o. Other duties as permitted by Indiana State Code.
B. Plan Commission Powers:
a. Delegate to a committee or person the role of Planning Director with the Howard County Plan
Commission, as provided by the Kokomo - Howard County Inter local Cooperative Agreement
No. I 994- I, as amended.
b. Hire, remove, and determine job descriptions for support staff with the Howard County Plan
Commission, as provided by the Kokomo - Howard County Inter local Cooperative Agreement
No. 1994-1, as amended.
c. Establish advisory committees as necessary made up of City officials and the general public.
d. Establish an executive conference committee with the Howard County Plan Commission, as
provided by the Kokomo - Howard County Inter local Cooperative Agreement No. 1994- I, as
amended.
e. Seek funding assistance through grant programs as necessary.
f. Distribute copies or summaries of the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or Subdivision
Control Ordinance to the general public and development community.
g. Determine the compensation for support staff and members as provided within the budget submission
to Common Council.
h. Other powers as permitted by Indiana State Code.
1.17 Summary of Powers and Duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals
The powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals are described below. Duties should beinterpreted
as activities that are obligations. Powers should be interpreted as activities that are optional to be initiated.
A. Board of Zoning Appeals Duties:
a. Review and hear appeals of decisions made under this Zoning Ordinance by the Planning Director
and Plan Commission Staff.
b. Review, hear and approve or deny all petitions for special exceptions based on the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance and Indiana State Code.
c. Other duties as permitted by Indiana State Code.
Article One: Basic Provisions 1-5
1.18 Planning Commission Certification
This Zoning Ordinance was certified for adoption on the 12th day of August, 2003 by the Kokomo Planning
Commission after holding a legally announced public hearing. This Zoning Ordinance was certified by
a 8 to 0 vote. This certification is validated by the following Planning Commission members.
•(signed)•
Jeff Camey
•(signed)•
Chris Thompson
•(signed)•
Richard Murphy
•(signed)•
Lisa Rink
•(signed)•
Greg Goodnight
•(signed)•
William Eldridge
•(signed)•
Keith Kruger
*(signed)*
John Beery
Tim Severns
1-6 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
1.19 Effective Date
This Zoning Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on the 6th day of November, 2003.
PASSED by the Kokomo Common Council this 29th day of September, 2003.
Attest:
*(signed)*
Brenda Ott, City Clerk
*(signed)*
Robert L. Hayes, Sr., President
Kokomo Common Council
PRESENTED by me to the Mayor this 30th day of September, 2003.
*(signed)*
Brenda Ott, City Clerk
APPROVED by me this 16th day of October, 2003.
*(signed)*
James E. Trobaugh, Mayor
City of Kokomo, Indiana
Attest:
*(signed)*
Brenda Ott, City Clerk
Article One: Basic Provisions t-7
1-8 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
. Article Two
General Zoning Districts
~r-~roundlRules website w w w . gro u nd r u I es inc . co m
August 12, 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
• • • l ~
• ' l ,,
J
. . ~ \
Article Tun
General Zoning Districts
2.1 Establishment of Districts
2 -2
All of the zoning districts in this Zoning Ordinance stand alone and are not a part of a hierarchy system of
zoning.
[For example, what is permitted in the CJ district is NOT permitted in the C2 district or any other
zoning district. Only those land uses and development standards which are expressly permitted and
noted for each zoning district apply.]
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, the planning jurisdiction is divided into the following zoning
districts for the general uses as stated:
AG-Agriculture (page 3-2 and 3-3): This district is established for agricultural areas, homes and
buildings associated with agriculture production.
PR-Parks and Recreation (pave 3-4 and 3-5); This district is established for parks, open space,
trails and recreational areas both public and private.
RI-Very Low Density Residential (page 3-6 and 3-7): This district is established for single family,
detached, medium to large sized homes on medium to large sized lots.
R2-Low Density Residential Cpage 3-8 and 3-9); This district is established for single family,
detached, small to medium sized homes on medium sized lots.
~Medium Density Residential (nage 3-10 and 3-11); This district is established for single family,
detached, small to medium sized homes on small to medium sized lots.
R4-Medjum Density Urban Resjdential (page 3-12 and 3-13); This district is established for
existing older, single family detached neighborhoods.
RS=High Density Urban Residential (page 3-14 and 3-15); This district is established for existing
older, single family detached and limited multifamily residential lots.
Ml-Low Density Multifamily Residential (page 3-16 and 3-17); This district is established for
small-scale, low density, single structure, multifamily lots. ·
M2=-General Multifamily Residential (page 3-18 and 3-19): This district is established for medium
to large sized, moderate density, multiple structure, multifamily developments.
MP-Mobile Home Park (page 3-20 and 3-2U; This district is established for leased lot developments
(typically mobile or manufactured home parks) which typically lease dwelling sites for single-wide
and double-wide manufactured homes.
NC-Neighborhood Commercial <oage 3-22 and 3-23>; This district is established for small scale
businesses that provide products and services primarily to local neighborhoods.
15=1gstjtutional Uses (page 3-24 and 3-25); This district is established for institutional and municipal
owned lands, both public or quasi-public, where the use is for public purpose and is anticipated to remain
permanent.
OC=Qffice Commercjal (page 3-26 and 3-27>: This district is established for small to moderate scale
office uses with provisions for some complementary uses.
DC- Downtown Commercial (page 3-28 apd 3-29); This district is established for special issues and
land use goals for the downtown area in Kokomo.
Cit y of Kokaro zoning Ordinance
Cl-Small to Medjum Scale General Commercial (page 3-30 and 3-30; This district is established
for a wide variety ofretail, commercial, service, entertainment, and eating establishments that are small to
medium in scale, and low to medium intensity.
Cl-Medium to Large Scale General Commercial Cpage 3-32 and 3-33): This district is established
for a wide variety of retail, commercial, service, entertainment, and eating establishments that are
medium to large in scale, and medium to high intensity.
LI-Low Intensity Industrial/Business Park Cpage 3-34 and 3-35): This district is established for
low intensity business parks, distribution facilities, flex space, and nonhazardous outdoor storage.
MI-Moderate Intensity Industrial/Light Manufacturing Cpage 3-36 and 3-37); This district is
established for moderate intensity industrial parks, manufacturing facilities, assembly operations.
HJ-High Intensity Industrial/Heavy Manufacturjng <page 3-38 and 3-39): This district is established
for large industrial parks, heavy manufacturing facilities, hazardous material storage, and utility
usage.
2.2 Standard Zoning District Permitted and Special Exception Land Uses
Land uses are either pennitted, non-pennitted or a special exception and are labeled as such in each
zoning district section in Article Three. More specifically, Kokomo's permitted and special exception uses
for each district are listed in the columns labeled "Pennitted Uses" and "Special Exception Uses" found in
Article Three.
2.3 Establishment of Overlay Districts
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance 3 Overlay Districts have been established .as stated below.
AH-OL-Airport Hazard Area Overlay (page 4-2): This district is established to disallow land uses
which are in conflict with or adversely affected by normal airport operations.
WH-Ok=Wellhead Overlay (page 4-4); This district is established to protect the integrity and
drinkability of the community's public water supply, enhance water quality of streams.
FH-Ok-Flood Hazard Oyer!ay (page 4-6): This district is established to minimize risk to life, protect
property from damage, reduce risk of flooding, and improve stonn water quality.
WR-OL -- Well Restriction Oyer!ay (page 4-8): This district is intended for protecting the community
from chemicals contaminating ground water.
AC-OL -Architecture Control Overlay District (page 4-lQ): This district is intended for protecting,
preserving and enhancing the historic character and fonn of the downtown and other similar areas.
2.4 Overlay Zoning District Permitted and Special Exception Land Uses
An overlay district will s·upercede any standard zoning district regulations, pennitted uses, or special
exception uses as noted in the overlay district text. Any additions or deletions to the pennitted or special
exception uses caused by an overlay district will be noted in the columns labeled "Affect on Uses" in the
overlay district article (Article Four). Superceding language that affects development standards wili also
be found in Article Four.
2.5 Establishment of Planned Development Districts
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance allow the RI, R2, R3, MI, M2, NC, OC, Cl, C2, LI, Ml, and HI
districts to be rezoned for a planned development. No other districts shall be rezoned into a planned
development district. '
On the Official Zoning Map a planned development district, once rezoned, shall be labeled as PD followed
by the district it was created from. The following are the appropriate and corresponding labels for
2 - 3
Planned Development Districts: PD-RI, PD-R2, PD-R3, PD-MI, PD-M2, PD-NC, PD-OC, PD-CI, PDC2,
PD-LI, PD-MI, and PD-HI.
The provisions that regulate Planned Developments can be found in Article Seven.
2.6 Unlisted Land Uses
Any land use not specifically listed as a permitted use or special exception use in Article Three or Article
Four in the columns labeled "Permitted Uses", "Special Exception Uses", or "Affect on Uses" is considered
Non-Permitted.
2.7 Questionable Land Uses
Any land use not specifically listed as a permitted use or special exception use, but that is similar to a use
which is permitted or a special exception may be considered a questionable land use. Through a "Questionable
Land Use Appeal Process" the desired use may be determined to be a permitted use, special
exception use, or remain a non-permitted use.
2 - 4 City of Kokaro ZOning Ordinance
Article Three
Zoning Districts
I a ~~roundJRules
. websifewww . grou.ndrulcsinc.com
August 12, 2003
@ 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
AG District
3.1 AG District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent '
The AG (Agriculture) District is .
intended to be used as follows:
Type and Intensity
• agricultu~al activities
Applic'ation of Oistrict .
•existing conditions · .
:'holding district after anne~iition ~ .• . .. .
Development Standards
·provide adequate standards that ·
allow cqmmon agricult~ra·1 practices
within tt1e corporate li~lt. ·of t~~- ~
Appropriate. Adjacent Dis~cts
·all districts ·.:. · · · ..
Pianrilng Gominissiqn · ': · · .. . ·
·use thi~. djstrict ,rorexi$tihg fa!'TJ1s· or ·
for lanc;l n~wJy ?nn.exe.d·thatdoes not
yet have pevelopment Pl.ans , . · ·. . ·
. ~ :·.
)i .· '.:."·!··. ·,•
• to: -:
; ... ~-' .. .~· .• ' \ t
:.·.
. ·~'- '~
' '{: :_.:-'. ·: ~· ·· · .
. : ~-
~ .
3-2
~( ...
.1'.
·.
' .
. .... . -
.·
•: .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
..

'·
• SI-06 ... ......... Page 6-31"
"Parking (PK)
• PK-01. ........... Page 6-37"
• PK-02 ...... ...... Page 6-37"
"Entrance/Driveway (ED)
• ED-01. ........... Page 6-43"
"Vision ·clearance (VC)
• VC-01. ........... Page 6-45"
"Special Exception (SE)
• SE-01. ............ Page 6-53"
"Miscellaneous (MC)
• MC-01. ........... Page 6-54
• MC-02 ............ Page 6-54
• MC-03 ............ Page 6-54
• MC-04 ............ Page 6-55"
6-2 6.3-6.65 Insert "AR" zoning designation Development Standards LO-Ol,
SB-01, SW-01, DI-01, FA-01, HT-01, AS-01, AS-02, FW-01, 111-01,
W-02, HO-Ol, H0-02, LA-01, LA-02, LA-08, EN-01, PF-01, LT-01,
SI-01, SI-02, SI-04, SI-06, PK-01, PK-02, ED-01, VC-01, SE-01,
MC-01, MC-02, MC-03, MC-04.
) , SECTION II. The above changes shall be duly entered on the filed copies of the zoning map, which is a
part of Kokomo .ZOning Ordinance No. 6279.
\
SECTION III. '.fhis ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, signature by the
Mayor, and publications as provided by law.
PASSED by the Kokomo Common Council this __ day of ________ ___, 2011.
AITEST:
Brenda Brunnemer-Ott, City Clerk
Michael Kennedy, President
Kokomo Common Council
Presented by me to the Mayor of Kokomo, Indiana, this_ day of _____ __, 2011 at the
hour of o'clock A.M.
4

)
• 5 feet for Accessory Structure"
"Maximum Building Lot Coverage:
• square footage of all primary and accessory structures cannot exceed
30% of the Lot Area"
"Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1,600 square feet for one story Primary Structure; or
• 1,000 square feet for the first floor of the Primary Structure, provided
that the total Finished Floor Area is 1,600 square feet or more"
"Additional Development Standards that Apply"
"LOt (LO)
_ • L0-01 ......... Page 6-3"
"Setback (SB)
• SB-01 .......... Page 6-4"
"Sewer and Water (SW)
• SW-01 ......... Page 6-5"
"Density and Intensity (DI)
• DI-01. .......... Page 6-6"
"Floor. Area (FA)
• FA-01. ......... Page 6-7"
"Height (HT)
• HT-01. ......... Page 6-8"
"Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01. ......... Page 6-9
• AS-02 .......... Page 6-9"
"Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-01. ........ Page 6-12"
"Temporary Uses (fU)
• TU-01. ......... Page 6-13
• TU-02 .......... Page 6-13"
"Home Occupation
• H0-01. ......... Page 6-15
• H0-02 .......... Page 6-16"
"Landscaping (LA)
• LA-01. .......... Page 6-18
• LA-02 ........... Page 6-20
• LA-08 ........... Page 6-25"
"Environmental (EN)
• EN-01. .......... Page 6-26"
"Performance (PF) .
• PF-01 ............ Page 6-27"
"Lighting (LT)
• LT-01. ........... Page 6-28"
"Sign (SI)
• SI-01. ........... Page 6-29
• SI-02 ............ Page 6-30
• SI-04 ............ Page 6-31
3

)
3-41 3.40
)
•tree farms"
"Residential
• dwelling, single family
• fair housing facility (small)"
"Accessory Use
• child day-care home
• home occupation (type 1 )"
"Special Exception Uses"
"Agricultural
• raising of farm animals"
"Communication/Utility
• above ground utility facility''
"General
• offsite. parking lot for a church, temple, mosque or similar place of
worship"
"Residential
• bed and breakfast
• fair housing facility (large)
• group home"
"Public Facilities
• public park"
"Accessory Use
• artificial land or pond over 500 sq. ft.
• home occupation (type 2)"
Insert "Minimum Lot Area:
• 1 acre (farm homestead)
"Minimum Lot Width:
• 120 feet"
"Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a public street with access from said public street"
"Sewer and Water:
• Requires hook up to municipal water and sewer for new development
only"
"Maximum Structure Height:
• 40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 25 feet for Accessory Structures
• Agricultural related accessory structures are exempt"
"Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 50 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 40 feet when adjacent to a Collector or Local Street"
"Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 10 feet for the Primary Structure
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures"
"Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 25 feet for Primary Structure
2

)
)
μ ~-·,;· ~~, I·(} , I\
ORDINANCE NO. 6657
MULTIPLE AMENDMENTS TO KOKOMO WNING ORDINANCE NO. 6279
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 6279, NOW TIIBREFORE, BE IT ORDIANED
BY TIIE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF KOKOMO, INDIANA, that Ordinance No. 6279,
as amended, with all subsequent amendments be and is hereby amended as follows: ·
SECTION I. The following described amendments be incorporated into Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
No. 6279.
Item -Page Se.ction Change
Addition of an Agricultural/Rural Residential - AIR zoning district
I. 3-40 3.39 Insert "AR District"
"3.39 Agricultural/Rural Residential Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special
Exception Uses." ·
"District Intent"
''Type and Intensity
•agricultural activities
• single-family detached homes
• mediwn to large size homes
• large size lots"
"Application of District
• existing and new development"
"Development Standards
• provide adequate standards that allow common agricultural practices and
promote low-impact development within the corporate limit of the city."
"Appropriate Adjacent Districts
• all districts"
"Planning Commission
• should limit the use of this district to land incorporated after an
annexation that was previously zoned Rural Residential under the Howard
County Zoning Ordinance"
"Board of Zoning Appeals
• allow a special exception use only when it clearly is a benefit to the
residential component of the development and does not add to the existing
agricultural use of the land"
"Permitted Uses"
"Agricultural
• agricultural crop production
•orchards
• plant nursery
• roadside produce sales .
• storage of agricultural products produced on site
1
AG District
3.2 AG District Development Standards
/ R.O.W. •kl Deftrled '"1 lhafoughfaN Plan
Minimum Lot Area:
•nla
Minimum Lot Width:
•nla
Minimum Lot Frontage: ·
•n/a
Sewer and Water:
• Does not require municipal water or
sewer hookup
Al::.cessory Slruclure
Gable Roof Structures
(lram highest gable roof)
Primary Structut8
Flat Roof 51nlduras
(from hlglwol
aecUonol llol rool)
Maximum Structure Height:
• 40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 25 feet for Accessory Structures
• Agriculture related accessory
structures are exempt
R.0.W.
I
/
R.O.W. •kl Oeined '"'ThanJughlaAI Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 50 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 40 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 40 feet for Primary Structures
• 30 feet for Accessory Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 40 feet for Primary Structures
• 30 feet for Accessory Structures
~ .R.O.W. r ,,.-----------
R.O.W.• Aalletned'"1~1'1an
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•square fOotage of all primary and
accessory structures cannot exceed
15% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1, 100 square feet for one· story
Primary Structures; or
• 800 square feet for multiple story
Primary Structures, provided that the
total Finished Floor Area is 1, 100
square feet or more.
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended 3-3
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
PR District
3.3 PR District Intent, Permitted Us es, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The PR (Parts and Reci:-eatlon)
District i~ intended to be used as
follows: · · · ·
·Type a11d lriWnsify
·public par!<s •. o~n sp;:i~. playgrounds,
::an? i~e~eation~I areas ,
. App!ica(lqtj;9f Piiltri~t :· : · . •
~ ex\sfing·: ~M ·:ne.w ·cJ!~ve.loprnent
·spot .z<?.~ir~; ~~ ·. · ·
• buffer'<l\sl{itf: .«
. : . ~."-.':',' ~-.~:.r '; _r:·. i.-:- . . , . . it: . ...
• ~~;~t~~]~\~~fft~~r:wtara:eas for
j:>'lJP-119 .. SCce~S and . retfeatiqn I
r ' • ~ , • • • •
· App(opri~te Adjacent Districts
• all districts:• ' . .
3-4
;.; .... ~·
/'. ,;;,:;_;'. ' ~' ;' ..
.. ,. .
:·.~ ..:.
"
.....
:;
. :( -·
:-:·
. .L "<J?.~pn,itt~ V~et. . r
'
.. P,U'ilf 1~
l .. •
4-' ...._ J t,
4 ... • .r. ,.. ~ . . •, •· :,, '( ~-•
.:- ; :~~~~L:;~.:~~§~:>t:~~ ..
. ~>~''.'~r~~-~- ~.1~:~ ~ .
. .
.- t.. . ~ ~·· .
:·.·.
-. ,; 4:
", -~.
~i,.,; \;
.,,
.· '/";
·'f;
" ~ ~~i:;~rl:;.~.'.~1~~~;.·0~5
... ~ ;· :-·~· ' ~
iii \.,.
J1 ,
-.~
' ' :·.;
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. as amended
by Ordinances No. 63 75, 6426 and 6435. June
27, 2006
PR District
3.4 PR District Development Standards
...-;;.O.W.•M~on~Plon
Minimum Lot Area:
•n/a
Minimum Lot Width:
•nla
Minimum Lot Frontage:
•nla
Accesscxy Structure
Gable Roof Strudures
(from hlghoal goble rool)
Primary SlrUclln
Maximum Structure Height:
• 35 feet for the Primary Structure
• 25 feet for Accessory Structures
R.0.W.
I
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 35 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 25 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 15 feet for Primary and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 20 feet for Primary and Accessory
Structures
" ..
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
R.0.W.
I
~o.w .• ,.. Oetnod on Thoroughlorw Pion
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all primary and
accessory structures cannot exceed
50% of the Lot Area
•.:.
3-5
R1 District
3.5 R1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
·District Intent
The R1 (Very Low.Density
Residentiai) pistrictis Intended to
be used as follows:
Ty~ ahd lnJen~ity · .
• single~f~mily detached homes
•large ·sized 'homes
·medium to .large sized lots - ..
. Appiiq~tion c#>is~ct . . ·
• existil)g .. ;a.~d ·:~~w d~v~}qpr,oeht_
•small''a~j:I f-Qning ·. ·; · .
· o e~ etQ ·.t~".~J!eI ~.i,._s, +;-~; .fld..· a. ·rd;.&.~-..: - .. . . .
• prorno~~ 19y..~ifhpaiit· d¢V.el9Pment in :.
-con~:fPf-'ith,·~-.naturarseffitr9 ·
· Appropriate Adjacent District$ ,, .
•ANGC, .P.R.; R , 4., R3, R.4 ~ R5.·, M1·, IS.,.ai\.( I -
. I t ~;. ,: • .J.'.
Plaoni,1'.19 PC)mh)issip,n , ,,,,: \,. "/
• should;)imit'the 'use• of. this district-,. '
wittiln ifle c11:y·ofK.91<9~0:~~~~9rttie·.:
low der:\Sity nature of tnls district .and
to ~voia :exdu~ioriary zoriih~ 'praC; ·.
tices . . ;,,. - _: ·, -! · · ·•:'.· .. · · '
,j. •
• eoard otz'.onlng,Ap~als ... --;: '~~-·
•allow -a. ;~p~cial exception μse only ·
·vmen-itClearly is acbenefit'to'.fhe .
residential. c:Omponent of the. develbp-
' merit .. . . . ... · .'. .,'
"r-
3-6
. .
. .. .....
<. J ~
't·_····;·
'c"
~-
•. ,M~~:f ~~,*; i'J~it . ,,, ..
. -..: _,;., ~·"·· ' ·;.r'.~*t.~'l~-¢.ir·~'~
~1i~·-~·~t~;:~-~}:;·:;·~~(t,:~~~w:.~:~>·:.:).~~:::·
·~. '~~ ~(''"'k·'~p .. {";~~~\~(~~,, ~%! .. ~~~-
~~t§WJF!.r}~l~i . '.\k<·&~i.
·'i .:r.:-...-'.-;:·• -~·~, .~.-. • • . ' . .• ;.,!),~~-
"
•.!',· 'v~
'}:~.'~-~.;:_~ .
-~. '~::. :'. -: .... -:
.!.l .. :<;: ::·~-~: ) .~ . : .t .. ,
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
. 27. 2006
R1 District
3.6 R1 District Development Standards
A.O.W.•MDelnedCWl~l'lon
Minimum Lot Area:
• 15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
• 100 feet
Maximum Lot Depth:
• 3 times the Lot Width
Minimum Lot isrontage:
• 50 feet on a Pi.Jblic Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Accessory Structure
Gable Roof Slrudwes
(from hlg"."ol ~- rool)
Primary S1ruclure
Flat Roof SINdUf9g
-.o'1"1'1o"1"ro~o l)
Maximum Structure Height:
•45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
I r A.O.W. • M Ddnod.., ThorouahfMe Plan
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 30 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 25 feet when adjacent to a Collector or
Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 10 feet for the Primary Structure
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback: ·
• 20 feet for the Primary Structure
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures
. . .
~· . , . :; ... :
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 2 7, 2006
Maximum Lot Coverage:
• Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
. 35% of the Lot Area ·
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1, 700 square feet for one story
Primary Structures; or
• 1,000 square feet for the first floor of
the Primary Structure, provided that
the total Finished Floor Area is 1, 700
square feet or more
.•,'•.: .
• • : ,1
... . · .
. \ ........
·,·• . - ·,
3-7
R2 District
3.7 R2 District Intent, Pennitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District lnterit
PE'.Y~9L
•prg con ' ~-. ;~
'A . ..,~. · nateAtr~c«!ntDjstiicts ·:~·· ·A~~tfti R1 ;,~~;~~·fR5.J~.1. M2; 1s,' ,Nc;·(itC;,and:CL· . .. · . ..... .
,.. -~
l'."~ :
3-8
1" -~·
-· .. :··· · 1 :·, ·:·· ~ :,~:··: ·, ·! o<
·:
.... t
~~:~1J~;;(~
1Xt· ~ · , rt.;t ·J.kt~i ;i1~,::. :g~{;;-. ~::~;~*; ' > !(.·-~:.' :,:>"fk"· ,~ .. ·~
..
·:· ·;·
~ -.: • ·;> "{~ -~'~.
~: ,\)~~:~i11.~ ·~ 'i ' I•,; ... j,,.
'<1\:~~~ \~
·-. ...·. . .. .. ,
.. · ·( ,-·
•.• :< •••
.. ' -•. ,.
#_.'
";~-t !,~:~~~~·~ _;!~ .....- -·~·-~t; ~·
.·!°.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375. 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
=~· =~ -.t•
R2 District
3.8 R2 District Development Standards
R.O.W. • h OolWied on 1'horoughlaro Plin
Minimum Lot Area:
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•80 feet
Maximum Lot Depth:
• 3 times the Lot Width
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 40 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water: .
•Requires municipal water and sewer
.hookup
At:l:essory Structure
Gable Roof S1rudul9S
(from hlglwol gob!• ll>OI)
Primary S1rucWre
Maximum Structure Height:
• 45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.o.W.
I
~ .
R.O.W. • h OolWied on Tlian>ugl1'lre Aon
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 30 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 25 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 8 feet per side for the Primary
Structure .
• 5 feet per side for Accessory Structures
·
" Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 20 feet for the Primary Structure
• 3 feet for Accessory Structures
Maximum Lot Coverage:
• Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
40% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1,400 square feet for one story
Primary Structures; or .
• 900 square feet for the first floor of the
Primary Structure, provided that the
total Finished Floor Area is 1,400
square feet or more
:· ..
~j
~~7 .. ~{/ '· ... .; ' ..
e'6i37 .·. . -: • .-. : Jt•. • ·' ..' "~ -~ .l
. {;·"!~·.st+·~.:· .· · :. . - .a;: ~·
- .·- ·.. :·:.-~···
·.· .
". ~ ..
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordlnan.ces No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
3-9
R3 District
3.9 R3 District Intent, Pennitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
... ·· i
.• ~ I..
., .. 't.· •''
3-10
~.
·,,
'
' ~~ ~~~?~~?:~ ~ ·~· '
;': ;.J: .
,:._:.~ :'~:~~· .(;. ~_.
i ~: .... : ..
;~~;:~#;l~;~~ ..
. '
, ;
. ':·
. ·~
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27,2006
•• '
~ R3 District
·•
3.10 R3 District Development Standards
/ RO.W. •As Defined"" Thoroughfare Plan
Minimum Lot Area:
• 7,200 square feet/dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width:
•60 feet
Maximum Lot Depth:
• 3 times the Lot Width
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 30 feet on a Public Street with
vehicular access from said Public
Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Primary Structuie
Gable Roof Strudures • Flat Roof Struelures
[from hV-goble root) (from higl1Ht
llllCllon of llol root)
·Maximum Structure Height:
• 40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
I :.r RO.W. •Al Delned en Thoroughfore Piao
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 30 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
· • 25 feet when adjacent to a Collector
· or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 6 feet per side for the Primary
Structure ·
• 3 feet per side for Accessory Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 20 feet for the Primary Structure
• 3 feet for Acces~ory Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
45% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1, 100 square feet for one story
Primary Structures; or
• 800 square feet for the first floor of the
Primary Structure, provided that the
total Finished Floor Area is 1, 100
square feet or more
. r. :.:...1··
:. :
••• :-;!
3-11
R4 District
3.11 R4 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District lnte-1t
The R4 (Urtian Resi.d~pti~!) Oi~tfict
. Is i~ten.d~C:t ~-o t>e used ~S:f;?.llo\YS:
. . ~. ·~ . \~ . . ' · ..
. Type apd lntei)~f!Y. : . . . . .
• singte:~@m1lY::Cf~ta¢1!e9 :hprn~s
• snia11 tq tM~llil'Q :~~~er t.\oiJie~ ·
·very _s"1~1\ ·tg·'§IJ\af!:~}~~Jcjf~ .
App(i~~ti9~~f Q~~~(_.:. · ·.
• e2<l s. tfr'i a· ...1 '0· · •· ·.''.-.'·.';·e ·-r,i t'.o• ,n , yL ". . ·
• srliair~~~ tj)~•c\ .. :"'·":':·, ,.
:. ~~~ ~<.~g;'.._;~,,~}~ . :-~:~1~'~.::~.)J~e·;:.
~pr~t . .. · Rt~: . ·
!'old1 .. .J ·K"<?.~c?mo .
•pto.r.n~,, _ . ~Q_ . . , .• ]r~~rn(!nt
in &iitcett with ·an 1.nta·n ·l:invlron.tnent
. AP.R19~~~t,'h.ijJ~~~~i_o·i~·tr.I~~-· . -: .
! RFk~~:.'~.R3;·:R5~ M1 ,.f'..4~. MPilS;. ,,
. NC be DC and LI .. _..: ' . ,:_,,' . .. J'.;"1'
' P.t;i~hth~-~~~;~!~)j -.,_.~::'.\ ~. ~:~l~i:·~
• h ')\'iia 'o 'e' ttils:--cliSttict-Jor" : · "'s!h · ~·:. ~ . cie~~19ilJe.n~ ·'3~~·~(e.ftil1~~~r.11~w.-~-. :res-1~1,,J, e",n ·t ·1'·a ... 1 J": -"'. .~..v e' J 1J.,'1 ·p_·m-'.".,'1(;1.'t.Y'" "1~lt.:.1' a"1" ..".°.~' t l"i?..l,l,",'. ;' .. .
)~i~~r$~' ,•. , ,;.,, :&•·;1,,,• . ,t,~i
.:,:~~\ ..... JJf.9Uf~t~ ;~il]QI~~. . a_rn,1 , . )9~!1:~~;· ·:~~·; '''·.'q~·r
· B~~r~,~f-Z~i:li~g.Ap~ill~ · ,:' ·• · ' , ·
• allc:>Yi a ·special ~xt:epti6o use brily "'
when it clearly.is a.benefit to. the _ · ·
: ~ic:lential · com.ponent of the ·c:1eve!6p,-
ment : · · ·· ·
:·u_tilize the surrounding property
design features to de~ermine c0mmitme11ts
and approv~ls .... _:,. .
h. ', ·:;1 ; · · , · · .. ~ ;: .--~:: t!' -,i.rf.l.~Y J, ,-:.,~
;:: .: ·:~ .~ • :• I ;/''.,.7 . ·.
;•,
3-12
'·.
. A: .;f: -.'i.~
. ; . ~-~ .. ~ .;~~.:- . ·,,:·
... ··: :-:.
. . ·:·.• ····' • .. -.
. ~·
j . ... ., ~··
~ ·...
I • •,'
' ·
..
''
":'J
( • ..
~~. , . -:· .. : ..
I,.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
.c: ...
••
.
'
".
R4 District
3.12 R4 District Development Standards
Building
Lile
R.O.W •M o.IOd ml~ Aon
Minimum Lot Area:
• 6,000 square feeVdwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width:
•35 feet
Maximum Lot Depth:
• 3 times the Lot Width
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 25 feet on a Public Street with
vehicular access from said Public
Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Accessory Structure Primary Sln.Jctura
Maximum Structure Height:
•40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W •M Oellned ml~ Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 25 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 25 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 5 feet per side for the Primary
Structure
• 3 feet per side for Accessory Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback: ·
• 15 feet for the Primary Structure
• 3 feet for Accessory Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Sq48re footage of all Primary and .
. A<:.a3ssory Structures cannot exceed
70% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 960 square feet for one story Primary
Structures; or
• 700 square feet for the first floor of the
Primary structure, provided that the
total Finished Floor Area is 960
square feet or more
3-13
R5 District
3.13 RS District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District fotent
T~e R5 C~fb.~{lR~~i~~n~,ii.I) pistrict
Is antendedJ<>"f.>e ~~ed ~s follows:
1.··
Type and ln~ns!ty ·. " ·,~; ·
• sirigle-tamily di;ltat;:h~:d 1),qilies :
, limited dupl~~- ~·~-~ ,~p!~X'>~<;>mes
• sma!I to m,~~llfm.~~~~<Etii:>m~s
• ver'} small t9 :siT\a.ll .!jf,z,~Q Jots
--~·~·:· ,; -~:·~- --~·:· .l.~:\!~ :. ..
Apnll~~tioil;Of:m~sVti:.r;'' . ,,~~. ·
• exi~tin9 :dell~lb~!\(~N,~ ,: '. ,
•smal.l :a•. rea ,~a1,1.~~< .·· ~ ;:;: :.· ·, ~ .. ~;.. .. :.k:: ... "} {"~ -~ ~:~1-'l
. Developrn~ot·_ .. ,,, .,
~ prote~; ~rri~ ,,,... ·,,o!e .tt\e · ..
"old ..reside Jr.t~>KQ.lsomo
•prdrnote~iffi. ~ .. d~P.?ct;dey~l~Prn-~nt
in concert witn al'! urban envif,Orinient
~ppr~p,rlate A<f ~~en~ Dl~tnt,!S ,
;p~ .. R11,;~' ~$~'~·-~~.''.~;~1:M~,J~.
NG, ~:9;: ~:~.~.LI a~ :~ \:'\'·.· .. ,'· _' ....
. • P,1annlng :¢9rriml~lc;>rr · · ! < ... ;-, •• :
• shoul~ ;~J.tseAnis,tdl.s..ffi,ct ·
-~~: ':~ fu:':-.~~~~L I - ·: .';_1 ~·
•-: re-~· t"t'iSa.t ::<>~~tu:.:..:...• s.m.. a.. ·•·~ .-•
·: 11•91'"&'.: /'a~ rw;«rt ~ . , .: , t~
. . >"! ':'. ~· .. ,,.,~~1i''~' ;• •.- · :;·•,.1,} r .>'' L ,!:·: ~ .
.. B,~~r~ :~f~O.Jiio9~.P~~·~;;:J'. \ · -< ~1:' ~ : .. ~~~
now, a ·J?pe~ar~~eep_t19t)).istf\only 1 ....
W,tieti1tj:;!¢~rty'is :a ~nefit)tf1h.~ . '·
, res!d~ri.tiaf ·c;Qrn.ponent of the develoP-
'ment . . .
~\rtiiize. the s1.irrOun~ing pr<>i$ei'tY '.:i-,
desigh feati.Jres fo determine 'eoirirnitments
ar~ approvals
~ ... . . . :~
3-14
...
:.~
~\;.::;::::.:r. ffi:,;·~ ~ , ~~,. · ·-- ~~',,..f b.
~·1' ~:~·' "'~:· • . .. .~.),
f : •
~:.I;-; 10::
7: ··:· -'\.
~· . ··~ ".';' :.~ .
·:=···
.; •: .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375. 6426 and 6435. June
27. 2006
·•
R5 District
3.14 R5 District Development Standards
R.O.W •lw Doftnod.., Thoruughfar9 Pion
Minimum Lot Area:
•4,000 square feet/dwelling unit
Minimum Lot Width:
•30 feet
Maximum Lot Depth:
• 3 times the Lot Width
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 25 feet on a Public Street with
vehicular access from said Public
Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Alx:es5'Xy Structure Primary S1rudure
Fief Roof SlrudurH
(from higl...i
-offlllr<>OI)
Maximum Structure Height:
•45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Min.
Side
Yard
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 25 feet when adjacent to an Merial
• 15 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 3 feet per side for the Primary
Structure
• 3 feet per side for Accessory Struc;..
tu res
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 10 feet for the Primary Structure
• 3 feet for Accessory Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
PIWnary
Slructure
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
75% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 860 square feet for one story Primary
Structures; or
•600 square feet for the first floor of the
Primary Structure, provided that the
total Finished Floor Area is 860
square feet or more
Minimum Floor Area Per Unit:
•850 square feet average per dwelling
unit in a multiple-unit Primary
Structure
3-15
M1 District
3.15 M1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent .
The M1.(LowDensify Multjfamily
Residential) District is Intended to
be used as foUows:
Type and lnten$1ty .
·small-scale multifamily residential
(Le. duplex, tnpiex, ai')d quadplex)
•limited mixes of residential ·uses •one primary structure per lot.
• low density , • ·
Application c:>! p_ISt;ict · .
·new and existin{f development·
•small area zo,niriQ ·
' -" s - . .
DevelopmentStandards ;
• recogniZe that multifamily development
requires more stringent
development standards to protect the
quality of life of tenants
Appropriate.AdjacerjtDlsir!ct$ · : -
·AG, PR; R1', R2, R3,-R.4, R,5~ M2, ¥P,
IS, NC, OC, DC, C1, C2 and LI .
Planning corii~l~sion · .
•should use this district for- ¢;xisting
developments and carefully. for new
~ r~sid~nti_al oe,vetoprilent within the
City of Kok9trio ..'. . · . . :
Board of Z911ing Appeals !"•f ·" ·• ·
·allow a s~cia! exc,eptioh use only .
when it cl_early is a tomp~IJlent to the
residential c<imponent cif the develo~
ment. · ·
3-16
..- .
~/ -. ' '
'•; -.. .,
'
:"- . ~
. (• '. '"~~~:
. '
Resldentfal · · · ,
1
• clwelli g, multifamily (4-units or less)
•fair housing fa-cility (small)
Acoess.ory Use
• child day-care home
home' occupation (type 1)
.·~·
• I ~·
.... .
· .. -
,.,... . ,.
'\}~&~·~~;~~' ,.
........
·"'
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27,2006
•
M1 District
3.16 M1 District Development Standards
R.O.W • M Doflnocl en Tllolaughfont Pion
Minimum Lot Area:
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•70 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup ·
Af:ressory Structure
Gable Roof Slrudures
(from hlglat .... IOOI)
Flat Roof Structur9s
(tom Ni;IOol
-oltlotlOOI)
Maximum Structure Height:
•45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W •M Oolnod cn ~Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• Primary Structure - 1 O feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Accessory Structures - 5 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 15 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
Article Thr~:·Zontng Districts. as amended
by Ordinances No. 63 75, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
R.O. W • H Dolnod cn ThoRllq,fare Pim>
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
65% of the Lot Area
Maximum Density:
• 8 units per acre
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1, 100 square feet per Primary
Structure for single family or multifamily
uses
Minimum Floor Area Per Unit:
• 800 square feet average per dwelling
unit in a multiple-unit Primary
Structure
3-17
M2 District
3.17 M2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District ~tent
The M2 (Multifamily Resi~erit!a.1)
District is intendetl to be use_d as
follows:
,,
Type and Intensity . " ·.
·medium · to large syale multifamily .
residential (i.e. apartment.complexes)
•limited mixes of residential 'us'es .
·multiple prim;:iry stri!~~i~ '.~~ lot
• mediulT) to high deO:SitY
' . . · .. :: . .;· .
Applic?tiQ~;9f_?J~fr,l'"~l] ; ·. ~··
·new and e,~Jl>UQ9-"~~-~lprifl!~!lt .
·small _ ar~a zori1n9 · 9f~ot'j::Qi:!lo9
- . ~ . ·. .
Oev~iopiner,it S~~-~artls .
•recognize that multifamily development
re.quires more. stringel')t
development stanciards to· prot~ct .the
quality o.f life of tenants ~ . . .
·A · ro ria·teAijace toi§ffi~ts • .. •A~P Ftff.'.R. eY.R_ j~AA :~511i•'j:::~p,1s. NC: o~: ~. c-1; c2:,_l~:~~~fti' . ·
Plan.nin~ C~rri_m,j~_$iQhr :'_·,:_.,._: .' •.
·should. use 'this distncnor.·~~1s{ing
dev~iop,nents al}~ 99r~fJJl!~J§j:j:i~,,w
resjderitlal :pevelopmer:it. ,Wiff11n-Jfle
·City of Kokgmo · ' « '
. (·.
Board of,"?.onipg AP,p9;tl$ , .
•allow ? ~~9i~J .-~~~p!lO!), HS,\!,pnly '· ,. •
when 1t Glr¢arly 1s -~ C9CTJPlelJ!e,nft<> Jti~
residential' 't;Omponent ·of t~~ Cl~if~lqp,.
me~ · ·
3-18
• ''f
: '·''·· .+·
·.·.
.. . '
City of Kokomo. Zonirig Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 63 75, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
,
3 .18 : M2 District Development Standards
o ' Minimum Front Yard Setback:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~== .. 25 feet whefl aejaeeflt te aft :Aiftexial 10 feet for ~
Primary Structures
M2 District • 2§ feet '•JACH aeljaeeRt te a Celleeter SF Leeal
StFeet 2 '.> feet for Accessory Structures
3.18 M2 District Development Standards
Multi-family Minimum Lot Area: .
• 25,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
• 1 00 feet ,,,
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
• Req_IU!res municipal water and sewer
hoolkup
Act;;essoty Stnn:ture
Max.imum Structure Height:
• 65 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W • N. Oeftned on~ Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Access~ry Structures - 5 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• Primary Structure - 25 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
Minimum Primary Bulldfngs
Separation
• 1.5 times the required side yard
setback
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
R.O.W •N. Oeftnedcin~ Pion
Maximum Lot Coverage:
• Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
70% of the Lot Area
Maximum Density:
• 24 units per acre
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1,300 square feet per Primary
Structure for single family or m\Jltifamily
uses
Minimum Floor Area Per Unit:
• 800 square feet average per dwelling
unit in a multiple-unit Primary
Structure
3-19
MP District
3.19 MP District Intent. 'Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
Districtlntenf ·
The MP (Manufactured Home Park)
District is intended to be U$ed as
folloW5:
Type and Intensity .
•lease-lot housing {typically mobile or
manufactured homes) ·
• multiple primary structures ·j)er lot
> •
Appll~tlon ofpjsti;ct . .
•new and ~~ng developmient
• smafl are~ ·or ~ot ioning
(', ,··
Development Standards ·
• r€C,ogtrize that lease lot deveJopment
requites more stringent deV¢!opment
standards to protect the quality of life
· of lease holders ··
·shall be i.n ~ccordance witb JC 1~Hr,.
27-1 et,seq .• Rule 410, !AC 6.::6 en!:! :
their s.μpgequent am,endmen~s
Ap~~ciprtate Ad~Cfjht 01s~~IS · · ·
•AG, PR, R3, R4, R5;M1,M.~..;t~, NC;
C1, C2 and LI . . '
Pl~nning Comnitss·tQn . . .,, .. '. ·
• should use this district fordsting .
dev.~l9Pr;nel'\.ts ~od .~r~w.Uy,:fyr new .t ·
re~1(f~nti.al ,d.evelopment w•~!n the
City pf Kokomo ·
Board ~izo~l~g.Appeatf :-.
•allow ~- special ex«eption -~ only
when it c;:learly Is a benefit te.~e
residential component of the development
·· ·
. .i· . :. 1'~:·
;~; ·''
,-;.,
1.;:
·.· ,. '.
,.
il·~.~:~>~
·~
3-20
~.~! .
.·~:1~,~
.;' .... ~~:· ·
.... ;-:.·_ . (' .
1·
'.
·\:·" ·.(;>~~; :'"'.:-:.! ~- .. ~<
· :... :·;:~~~:·;· .
. ,; ·.~::::
•'' ,::I•.,;
.,
·"
',:·,~·
~.
,.
'•
,,
" .~ ...
·:r --
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375. 6426 and 6435, June
27,2006
-·
MP District
3.20 MP District Development Standards
j.----1.ot Frontage ---1 R.O.W.
Minimum Lot Area:
• 3 acres (130,680 square feet)
Minimum Lot Width:
• 250 feet "'
Minimum Dwelling Site Size:
• 3,000 square feet
Minimum Dwelling Site Width:
•30 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage:
l
• 70 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
RO.W.•"- ~m~l'lan
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 40 feet from any street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 20 feet for the Primary and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 20 feet for the Prima.ry and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Dwelling Site Front Yard
Setback:
• 10 feet from edge of pavement of
Interior roads
Minimum Dwelling Site Side Yard
Setback:
• 5 feet for the Primary Structures
• 2 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W. '
Minimum Dwelling Site Rear Yard
Setback: ·
• 5 feet for the Primary Structures
•3 feet for Acc.essory Structures.
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all Primary and
Accessory Structures cannot exceed
65% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area per Unit
• 700 square feet per Primary Structure
on a Dwelling Site
. . · · ,. A~dition:l!,Devel~ptJientS,tantlafds thatApp~: .
Accessory Structure
Gable Roof Slrvdures
(from hlghesl gol>le roof)
Primary Structure
Flat Roof Struclunls
(flomi.vr-1
·-Dlllotrool)
Maximum Structure Height:
• 35 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
3-2 1
NC District
3.21 NC District Intent, Pennitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The NC (Nelghborh()()~~pmmerclal)
District is lntended·to be used as
.follows: ·
Type and lnte~slty
·small stale commercial uses that
provide products an~ ~Niees
primarily to t~e adjacen~ neighborhoo.(
ls _:_.~ .
• very tow impact in a ~hbol'hoocl
area ··
AppUcatilm of District
·new and· existing de)'elopment
• buffer district or trar1sitici'nal district
•very limlt~ small areas
• spot .zoning .. · ·
Development &~ndar~s . · .
• recognize the need for 'guality time,
place and manner . dev~IOP.{l1ent
stano~rds to mlnin'!.iz~ i!Jlpacts on . .
surrounding propertiGs ;:ind to assure
residentii:IH!~le anp_Ch ai'~cter .' ·
Appr6pr:t~te A$cen,( Pl.$trl¢ts : · , - .
•PR, R1.~. R3, R4, R5,:M1~· M2. MP,
IS, OC, DC, and C1. ·
Ptann:!n9' Com~i~s!o~ · '. · . · __
• rezone property tor NC onty after
determining that the proposed use is
appropriate for the surroi..mding area
~ receive' written land . use and develop-,
ment standard commitments prior to ·
rezoning .
- -) Board of Zoning ApPElals
•allow a special exception use only
when it .clearly is ·a pene,fit t.o the .·
~urrounciing a_re~s ancfwherf traffic
generation will npt redu'i;:e qualify. of .
life for. neaif)y residential arei:ls . . . '
. ~ :·:·( :\ . '. : ,,,; -~ l:~i~'.~~~
,, ' ...... .
; •.J:•
3-22
~· · t z~: .
·.s.~ ~s~"·· ... \\. .. .:-.
~ ·~· ·.l . .
{-·
·L." ·· ~f<::· .. ~
' ~;: ..· ···~:~· ·: .~·~.
.... ;~
}f 'ii
.. . ,
. Y.,.
·'
.·'.
. ·.
·.· .. :{.' :
, .. _!l.} : • ~ • ~ ·, •• -
.'.. . ~· .
·:.<;:.· ... . ·~ .
_ .., .
~ ~ .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375; 6426 and 6435, June
27,2006
3.22: NC District Development Standards
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ o Minimum Front Yard Setback: ----------------
• 2§ feet '•IACft ae:}aeeftt te aft AFterial 10 feet for
NC District Pr1'nary Structures .
• 25 feet ·.1A:eft aEijaeeat te a Gelleet:l8F el!? J:.eeal
3.22 NC District Development Standards StPeet 20 feet for Accessor¥ Structures
R.O.W. •Al Doftned on 'lllofouglilate Pion
Minimum Lot Area:
•6,000 square feet
Maximum Lot Area:
• 30,000 sqiaare feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•55 feet •
Minimum Lot Frontage:
•45 feet on a Public street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
At::cessfK'/ Structure
Primary SlrUcture
Flat Roor Stnic:turea Gable Roof Slruc:tures
(tom hlglal-ol llol rvof) (from hlglwll ~ ftlOf)
Maximum Structure Height:
•40 feet for the Primary structure
• 15 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
RO,W. •Al Dcfinod on ThoroUl!hfare Pl•n
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•Primary structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Accessory Structures - 3 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• Primary structure - 20 feet
• Accessory Structure - 3 feet
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
R.O.W.
R.O.W. •As Defined on Thoft>ugldwo Aon
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 65% of the Lot
Area
Minimum Main Floor Area: ·
• 300 square feet for Primary structures
Maximum Main Floor Area:
•6,000 square feet for Primary and ·
Accessory structures combined
3-23
,
IS District
3.23 JS District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The IS (Institutional Use) District is
intended to be used as follows:
Type and Intensity
•institutionally owned lands, including
state, county, and town facilities
•public facilities
•limited quasi-public uses
• multiple primary structure per lot
Application of District
•existing development
·new development upon demand (no
"greenfield" zoning)
•buffer district or transitional district
•spot zoning
• upon petition
Development Standards
•recognize the need for quality time,
place and manner development
standards to improve public accessibility
and use of the property while
minimizing Impacts on surrounding
properties
Appropriate Adjaceht Districts
•AG. PR, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5, M1, M2,
MP, NC, OC, DC, C1, C2, LI, Ml, and HI
Planning Commission
•rezone property for IS only after
commitments have been made to
develop an institutional use, and after
determining that the proposed use is
very appropriate for the area
Board of Zoning Appeals
• allow a special exception use only
when it clearty is a benefit to the
surrounding areas and when traffic
generation will not reduce quality of
life for nearby residential areas
3-24
Permitted Uses
Public Facilities
• church, temple or mosque
• community center
·library
• school (P-12)
Institutional
• bus station
• government office
• goveinrnent operations (non-office)
•hospit~I ·
•museum
•police, :fire or rescue station
·post office
• public· parking lot
·- -·---------- ----
Special Exception Uses
Residential
• child care institution
• nursing home
·facility for developmentally disabled
• facility for mentally ill
•fair housing facility Qarge) '
Institutional
•cemetery
• child care institution/orphanage
•drug/alcohol rehabilitation clinic
• facility for developmentally disabled
•facility for mentally ill
•jail
•juvenile detention center
• light rail statiOn
•prison (minimum security)
• prison (maximum security)
• recyding collection point
•trade or business school
• university or college
Communication/Utility
•above ground utility facility
•wireless telecommunication facility
General
•offsit~ parking lot for a chu.r:ch. teirtple,
mosque or similar place of worship
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as. amended
by Ordinances No. 6375-, 6426 and 6435. lune
/"
,
IS District
3 . 24 : IS Dist.Iict Development Standards
o Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 35 feet w:heR ae;;aeeRt te aR AFte:dal 10 feet for
Primary Structures
• 25 feet: waeR aa;;aeeRt te .a SelleeteF el!' J,,eeal
3.24 IS District Development Standards StFeet 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Loi_,,
Area
to---Loi Wlllh
R.O.W.•h D-d-TlltlOUFf•t• Plan
Minimum LotArea:
• 6,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•60 fpet
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 40 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Prll'llary S!n•:ture
Flat Root S:-IUCllres C>Able Root Structures
rf:'om •ighKI """"°" of 111: met, itwn ,,..,\t go:ilc: rQ3f1
Maximum ·structure Height:
• 55 feet for the Primary Structure
• 25 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W. R.O.W.
I
11.0.w •• ,,._,,,.,..,.._.,.....,.
11.0.W.• Iv-·· 'IM•• ....... PllA
- Minimum Front Yard Setback: Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 70% of the lot
Area
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• Primary Structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 900 ,square feet for Primary Structures
• Accessory Structures - 5 feet per side
Minimum RearYard Setback:
• Primary Structure - 20 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
Additional Development Standards that Apply
Landscaping (LA) Loading (LD)
• LA-01 ............ ...;.. Page 6-18 • L0-01 .................. Page &42
Lot (LO)
• L0-01 .................... Page 6-3
Setback (SB) • LA-05 .................. Page 6-21 Entrance/Driveway (ED)
• SB-01 .................... P&rJe 6-4 • LA-07 .................. Page 6-23 • ED-01 •..•...•.•.•.•.••• Page &43
• LA-08 .................. P&rJe 6-25 Vision Clearance (VC)
Environmental (EN) • VC-01 ................. Page 6-45
• EN-01 ................. Page 6-26 Telecommunications
1 Performance (PF), Facility (TC)
• PF-01 .................. Page 6-27 • TC-01 ................. Page &46
Lighting (LT) Special Exception (SE)
• L T-01 .................. Page 6-28 • SE-01 .................. Page 6-53
Sign (SI) Miscellaneous (MC)
• Sl-01 ................... Page 6-29 • MC-01 ................. Page~
• Sl-03 ................... Page 6-30 • MC-02 ................. Page 6-54
. • Sl-07 ................... Page 6-32 • MC--03 ................. Page 6-
Parking (PK) • MC-04 ................. Page 55
• PK-01 ....•..•••..•..... Page 6-37 I
• PK-06 .................. Page 6-38
• PK-07 .................. Page 6-40
Sewer and Water (SW}
• SW-01 ................... Page 6-5
Density and Intensity (DI)
• Dl-01 ..................... Page fKi
Floor Area (FA)
• FA-01 .................... Page 6-7
Height (HT)
• HT-01 .................... Page 6-8
Accessory Structure (AS)
• AS-01 .................... Page 6-9
• AS-06 .................. ~6-11
Fence and Wall (FW)
• FW-02 ................. Page 6-12
Temporary Uses (TU)
• TU-01 ................. Page 6-13
• TU-03 ................. Page6-14
.•
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 63 75, 6426 and 6435,
hin .. ?7 ?nnn
--··---- 3-25
QC District
3.25 OC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Iritent
The oc (Office Commereial)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Type ~nd ln~~Jty ·
•iow ~d office uses
• liti'lited :Compleme~tary business
uses
·stand alone offire buildings
• sinai1 cnr.ii~ ot office J)unaings
• multiple prifllary swctut~ per lot
Application of Ois~rict .. .
• new and existing development
• buffer <;listrict or tralisitiOnal district
• small area. zoning
·spot toning
Development Standards · '
• recogrii,ze th~ need for qwality μme,
place ailtl nianner development .
. sfar.ijards 1b rhinimiie' imi:>actS· ori
suri"9μriding properties ancffo a5sure
residential~scale and characte~ ». · , :
ApptSptlate Adjacent Dl~trltb · :
•PR R~. R3, R4, Rs; M1; M2, IS, NC,
bC, C1, C2, and LI
Planning Commlsslo.n . .
~ rezone property tor oc only after
determining that the proposed use is
app.ropriate for the surrounding ·area ..
Board ·of Zoning Appeals
•allow a 5pecial exception use only
when it clearly is a benefit to the
surrounding areas and \Yhen traffic
generation will not reduce quality Qf
life for nearby residential areas . . .
.~ ..
3-26
.!i.
,.;' · 1
:.1:
:·'..~. . ..
-~:·~\~{y;:
;f :~~;~z~;~~i
· · Speci~J Exception Yses
•:
._ ... '· lf ~~
•1 .. : ·· \' ;: :·: ~ .
:_.. "( . f~."'. ..; ·}:'·!~.
~~ .,.,, .... ·
. i;.:·
fi:~:-,-~£;:f~J~k l~~ ~;.~:·
~·· ~-- J,,
.......
. ;":.f •
. :; . • .f.'~ .
~:.·~ ;·
......
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
OC District
3.26: OC District Development Standards
o Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 2§ feet .,,fiea aej aeeat to aR ."Jrterial 10 feet for
Ptimary Structures
3.26 OC District Development Standards
• 2§ feet \JReR aajaeeRt to a Gelleetor or Leeal
Street 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Area s
.0,
;
R.O.W. •Ao Defined on~ flln
Minimum Lot Area:
•7,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•70 feet rt
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Primary SlructU18
Maximum Structure Height:
• 55 feet for the Primary Structure
• 15 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
R.O.W. •ltl DmhM.., ,_.,.... 1'1111
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Accessory Structures - 5 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 20 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
Minimum Primary Buildings
Separation
• 1.5 times the required side yard
setback
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
R.0.W.
R.O. w .• N Defined.,, Thonl<Jghr.,. Plan
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 65% of the Lot
Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1,000 square feet for Primary Structures
3-27
DC District
3.27 DC District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The DC (Downtown Commercial)
District is intended to be used as
follows:
Type and lntenSity
·traditional downtown uses
• mixed uses that promote a strong
pedestrian oriented downtQwn
• limited institutional and servioe
oriented businesses
• disallow residential on first floors
Application of District
·existing downtoWl'I area
•downtown-like buildings scattered
throughout the dty
Oeveiopment Standards
•recognize the need for quality time,
place and manner. development
standards to ~l.lfe that Mure .
development ·and· ·modifications wm
reflect the existing character of the
downtown _
• reduce parking requiremems _due to
limited lot siies ··
Appropriate Adjacent Districts
•PR, R2, R3, R4, R5, M1, MZ 1$, NC,
OC, C1, and C2 . .
Planning Commission
·maintain zoning ordinance language
that promotes a healthy downtown
and encourages two story downtown
struCtures built to the front property
line
Board of Zoning Appeals
•allow S special f.)Xception !JSe only
when it clearly is a benefit to the
downtown· area .
•allow traffic generation ! ·
, ·
3-28
Permitted .Uses .
. ReS1d8rlti&l . .~ ...~ 1.:~·=· : .
• dwelling, singl(il~ffjmlly (μJi~r floors)
·dwelling, multifamily. (llwer. floors)
Public F~~llltl~': ·.
•library · . · " ''~.' ·
Business; Gerieral Bu$iness
~bank machine/ATM " . :.,, ·
• c0py center . . '
• dellcatesseh':P\~·.f>·. ~ · · : '
• dry.:~iefjnin~ s~~:' >. . · · .~,
• farmers rnalket .
• fitne~s cente'r/gym . ; ,: .
:~~m,~: ot~:~ry ~ . . ·
·hotel/motel '' • ' · -· .- : ~i~t~tJh~P,~.~ .. :~'.: :·'":;, ::.
• ph9tograi?,hic :st\jdio.· •~ ' ..
• restaurant . . . ,.~ • ~ . . - ·:t;.J :'
·.. ~" :.
·.!
Special Exception Uses
ResfdentJal
• l:>ed and breakfast facility
Public Fa~llitles
• ch1,1rcn, temple or: mosque
• commUf)lfy C:enter ·" · ·
• public patk .
· Business: General Business
• auto otleritedtacllity-(low intensity)
• bar/tavern -~ ·
• billiard/arcade room . \ .
• dance/aerobics/gYmnastics studio
• danceloigtit ~ub
; kar8te .. studio · : : :_j ·' .
·~lodge bf Pri~te dt.ib
• movie t!Jeater . _ .
• tatoo/p~i:cing ·parlor
C9mmunicatiori/Utillty
• Sbbve Qround utility facility ··· .. ·:; ·
General . . . . .
• o~ite parking 1o1'for f '?h!:!r.ch.. :. ~;:.i;
tempi!;!, mosque .ors1m!lar pl~ .Of. •..
· worship · · ·
· .Ac.:.es~ory u~ ... ::.· . , '.· , -. ·1. ·,'"'
<i. honie · oeoupatiori :(type: ~Lt
• • : • • • ~ • \... • ¥~ _ ..
.. :;·:~~... • • ·.. .-.. : . ?:
. ,t . ~ ·. ...~~- ! ;f}·: .. ,
~ -:.lo":.,,i.-,a;~~· .• - -_?..- _. -~~.~.
~ \ ~ ~~~~{r~t .. -:: ., . ,.,. -ir: ....
::... . . ;-. ~ ~.·
·.":.
. ; .
' -·
. ~ •· ..... : . '
_f .•:;- .: •
• ,'·.
'._·;:.;.•·. __ ·•
... · :·. .' ..
;·_ .. \'
, :;
-:. ,.
.•' ~jf~
·.~
City of Kokomo "zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 63 75, 6426 and 6435, June
27. 2006
DC District
3.28 DC District Development Standards ·
R.O.W. •As Oeflnod on Thort>ughlarw Pion
Minimum Lot Area:
• 2,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
• 25 feet ,.,
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 25 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
• Requires municipal water or sewer
hookup
Ar:t:eurxy Structure
Primary Slruclura
Flat Roof Sbudures Gable Roof Slnlclures
(tan """*'-0( lol lllOI) (lrDnl highul _.... ruol)
Maximum Structure Height:
• 85 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
•O feet for Primary Structures
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Maximum Front Yard Setback:
• 10 feet for Primary Structures
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 0 feet for Primary Structures
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures
Maximum Side Yard Setback:
• 0 feet for Primary Structures
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 0 feet for the Primary Structure
• 5 feet for Accessory Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
. <
Minimum Lot Coverage:
•Square footage of all Primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surfaces combined cannot be less
than 75% of the Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 1,000 square feet for Primary structures
Minimum Floor Area Per Unit:
• 850 square feet average per residential
dwelling unit in a Primary Structure
3-29
C1 District
S.29 C1 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
· The 01 (Small to Medium scale
, General Commercial) District is
' Intended to be used as follows:
~ l)'pe and Intensity
~low to moderate impact u~$
:·wide variety of retail, COfl1mei"clal,
service, eating, and entertainment
establishments ~ .
·stand alone buildings and small strip
centers
· Application of District
~ new and exiSting devetopmeht
' \ Development Standards r recognize the need for quality time,
: place and manner development
l standards to minimize impacts on
1 surrounding Pr0i>Eiities Whiie. ~n·eour'
agin_g eoonomic vi~lity . : ·. · . .. . . ·,
t. Appropi'iat~ AdJacittit t;>t~• . . .
I AG. PR, R2, RS, R4, R5, M1; M2, MP, ·
IS, N.C , OC, DC, and C2 ·. . . ~- .. . . .· :.··· . ~· ·: ..
i Planning coinmis$1on ·..;,' ·' '. ·
l·zone property for C1 only after ..
determining ~at the sit~ . is appropria~
fOf ahy of\he ·wss.ible Uses .
allo~d in this district · ·
'
•Require written acknowledgment of ..
the maximum mairi floor area
requirement .-
! Board of Zoning Appeals
,•allow a $~1 .exQi!ptiol.) use only
wtien it clearly is a benefit to the ·
surrounding areas ·. ·
•b e very sensitive to_th e potential for
light poll~ion, .and pedestJfan -and
ve~Jci.llar safetY. : · . · . : ' ·
:· ~ ..
. ..
. .....
3-30
· .. Permitted Uses
·Business::aene~,i sJsin~~s
•adult day~care . · . · ~
• auto· ork;lnted Ptisin~ss :ttbw intensity)
• bahk madlinelATM .; , ; . ' .
•bar/tavern· .. '.·.' ·.
• barber/J;>.e~ufy ~hop .. ; .
• billiard/areaae room. ~.,., ._;
•bowling ~lie}". . .
•car rental '\· .. ' ··"··· t
• cellular ''pnone/co~m~'hi¢'.ation _shop
• ctiild day~car¢ ·~nter · · · ; .
•coffee shop· ··: ,.,. '.,;·>.-~.::;,-.· .. • a. • •• ~ • • • • 'I' • • - • • c6in iaundni ~-. ~;: :,. '·':~f\1"~"11,,.,\.' .>"
~.tciminertj~I.£~'~,-::· :.:>.~- · ·
•copy i;:enter .. ":·' ' .- .. · ..
··couiitrf club\:: · . · · .. . ._. 'J,.· .
~ d~nce/aerbQi2sfgymha!;t/cs stU<liO · ·:
·dance/night :sl!J)' ... ;,.~~,'l~ •; ... ·
: delicat~s~eh-:}i.:~~~·i:'k·:~ ':,' ~-'.: '..- _ . . .
: 9ry~anrng ,~el'lr'~ ·, , .. , , ,_ .. , '°' ,., .
iitlil~~tl;:_;1~_-_:F_:, ~ 1uneral\nome~f· f0Qt:t~~· 1··l'-'-~· ~ i•V . •
·"~"' ~ • " t'·;\ ~ .... 't~~J, ~t It 'f ~ , ..l• • ·""'"\ ,i·.._ ,....,
. '• .1oof;!',.;' ... ~":~ ~.::~:::,~{t.k~~·:''" -> 2-~lj .. ~
... \..,~~.r -~. . .,.. ...,.,.;::"".· ...
. ;~J itt~
• ~ • •• < r ,· ..
Special Exception Uses
Business: General Business
' ·auto oriented business· (high intensity)
• b~nquet hell · . . ·
• commercial training fiBCtllty or school
• drivmg range, . .-: ·
•hotel/motel - ·
•kennel (commercial)
• miniature golf .
• movie thea.ter ' 1
• olitd(>qt service' facility'
·print stio·p · ·:.
•skating rink . .
• tat_~pfp'!~rp_iJ)g ·p~itor ' '. · '·
~u~Jn~ss! Ritf8n · ·; .. , ·, '.
~ hJQ1,1: _inw_risify/~~if .. · :. .
C()mrmtt.11~t1on1!.J1!11ty •. · :.-. · ·
• a~~ye ground ~lify facility
• wireles~ telec:OnimuOJc;atlon faqllify .
Public Facilities · . . .-
~ ~l.lr~~,-- iemi>l~. o(m<;i~~: !-I.sing ~ti':
~~~!~i buil~i?~ >:·~.. (; ?:-· ... ~~~~ ·
~-p~~e P.a.~~s>l i~(~_'tj)y_tcJti!~Rle,
• ffiOSQUe ·'Of ·j;1ftwiar pl~OO.;i Of WQll!hlp '.
.; ·~- ·,/{-·:?10:~f-:-i,~:·r:.;;... -- ~,;._
:i ,.( '. t~H '., -::':Jj: :f~~--'-.. I
. .
'"·.'· ·
/.
. f ..
;I,.
·.'.
. · .·.• .
'.· .. ... ~ .. '
• : • I • " • : .'~ '; .. ' . ~. .:- ,:. . ~ ...: ~ ... .
!',:,. .. :
•':"'.
~ ~. \ I : ..... .· .· :.
~- ·,
.· ..= .~
... ; ....
ol ............. .
. . ,
-.~ ....
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordln.by Ordinance No. 6426, May 8, 2006
27,2006
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~3 .30 : Cl Di strict Development Standards~~~~~~~~~~
~ o Minimum tront Yard Setback:
C1 District • 25 feet wlieR adj aeeRt to aR Arterial HJ feet tor
P~imary Structures
3.30 C1 District Development Standards • 'u; feet \iAeR adjaeeat t o a Colleetolf or 1.oeal
~ tr e et 20 feet for Accessory Structures
Minimum Lot Area:
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•65 feet '1
Minimum lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
• Requires municipal water or sewer
hookup
ACCllss«y Structure
Flat Roof SIJUdures Gable Roof Slruclures
(lrom hlghoot - of hi IOOI) (lnMn hlglwol lll'blt rucl)
Maximum Structure Height:
•40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 15 feet for Accessory Structures
Minim um Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Accessory Stn.ictures - 5 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 20 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6 375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
RO.W.
RO.W. • As OeAned oo Thoroogl>taro Pion
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square feet of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 65% of the Lot
Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 300 square feet for Primary Structures
· Maximum Main Floor Area:
• 25,000 square feet for Primary and
Accessory Stn.ictures associated with
retail uses
3-31
C2 District
3.31 C2 District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The C2 (Medium to l.arge Scale
General Commercial) District Is
Intended to be used as follows:
Type and Intensity
• modettite to high impact uses
·wide variety of retail, commerci~I.
service, eatifl9. arid entertainment
establishments .
; siand aio,.-h"lilidings. ·.· Stiip centers and mailS · · ·
Appl!cation of District
·new Md. ~ting development
· DeveJopmentStandards
• recoQnize the need to~ quality time,
plat$ a.nd manner .dev~lopment
standards to minimlte impacts on
surroun9ing propertjes '.Wflil8. ·~mcou~
aging ~C:Onomk: vitali\Y · ~ · · ·-
• ~s4~~ tti~t ~re.~re tjo; ~~ _ .
affects on ·the natural ehVl~~nt .
App~~pr;aie A.dJa~tintQls~IC~ ....
·AG. PR.M1, ~.MP. 1s.:0C:t>c .. c1,
and LI .
PlannJng comml~too ·. · -
• zooe propertY for .02 only after
de~etmin,ing Wit UlEl: $ite IS appropriate
for any of the p0sslble uses
allowed.m lh is district . "
·be very sensitive to environmental
protection ·
.•.
Board of Zoning Appeal$
• allo.w a, special e~~pt~il use . only
wheh i~ clearfy is a·~nefit kl the ·
.surrounding areas · · · · ._ · ~ •
·be ·verY ~ns!W~ Jp'.tij:e t>ot~ba1 fQr. ·.;
light pPlll.lliOI\ :el<~$$:iye p~fking lots,
.9\i~~-lz.e!:f :~igil$, -~~M.b~ti,!1$,'<•~!i'. ·, . ;·
·pedestnan'-and velliculaf safety . ·.. .. .
' .. '. ;· .... _: . . '· . .... ": ;. : :·: ... ~; ·, · ... .
. · ..
: ·::: .
• • ~'I ••
' ·. ' .. . -· .. : :. ~ "', ... :-
,. ~ •' .. ·. ! ..... .... . .. . .. .· .
. ~ . :
• • • • f ~-:
3-32
.., " ... ,. . ... ··\,·
; .~_. -.· :"' : :.: .· . . . . .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordin by Ordinance No. 6426, May 8, 2006
27, 2006
3.32: C2 District Development Standards
o Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 30 feet WAER aajaeeat te aR J'.rterial 10 feet for
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Primary Structures
C2 District •
3.32 C2 District Development Standards
2§ feet '•<AeR aeljaeeRt te a Celleeter er i.eeal
Street 20 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W. =IV. Defined er. Thcn:lu!!li141" Pl8r.
Minimum Lot Area:
• 20,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
• 100 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 80 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water or sewer
hookup
Primary Structure
Maximum Structure Height:
• 45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 20 feet for Accessory Structures
. R;O.W,
R.O.Wo·•M Dolllldcrl ~ 1'11111
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 10 feet per side
plus 5 feet for each story after the
second story
• Accessory Structures - 5 feet per side
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
•Primary Structure - 20 feet
• Accessory Structure - 5 feet
R.O;W.•M~-~Maximum
Lot Coverage:
·square feet of all primary and
accessory structures, and Impervious
surfaces cannot exceed 70% of the
Lot Area
Minimum Main Floor Area:
• 600 square feet for Primary Structures
· J\_dditional DeveJopmep.t Standards tlt~t.Apply l' • '
LOt (LO) : :. :·· . . . Landscaping {LA) . . . . ;; Lo~<lirig (LP) . . .
• LD-01 ................ ; .. Page6-3 .• LA-0.1 ·"·i:"l..::~. Page 6-18 • ~0-01 .. ; ............ ~ Pag~ 642
'.Setback (SB) . ' · . . • LA-05 ..;....:.;;;_:.,. Page 6-21 . • E'lllJ'll1wetDrive~ (E1l) •
• SB--01 ,; .... ,.,~.;...,,_ P-age 6-4 · • LA.OT ... .-:...: • ..: ?age 6-23 - , • i:;p.-01 ....... ~.-..... P~g~ 6-43
S~er ilild W•ter (SW) . · • LA-08 ...... ~ .• -.... Pa9e t>.25 Vision Clearance :(VC) "· : <
~ SW-0~ ......... .:.: .. ~. P~ge 6-5 .. Environmental (E~ • VC-01 -, . .:,,;.-, .. : .... ~li.Qe 6-4~
· Oen~1ty and lntensit}' (~>I) · . • EN-01 .... ::: .••. ~ .... Ra9e &-26 · .. Tel~£QIJlhJUll1cations ·
• Dl-01 _ .. 4,...--.. ~-· Page 6-6 .Pertonnante (Pf) ., . Fa,t;lllty'(f<;) ' ' . ~·:,: · - ~
f!Oot A"9fi! "{FA) . . . . . . • PF-01 .. .,.'.: .......... Page. 6-27 . ; TC-0._1.,.,: ............. Page ~46 .• · .
• Fl\-01 ......... _ ........ P~IH. :< L1ghti119 (L1) ·. . . < Oorri.dOr E,~ncemeilt· (9E)
He.i~t {Hl) . . . ·: -. ·. ·-~ L'.-01., .............. :. "•·6+28 .. • LO-Ot .... ,,.;,.:''"•: Poii9e649 '
• HT L .... :·······"•· P~~ 64! -,.. . Sign(~ : , . : , - ~:!%~~~~ · ·
A~-essol)' Struc;ture (AS) • Sl-01 ... ,,.,,.,;,-· .. ; .P4'ft~~ 5)(" ·. . p : 6 51 ·
.• AS-.0 1 ..·. , ·. '-··. ·, · ·· · Page 5.9 , Sl-03 . · · · QM.i."" .. ,. : ' . cu1 ....... ...,....... a9e. • · ~ .... .,... . · •. ~.,.,,..,.,..,:-·-. .--~ ~ · • SX-o2 ,. · Pa1• 6-61
• AS-06 ................... PageS-11· ·.. • Sl-08 •.••••• ,..., . .,,., .. Pao11~ . . , .... , .. "..'"··:· ~e . . .
, ·· Fence al)d WaJI (fW) · · · Parking (PK) . , -~ · .• Special Exception (Sf;) , .
• fW-02 ................ PageS..12 ., PK-01 ' ............ Page6-3] · SE-01 .. , ............ :. PageS..53
T~rary U5e$ (TU) · • PK-06 ::::: ............ Page6-38 . ' Miscellane;>us !MC) .
• TU-01 .... -., ........ Page 6-13 • PK-07:~,;;,;•.;;.,;.,:';;, Page 6-40 : MC-01 · ; ............... P11ge 6-54 '
•TU-03 ..... .,.;: ........ Pa17eS.14 MC.02 .............. ,.. Page6..54 .•
· · · · · · · · · ' MC-03 ........ ~ ....... Page6-54 ·
·· · ~ .. • MC-t>4 ·~·:-· .. Y.t···~~. P~Jl~ S.-5.? . .
Artlcfe thrcih: t6ni~g t>istrfds. as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 2 7. 2006
3-33
LI District
3.33 LI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The l-1 (Low IQtenS-1ty lndusti:lal/
B\Jsiness Park) Di$trict i~flnte'nded
.to be used as· follows: -
"I ~', ' '
Type and 1ri~nsity . -'_
•low impact ind_usfri~I use$ :_
• business pafk, '1iistriblltion _opera-
tibns, (lbnst~tio_ri .trade~. and '
indui;trial facilities · · '
• stano_ alone. builcJings or IT)ulUple
· prlm~ry sW.~tut~s . . , . ·
~ .. ' ... -, . ' ' .
APPlicalion of DistfiCt ..
·hew qf'id ~exlstihJJ development·
. P.evel~p~~n~·s~ards .. :. ::. __ :
• r~cogmze the ·need ·for quality ume,
place arii'.l·tranDer ~evel,6priient · - *
.stan(jards t<;>. iTilnlr:Jl~e Jtnp;:ic'~ :ori
"sufro4n9if19 propertl:e.s While _!ill'itour~
agiri'g ·~rnio yttal'ity -· .. ,
·do -.npff~llire ~epa~tion .~r· bilff ering
from μses,wtth ·similar intensity
• requir-e ext~m1ive buffers Whe.n
adjac;e'nt to l~sser"jnl~l'!~e: lanj:l. uses
• ass~re._ t!l~t 'tj\enf ar~ '-fip;ni9.ative, _ ·
·affects on tne·natural ·i:invlrohment
, ~p~opttat-~·/..djac~nt·b1~trj~~, .
~.AG, PR~ M.2 ; lS, C2, M!~ ari<;ltlf . . :·, .
· PlanntrigCoinmi_ssl.ori " .
• ione prQp!irtyfor.Uonly after deter,. .
minigg ~that th~ si~ is anptoj)nate-for·
·any Qf,the WSSibJe <\lS9;> 'aJ!oW(iQ in
this'.diS,trict .·,; · ' . , . '." "· ·· , _
• R#qi1fr~~ wo~~!f acknp~ledgn'JeN of
·.. the,(ll~l'l)~ro· t9h~r~;;i·. r~~l~~rnen~
• be• ve,.Y·.$.e'n'sitlye 1!)'.envircmrhental
prc;>tection·. -- · . · : .~ . ·: · · ·
· 8.oard oJ ~ni.r\g Appeals .' · ,: ·
~allow a ·special. exception 'use only
when it cleat1$1 js· a'benefif to th.e 1
surrounding ai"¢as ·: ' . . .
• aS,sure ,~nvironn?en~I· Rrhteetlqn· prior
· to granting a spe.cial exception ·
• be ver'f s~msltiv~· to the, pi>tehtial for
JighJ P()llution; noise ·~!liJtiori, loading
: 1:>a~Jf071li11g)ea9s;; _oy~~iz~ ,s;~g11s,
la,rge ;~c~ vaffie; inQfi\l~Slegres~; . and
:pedestil~n and vehic't,Jlar. safefy · -
. ·:· ' ..
/l -·
•• ,f.';!
1·
" ·_r
3-34 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
•
LI District
3.34 LI District Development Standards
R.O.W. •At Doinocl an Thoroughl111 Pion
Minimum Lot Area:
• 15,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width:
•80 feet ,.,
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 50 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Flat Roel Slluclures Gable Roof Strudures
(tom lllghnl-of Ill_, (flom hlghoal"""" roof)
Maximum Structure Height:
•40 feet for the Primary Structure
• 35 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
R.O.W. • M o.tlr19cl an~ Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 25 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 15 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
•5 feet for Primary and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 5 feet for Primary and Accessory
Structures
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 2 7, 2006
r-- · R.o.w.
,f - ~on~l'llll
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square feet of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 85% of the Lot
Area
Maximum Main Floor Area:
•40,000 square feet for all structures
combined
3-35 ..
Ml District
3.35 Ml District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Mi (Moderate Intensity
lndustrlallllght Manufacturing)
District is Intended to be used as
follows:
Type and Intensity
• low to moderate impact industrial
uses
·business par.ks, distribution operations,
and Industrial parks
•stand alone building or multiple
primary structures
Application of Distrjct .
•new and existing devefopment
Development Standards .
•recognize the need for quality time,
place and manner development.
standi:uds to minimize impacts on .
surrounding properties while enco1.1raging
economic vitality . .
•do nOt require separation 0r bUtfering
from uses With similar intensity
•assure th!'!t there a~ l'lO ~~tive .
affects on the natural enVirOnrtient
• rTiinitnae light, noise, Water; ahd air .
poflution · ·
Appropriate.Adjacent Oistrtcts .
• AG, PR, IS, C2, LI, and HI
Planraing ~ommlsslon
•zone property for Ml only ~er deter:mining
that the site is aPJ>ropriate tor •.
any Of the possible uses allowed in .
this district
•be very se~ithie to environmental .. '
protection
. •; . ; . ' ......... ~ :;:: ~.f..1.
Board of Zoning Appeals .. ;; ·,, .•
• allow a spec:ial exception use only · -
when ft clearly is a benefit to the . : . • ..
surrouiidiny areas . ·;. - . - j'.;, :,
• require .significant bLiffert"9 and . -
separation frotn residential uses, ·
environmental feeture$, and historiC' .'
areas if withiri the Viclriify . : ... - ..
·notify ihe ·pr9perty 9wners within a. ;' . ...
signi~nt region <>f a P¢titiori fQr .
Special Exception, rather ·than jL1st . . ,
nearby pr-operty .oWners . · . · . ·.
•assure environmentiii pto.tection prior
to granting a special exception · ·:·;:.'·
! be very sensitive.to the potential JQT (,·
-light pollution, noise pollution, · ·
loadin_g bays fronting roads, oversized
signs. large truck traffic, ing~SS/ · ,.
. egress, ahd pedestrian and vehicular
safety ·
3-36
. H
Special E~ception Uses
Institutional
.. crematorium. .
• poll~. flre:qf ~C!Je sμrtion
Busln@•t Geiffmll ·jLirikya!il ;-: <::· ·
•re¢$~~ ·
CommunlcatlonlUtllitles
• sewage .tr~~tnient pl~nt
! water treatrnf!ht plant · ·. : ·
• wirele~s 'telecomrriuhications facility
J11d.l.tstria1 ~es: . · .: . · · .
~.~~~1~~.9a._$,:~t9r~'Sl~!t)~ut1on
·food ptQduc.Uprl/pro®~smg •.
~inoiherator ·. · · ~ .:. · . · .
·~~~~~,~~ks ·1notjh~#1r~>.
• offsite parking lc)t. for a churcl}.· temple,
mo~que or,similar·plaGe ·of\vrirs~!P
..
i'" ...... ·.~. · ....
.. .. '. i-1.· ..
'~ ~ · ... ~
~r.~1 ,. :~ ;: ' '! .
::.}. .. <~ .. '" ~~,~~·
..-,... . ·.
' },.". .. ,
... ::
~ .:·
•.
~ ·;i~~.~r~~
·:,'. : :
~
•• _f • : '.~·L · l. ·~:::-.
. :· :- .';. -; .. · ".:·:~:/"'.·:';:_·. ·'.:.
.' i"\~, ~ ~
/ ..
..'. ,,
- . .
' -... ~~-~~ ·~
!":'. ;: .. : ·.
.'.'
:-!' "f
•• ~I ..
1"
::. · '• . ..... ,_!: ... • -.,; ~
,. ~- . ~'. r.
~ .
·'
. 1:~}.~.· ....
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
Ml District
3.36 Ml District Development Standards
R.O.W. • M Dolinod on Thoroughfare Plan
Minimum Lot Area:
• 1 acres (43,560 square feet)
Minimum Lot Width:
• 130 feet I'
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 90 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Flat Roof Struclures Gable Roof Struclurea
(from highnl-al ftll roal) (from hlghelll goblt raal)
Maximum Structure Height:
• 45 feet for the Primary Structure
• 45 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
11.0.W. • M ~.., °Rlaftlug-Plln
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 25 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 15 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 5 feet for the Primary and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 5 feet for the Primary and Accessory
Structures ·
R.O.W.
RO.W. c As Oeflnod on 'lhonxlghlwe flan
·Maximum Lot Coverage:
• Square feet of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 85% of the Lot
Area
Maximum Main Floor Area:
. • 120,000 square feet for structures
combined
· ·: AdditfonalD¢vel<>"mentsW.ndatil ''thatA· 'Jy · ..... , ................ n .•.•..•. ·.·.·• -.·" , .............. ·.-· · · ..... _.~ ,, .. , .. . . · PR ....... , .... .
'·' LoqLO) ,.· .· : . ·, 4~sc•Ji1ri!1 (LAL ,~ · .~.::· ·:~oadl~g{LP,L .· · · .
'·
"· Height fflT) - · · · · · ' ·'· • • bW1"' · P&gltfl:-28 · · ·· • SE-i01 ::. -•.~,;: ' ~ l>~e'fi.:53
:.·[~:Rl".Q1 .·t\;~~·!S~ P~~#: : ;::·: :$~n:;:~6!:~:1}·~· )G':,;·. : h~ .. ·~>M.trceif~~~f:~r':< .
· Aecessory'5tfuctilre (AS)' . · · ·.· • st:01 [<-· ' " • ' P~e&-'29 ' ' ·' !.M~1;., . ., .. ~ .. {"" P.f!;lf!~~
1S~i~~r~~:·:·:~~;.}-~·-'.'~i!~;;:;:~e ·• . • • FW-02 ,;,,,,,;;;~; ... ~age6':12 - • PK-01 , · ,- ' . . Page 6'37 .... MC.:05 ...... ;, ... ;; ... P~eS.:55
;;~-~~~:;i,;, :~i{~:;::~~,"::1;' ... : .· .. · .'l i .
• I • ~ . .'_ . ./,
Article Three: Zoning Districts. as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006 .
3-37
HI District
3.37 HI District Intent, Permitted Uses, and Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The HI (Hi_gh Jntensity Industrial/
Heavy Manufacturing) District Is
intended to be used as follows:
Type and l~lty
•moderate tO high impact industrial
uses
•industrial parks, manufacturing
facilities and utility μsage
·stand alone buildif\gs or multiple
primary structures
Application of OJstrlct
• new and existing (!evelopment
Development Standards .
• reCOgnize the need for quality time,
place and manner development
standards to minimize imPlil~ on
surrounding· pr6perti~s ·While 'en¢our·
aging economic vitality .. :
•do not reciuire separation tir 'buffering·
from . uses with . similar; intensity .
• assure that there are no negative
affects on the natural environment
• minimii:e light, nbise, water, and air
pollution · · ·
Appropriate.AdjacentOlstrlQts
•AG, PR, JS, C2, LI and Ml
Planning Commission
• zone property for H1 only after determining
that the site is appropriate for
any of the i>ossible. uses allowed in
this district
• be very se'nsitive to environmental
protection
Boatd ofZorilrig App~{)ls . , , , ..
• allow a .special extepfion use oiily '
when it c;Jearly is a benefit to the ·
surrounding areas · n ·· ; · ..
• r~g~i~~ siQhi~nt buffering •l)d :
sepa ra.tton . tn:im. residential· (!Ses. ·
envitb'nmen~T features; ancthiStQric ..
are~s .If wjthin 'the.viclnitY . • . . . ' ·. ~
• notify the propefui owners within a .
signiticarit region of a petition tor .;
~pec;:ial Exception, rath~t,thari just - :
ne~rby property owners ;i.1 ,; .· . ·• ..
• assu.re environmer\tal prqt¢cti0:n prior
to grahting a special exception .
•be very sensitive to the pOtenlial fo.r .
, light pollution, . noise pollution, loading
bays ·tronting roads, over5iZ~d signs,
large truck traffic, ingress/egt-e~s. and
pedestrian a~. vehicular safety
. · S eciaU::x~eption Uses
.i·1· ...
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435, June
27, 2006
,.
HI District
HI District Development Standards
Minimum Lot Area:
•2 acres (87,120 square feet)
Minimum Lot Width:
•200 feet ,.,.
Minimum Lot Frontage:
• 90 feet on a Public Street with access
from said Public Street
Sewer and Water:
•Requires municipal water and sewer
hookup
Acalssrxy Struclure
. Primary Slructunl
Flat Roar SbudUres Gable Roof Slruclures
l""" ~ -ollll ~ (from hlghotl gobll IOOI)
Maximum Structure Height:
• 70 feet for the Primary Structure
• 60 feet for Accessory Structures
R.O.W.
R.O.W. • Aa Oellied"" Tharoughlore Pion
Minimum Front Yard Setback:
• 25 feet when adjacent to an Arterial
• 15 feet when adjacent to a Collector
or Local Street
Minimum Side Yard Setback:
• 5 feet for the Primary and Accessory
Structures
Minimum Rear Yard Setback:
• 5 feet for the Primary and Accessory
Structures
,r;;;~~~
Maximum Lot Coverage:
•Square feet of all primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface cannot exceed 85% of the Lot
Area
_, Tef!!p.Orary Uses .('i:IJ.) · . · ·. • f>~· •.. ;1.;;, .... "~ Page~:.38 .. ; ·.-. . ,_
, ·_}~1 ;,_,,:., ..... : .. ". ~ag~ 6-1,~ . • ~1.!-_·7';\'·:·;.:.: fiaj~ s-:40 ._ · ' . -~ . :
Article Three: Zoning Districts, as amended
by Ordinances No. 6375, 6426 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
...
3-39

Article Four
Overlay Districts
August 12, 2003
@> 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
"AH-OL" District
4.1 District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent .
The Airport Hazard Overlay District
(AH-OL) has ~n created to .
promote a."buffer" of appropriate
land uses around the airport iri .
order.to promote the growth and
ongoir'lg operations of the municipal
airport. ··
The Plan Commission and !3ZA
should strive to.minimize land uses
which pose a !}aZard to air traffic, .
inchJ<fi(jg' ~~~~ive lighting, tau .
strl!9lllr'~~. lighfrog ~at resembles ·a. ·
runway, etc. Ful'tt!er,, the Plan, . _: ··
tommr~ioo;aria . a.zA .shou1a
restricrany :ra.nd uSe .that .co~ld _be
ad-.ie'rsely ~ffected. b'y the noise
related tc>-cifr fr:affic. -. · •. . 9
' ... ){; '·
~:· :•. -~ .. ~~:
'- i
. ; '·
•• ~· .!.7- ·~ ;-. .::4~- .. :
~s;\-:.: :-·.·.
. -~· ..
: .'.! . ..~
~. ·'.~ .
:. ·-~r ·\ ... :;· ~?~:\~ .
.. ·t:~ ..
.... • I :..:~·.
• ~ f •
.'•
4-2
· Affect on Uses
Permitted Uses
All uses permitted in. the' base
zoning djst~ct are _permjtted .ln.;ti:i_e,
AH-OL zoning district e)<cept as ~'
listed below.in the "Restricted Land
Uses". section. : ,, · · ·
SP.ecfal E#~pti6.!i • •~r ·
~1f~Mi:~rmitt~.:li'· · ·
to1111fef. tli~trict ·a ·"
are·-.pefrriltfod . as .-spe
.irt lieA ... ! · · ·• ·"jrl"'T''· ('a:s ~k • ~
Development Standards
•When the development standards
outlined on the following page
·(Section 4.~) co11flict with the base
zoning district developm~nt standards
In Article Six, the more restrictive
shall apply_ ·All applicable
development standards in Article Six
that are not ·addressed in Article Four
will still apply. in accordance with the
b~se zoning district:
•_Jo~ t:fevelopment staridards for the
AH~oL :shatl be construed to be
.§pplJcable t9 au Plann~ Develop-, merits 'which are overtayea by this
district. · · ·
..
"
·_ t
. ,. { ..
'··! -.!'
~i .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 2 7. 2006
4.2 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Airport Hazard Overlay District
A. The jurisdictional boundaries for the Airport Hazard Overlay District (AH-OL) shall be shown on the
Official Zoning Map as a hatch or textured pattern and noted on the map legend as the Airport Haz.ard
Overlay District (AH-OL).
4.3 Additional Development Standards for the Airport Hazard Overlay District
The following development standards are required as follows in order to promote the intent of this zoning
district and meet the goals of the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
A. Adjustments to lighting standards are as follows:
a. No parking lot, street, exterior building, or landscape lighting shall be allowed to project upward or
horizontally. All lighting mounted on a pole, structure or building shall be 90° cutoffluminaries.
b. All signage lighting shall be internally lit and shall not exceed 5 footcandle at the property line.
c. No lighting shall spin, oscillate, or blink within this district.
B. Site design of any property or properties in conjunction shall not resemble an airport, taxiway, or
runway.
C. All structures within this district are encouraged to be constructed with extra sound dampening and
proofing such to mitigate noise from aircraft.
D. No structure may be located within 1000 feet of a runway unless it is used as a part of the airport
facility or aviation operation.
E. The maximum height of any structure is 40 feet whel) it is I 000 feet to 4500 feet from any airport
runway. The Planning Director may mandate a maximum height less than 40 feet if the structure is
within a precision runway approach (slope of 1to50 from the end of runway).
F. The maximum height of any structure is 90 feet when 4500 feet to 7920 feet ( 1 ~ mile) from any
airport runway.
[Note: All property purchasers and developers should be aware that the municipal airport facility
may expand in the future, thus resulting in more air traffic and larger aircraft.)
Article fuur: Overlay Districts, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
4-3
"WH-OL" District
4.4 District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent Affo~t on Uses Development Standards
The WH-OL (Wellhead Overlay)
District is intended to promote and
preserve the communities drinking
water quality. This District should
be used as follows.
·,
. .
Application f?f Distrjct . . . .
• all areas designated, ~y ari engineer-.
ing stucly n~~sary to protect ·
Ko~~ino's dnnklng wa~er supply
Lan~ μ~~ ~.ir,~~H?tic?n.~.'. '. • · ·.
• r~~_t9c_t:~r:ly~~~: u1~t i,tbJiL;e~ .or.. . .
ceii'ltains~ "·1 . ' ..... ,.~~~.;.t.i l•¢' t,•. 140:.1Is:.iQ"! hl O•-:.lL ·i·st. 1 .,t• ox.i.c•· .o r oihB!l'1!J!a+erial:OP.iaiooUS' t(Etlle: . '.'
pQ'iat)ffify'.~f'.Wate'r. -. ;· '. · . .
. i '
.~f~~~~hC~1~~t~iarninanti; ·
· ~etti~)~t6.. ~~-:C'.9m~~·q\ty~,;9~.n~IQ9, •
. v--afer. · · .. '~ · ,; '· · · ~ ·• · · · . ,i, JL : ' ·--
. i .:. ," :~.r:::-! ~ • : ., • '• ~: I :. ~:·.:.
:;: . ;, }l-~ - ,: ·.i'_·;~_:t·.~:;;;,!_
.:._:~-~\~~1'. ';.:;·. '\ ·-·:-;·'_i .. :.· ~ - ~ •
.'-i'.
: ·-~;-.,. ,;').I
-~.. ....
'· ..
. .
.+,;; •
: ...
4-4
!.
. "· .. '·
...
•When the development standards
outlined on the followirig page
(S~qion 4.10) conflict wit~ the base
zoning district development standards
in Article Six, the more restrictive
shall apply. All development
. ~~~dWds in Article Six that are not
a9~li"e~sed in the to_nowing sections
· (seetion· 4.1.0) wlll stm apply in
accotdance. with tile base zoning
district. ·
·Th~ development s~pdar9s for the
WH,~OL Shall be applicable to all
Pl~ro~ .[)¢velqpmeriWU:iat are .
oVElr1ayed by this district. ·
I . '
..f·i ~-~. ,., ~- ...
. ,"
1:. ,. •
·. \ I
•,:•-if'.:. I•
~ · -.·wir~-·:·.
.,, , ...
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
;
,·~··
4.5 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Wellhead Overlay District
A. The jurisdictional boundaries for the Wellhead Overlay District (WH-OL) shall be shown on the
Official Zoning Map a,s a hatch or textured pattern and noted on the map legend as the Wellhead
Overlay District (WH-OL).
4.6 Additional Development Standards for the Wellhead Overlay District
The following development standards are required as follows in order to promote the intent of this zoning
district and meet the goals of the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
A. No natural area or vegetated buffer may be treated with any herbicide, insecticide, fertilizer, or the
like without EPA or DNR approval for a specific treatment and recommended frequency of treatment
presented to the Planning Director in writing. Only lawn fertilizer and lawn weed control chemicals
available over-the-counter are exempt from this rule.
Article four: Overlay Districts, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
4-5
"FH .. QL" District
4.7 District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent Affecf on Uses Development Standards
The FH-OL (Flood Hazard Overlay)
District is intended to minimize risk
to life, ·protect property from
damage, reduce risk offlooding,
an_d improve stonn wa~~r quality.
Application ofDistrict ; .
·any area within the .100 year floodplain
· and any other,' areas along
regulated ditches. streams, rivers, ·
ponds · a~d ponds deemed necessary.
Land Use Restrictions
• restrict any lise that Utilizes or· ·
contains .vol.atile, poisonous; toxic, or
otherwise hazardous to ·flora, fauna
and the potability of water:'
Developmeht Standards
• rEil?ti:ict the C:qn'si.fucticih of habitable
or 'o'ccupiable structvres within the .
100 year rip.9dplain. · · , · ·
• assure· iio net: foss ' of. floooplain .
stoliige i~papfy due .to_~ll!l~itig or
filling' i,vithin.the 109 y~ar' fle>!'.>clPlain.
~ pr~.·~efy~ /jp,a,rJ~o..~n;ictCfrs .:~rci 'b:utfer
. areas-· af6cii'Jd •bOdies· :of wate.Hrom ·
:afre,¢t;Jp,~~8 :~.~~ i6a~'.".Eii1ent' · · ,
. d!stu[Q~r:ices•and removat ·otpl~HJt •
matetiaL" : ·. · · . • .. · :
! re~~·&: th,e.~iiee.d ·at wnich-.&(otril water· re;:i'cties· regulated dlfohes;
streams· ahd rivers. · ;
4-6
" ~ ' : .
..... . . ~
',·
' .. .- f-_ ';, ~·"'
· ·',
I•• '
·When the development standards
outlln'M on the following pages
• (sectiqn 4.!~) conflict with the base
zoriing dist(ict d.evelopment standards'
in Article Six or other Development
Standards in this Article, the '
IT!Ofe' re$bicti~e shalt apply . . All
development standards in Article Six
that'are' not addre~sed ' in the fQll6w~
ing s~ction (4.9) will still apply in . ·.
accoro~mce with 1he base zoning
district. . . · . · .
·The development standards tor the
FH~OL sry~ll j)e applicable to ·ail ·
Plannsd Developments that are
over1ayed by this district. ·
-,
·" ...
··:.
r ~. • • ' -~ , .
.. ..: ; '.. ; .- .
,. ~·-; \1.:'i. • .. • ••
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
4.8 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Flood Hazard Overlay District
A. The jurisdictional boundaries forthe Flood Hazard Overlay District (FH-OL) shall be shown on the
· Official Zoning Map as a hatch or textured pattern and noted on the map legend as the Flood Hazard
Overlay District (FH-OL).
4.9 Additional Development Standards for the Flood Hazard Overlay District
The following development standards are required as follows in order to promote the intent of this zoning
district and meet the goals of the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
A. The development standards of the Flood Hazard Areas Ordinance, No. 5959, as amended, shall apply.
B. No lot or building site, created after the adoption of this ordinance, shall locate any buildings within
FH-OL.
Article Four: Overlay Districts, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
4-7
"WR-OL" District
4.10
Application of District .
•all,a(eas designated by an
engineering study necessary for
p~otectilig the community ·.'·
Dev~lopment Standards
•restrict"the <Miling of waterwells
wliich m·ay bring· contaminated
ground water to the surface.
4-8
1!•
'
~ .· ;; ·.r,·,
·.' ... s.
t~. ~~r-;f
... • :-:f; •.
.,":-.I.'
... .. , ,
: .·
,.(
,.
.• .:;
De".el~pment St~ndards
• .No water wells may pe dug or drilled
within the WR-QL Oistdc;:t except for
m6hitoring wells, extraction wells for
a groundwater remediation system,
or other wells required or approved
by the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management.
' ...
"
II:;
-.\·
•• ~;· :'.k
.· ., ~· .
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 27. 2006
.....
4.11 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Well Restriction Overlay District
A The jurisdictional boundaries for the Well Restriction Overlay District (WR-OL) shall be shown on
the Official .ZOning Map as a hatch or textured pattern and noted on the map legend as the Well
Restriction Overlay District (WR-OL)."
Article Four: .<;>verlay Districts, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27, 2010
'·
"AC - OL" District
4.12 District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent Effect on Uses Development Standards
The AC -OL (Architecture Control
Overlay) District is intended to
protect, preserve arid enhance the
character and form of designated
Districts while maintaining continuity
to tl:le surroundings. The emphasis
shall be laid on the appropriate
mass, scale and prOj)()rtic;m that
proviq~s and profnot~s the compatibility
to the surroundings, allows for
suffici~Qt penetration ·of ligbt and air
and tefates well to the j:>e(lestrian
enVir<;)i'iment. The District should be
used tis foilows: .
Appiicati9n <>fttie District
!any"Area, With similar ~rchit~ct~ral
sfyle an~/,Qr.history whjch·Kokonio
deddes·should be maintained or
areas where maintairijng similar or
CorT)plime"r'itary. architectural styles is
consid.e r·.e· d desirabie. ·
Permitted Uses
All uses permitted in the qase zoning
district are permitted in the AC-OL. ·
Special Exceptj~m Uses
All uses pem1itfoa as ·special
exceptions iri the ~se zoning district
ate permitted in the AC-(}L. .
• !.··
; '4.
~. '"' .. ;.> 'l: - - .
•, .
.. ...
~.... . -~
:··
'
• The basic development standards
for base zoning district shall apply
unless replaced by the adopted
guidelines for the specific overlay
district.
------ - ·-. ··- - ·- ·- - - -----------
4-10 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27 , 2010
4.13 Jurisdictional Boundary for the Architectural Control Overlay District
A. The jurisdictional boundaries for the Architectural Control Overlay District (AC-OL) shal I be shown
on the Official Zoning Map as a hatch or textured pattern and noted on the map legend as the Architectural
Control Overlay District (AC-OL).
4.14 Architectural Review Process
A. Anyone proposing physical alterations to fayade(s) of existing structures, construction of new structures,
or replacement of sidewalks, parking lots or driveways, shall petition for an Improvement
Location Permit as provided by Section .9.2.
B. Review of petitions shall be guided by the appropriate adopted design guidelines.
C. Design guidelines shall be prepared by the Plan Director for each Architectural Control Overlay
District. The Plan Director will request comments and recommendations from the Kokomo Historic
Review Board on the district design guidelines. The Architectural Control Overlay District Design
Guidelines shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, after a public hearing,
may adopt, reject, continue consideration of or approve with modifications the design guidelines.
Article rour: Overlay Districts, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27, 2010
4 - 11
4-li City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27, 2010
AC-OL District
Add the following:
2.3 Establishment of Overlay Districts .
AC-OL -Architecture Control Overlay District (page 4-10): This district is. intended
for protecting, preserving and enhancing the historic character and form of the
downtown and other similar areas.
Article 4 - Overlay Districts
"AC - OL" District
4.12 District Intent, Affect on Uses, and Development Standards
District Intent Effect on Uses
The AC - OL (Architecture Permitted Uses
Control Overlay) District is All uses permitted in the base
intended to protect, preserve zoning district are permitted in
and enhance the character the AC-OL.
and form of designated
Districts while maintaining
continuity to the surroundings.
The emphasis shall be laid on
the appropriate mass, scale
and proportion that provides
and promotes the
compatibility to the
surroundings, allows for
sufficient penetration of light
and air and relates well to the
pedestrian environment. The
District should be used as
follows:
Application of the District
• any area with similar
architectural style and/or
history which Kokomo
decides should be
maintained or areas where
maintaining similar or
complimentary architectural
styles is considered
desirable.
K. - H. C. P. C.
Special Exception uses
All uses permitted as special
exceptions in the base zoning
district are permitted in the
AC-OL..
1of3
Development Standards
• The basic development ·
standards for base zoning
district shall apply unless
replaced by the adopted
guidelines for the specific
overlay district.
Printed: 7/1/2010
AC-OL ll>istrict
4.13 Jllrisdictional Boundary for the Architectural Control Overlay District
A. The jurisdictional boundaries for the Architectural Control Overlay District (ACOL)
shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map as a hatch or textured pattern
and noted on the map legend as the Architectural Control Overlay District (ACOL).
4.14 Architectural Review Process
A. Anyone proposing physical alterations to fa98de(s) of existing structures,
construction of new structures, or replacement of sidewalks, parking lots or
driveways, shall petition for an Improvement Location Permit as provided by
Section 9.2.
B.. Review of petitions shall be guided by the appropriate adopted design
guidelines. ·
C.. Design guidelines shall be prepared by the Plan Director for each Architectural
Control Overlay District. The Plan Director will request comments and
recommendations from the Kokomo Historic Review Board on-the district
design guidelines. The Architectural Control Overlay District Design Guidelines
shall be reviewed by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission, after a
public hearing, may adopt, reject, continue consideration of or approve with
modifications the design guidelines.
11.2 Defined Words:
Street Wall: A vertical plane at the right-of-way line created by the facades of
structures.
Streetscape: The entire system of streets, sidewalks and land.aping by which
people circulate through and experience a neighborhood.
· Fenestration: The arrangement of windows on a wall.
K. - H. C. P. C. 2 of 3 Printed: 7/1/2010
Architectural Control Ordinance Districts
r-•
AC-OL (1 ), Courthouse Square i._ ,I Central Business District Boundary
~ N
AC-OL (2), CBD Perimeter [J Kokomo Courthouse Square
AC-OL (3), Railroad Station !:1 Lake Erie & Western Depot
'' \f\q \\In

AC-OL District
Architectural Control Overlay Districts
•
K. -H. C. P. C. 3 of 3 Printed: 7/1/2010
Proposed
Architectural Control c;>verlay _District Design Guidelines
For:
. :, ~"
AC-OL (1:)., Cour,t, House Square District
.it'
AC-OL (2), Do~ntown.., l>erimeter District
AC-OL (3), Lake Erie~& Western Sepot District
I
' .
.-·
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines.
Architectural Control Overlay District Design Guidelines for:
AC-OL (1 ), Court House Square District
AC-OL (3), Lake Erie & Western Depot District
The following design guidelines are intended for promoting the intent of the overlay
zoning district and meet the goals of the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
A. Most structures surrounding the court house square and the remaining railroad
station area have various common elements which tie individual buildings into a
common image. The elements include facade articulation, ~indows, roofs, entrance
ways, heights of structure stories, and the height, orientation and bulk of the
structures. The design guidelines for th~ Court House Square District and the Lake
Erie and Western Depot District emphasize maintaining a building's compatibility
with neighboring buildings and with the streetscape in terms of the common
elements. The guidelines do not encourage a particular style of architecture.
B. Areas subject to design.guidelines for AC-OL(1) and AC-OL(3):
Cou1house Square AC·OL(l)
Architectural Control Districts
AC-0.(1 J. Co1111louse SqUJie • KolDmo Col.rthouse SqUJie (!
Cenl«ll eu;ness , , Hstorlc DlstrlCt
Olrtlcl earoav L •
K. - H. C. P. C. 1-1of7
rr===========================ti
AC-01.(3) Lake Erie I. Ytfestern Depot
Archit actu·ral Cantrel. Dlstrid
Printed: 9/141201 O
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
C. Changes to existing structures;
a. All alterations to existing structures shall be performed so as to pre.serve the
character of the architecture of the district.
b. The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site
and its environment shall not be destroyed.
c. The removal or alterations of any historic material or destruction of architectural
features shaU be avoided when possible.
d. All buildings. structures, and sites should be recognized as producfls of their own
time. Alterations which have no historic basis are discouraged.
e. Contemporary designs for alterations or. additions to existing properties are not
discouraged when such alterations or additions.<;io not destroy the carchitectural
character of the structure. Design proposals for alterations to existiing structures
shall be compatible with the size, scale, color, material and charactter of the
property, ·the immediately surrounding structures, and those in the cdistrict.
f. Materials in additions greater than 25 percent of the existing floor area or
alterations to the exterior fa9ade greater than 50 percent of the exiisting fac;ade
shall be consistent with those of new structures. Materials for additions oUess
than 25 percent of the existing floor area or alterations to the exteriior fa9ade of
less than 50 percent should strive to be constructed out of materiaits that were
used on the building when it was originally built.
g. When original materials cannot be replaced, they may be replacedhwith
architecturally correct materials that simulate the look, dimensions and details of
the original.
h. Replacement windows shall maintain the original window size. They shall have
window dressing, muntin and trim sympathetic to the original windcows.
i. Previous additions or alterations to the building that detract from 01r conceal the
character of the building may be removed and the building restoreGit to a previous
conctition. Improvements enhancing the original character of the btJJilding tire
encouraged.
j. BuUding height shall remain that of the original I previous height.
k. Existing structures, with blank walls along any sidewalk, should pnzl>Vide.windows
and other common elements for providing visual linkage with otheir buildings
along or facing the sidewalk.
C. New buildings and structures construction:
a. Contemporary designs are encouraged as long as the design mail!U'tains the
pattern established by existing structures on the same block.
1. Design proposals for new construction shall be compatible wittl the size,
scale, color, material and character of the immediately surrounding structures,
and those in the district.
2. New structures shall include common elements such as Cornices, Brackets,
Parapet wall, and Pedestal.
b. Heights:
1. New structures shall be at least two stories in height or match tile height of
either adjoining structure.
K. - H. C. P. C. 1-2 of 7 Paiinted: 9/14/2010
\
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
2. Stories shall maintain the heights between stories used by other structures on
the same biock. ' · . ·
3. All floors above the ground level floor shall enclose a horizontal area of at
least 60 percent of the ground floor area.
c. Location on Lot: ·
1. New buildings and structures shall sit on the front arid side property lines.
2. New buildings or structures shall be oriented parallel and perpendicular to the
street.
3. Fa~ade(s) of new structures may recede from the street wall for providing
room for columns, for other protruding architectural elements or fc;>r minor
recesses for entrances and outdoor seating /dining provided the upper
stories are built to the street wall.
New Structure Design Compatibility with Neighboring Structures
d. Building Details . .
1. New buildings or structures should have sufficient details for extending the
rich character of adjoining buildings or structures. They need not be as
intricate or elaborate as the detail on existing buildings or structures.
2. The detailing for the architectural elements may be of simple form based on
the shape, proportion, texture and overalrtorm adjoining buildings or
· structu~es, r~ther than attempt to copy existing patterns.. . .
3. The overall placement and proportion of the architectural elements shall be
compatible with and .of style similar to the character of the surrounding,
existing structures. Patterns can be. repeated for creating a sense of place,
harmony and rhythm. The various architectural elements can create new
innovative patterns that relate to the existing patterns rather than rigidly
following a historical architectural style.
4. Fa~ade(s) may have architectural elements, eaves, sills, balconies, bay
windows, cornices which project into the right of way of streets and alleys.
They shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet between the
projected architectural element and the sidewalk grade. They are subject to
K. - H. C. P. C. .1-3 of 7 Printed: 911412010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
approval by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety and the Plan
Director.
Sabad< pemitted
for recessed rroin ·
eiifrance
Stn..cture sh:>l.Jd be
bli~ to 1he bt lhes
Sabad< pemitted
for outdoor sa:iff rg
All buldlngs to be built to the frorl lot line unless appioved
by the plan commission
I
(OJ
CDJ
Parkhg pemitted n side and rear yard
, - ... - .. - . - .. - ... :"""' . - .:.;;,- ... ~ ~ ~ .. ·---· - .. - ..
"- ., . . .
Sabad< pemitted for widerirg ·
sidewal<
Sa~peuntted for side or rear \<]rd
parl<IFJJ
Comparison of "OldH and "New" Buildings v
•The "New" building has:
• A height similar to "Old" building.
• Windows oriented vertically.
iii • Maintained the proportions between the
ftrSt, second and other floors as the "old"
building. .
• Windows, doors and other
openings occupy about the same
proportk>ns of the facade as "old"
buildings.
e. Building Main Entrance
• Separated the ground floor from upper
floors with a horizontal design element.
• Main Entrance is emphasized
- and located on the main street
1. The main entrance for buildings and structures shall be 1ocated on at least
one of the street fronts.
2. The main entrance design shall be in accordance with the surrounding
structures.
K.-H. C. P. C. 1-4 of 7 Printed: 9/1412010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
3. lihe maiil entrance design shall have a design which aids locating it from ·
mearby streets and parking areas.
4. lihe entrance can be inset from the sidewalk so as to minimize encroachment
oo the sidewalk.
f. The windows, doorways and other openings shaU maintain the proportions of
windows and doorways of existing structures in the same block. It will create a
unifii>nn silhouette appearance which maintains the existing sense of place and
chm;acter of the downtown.
g. New buildings and structures shall not have· blank walls along any sidewalk.
h. Long fayade_s with dengths of greater th~n 100 feet shall provide additional
. arcMecturat interest and variety for avoiding the effect c# a single, long or
'massive wall with no relation to human size, by:· · ·
1. A standa"dized prototype_. d~sign must be. modified if necessary to meet the
provisions of this Article. ·
2. No wall that faces a street, alley or connecting walkway may have an
uninterrupted length exceeding 1 OQ f~t without including at least -~ of the
fellowing design elements: ' · ·
(1) Change in p!ane such as projections or recesses with a depth of at least
3% of the length of the fayade, ·
- - -
(2) Distinguishable change in texture or masonr:Y pattern,
((3) Additional wlndows which comprise at least 10% c:A the entire facade area,
or an equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale
proportions, or
«4) Building facades must include a repeating pattern that includes color
change and texture change. At l~ast. one p)...elernent (texture or color
K. - H. C. p _ C. 1-5 of7 Printed: 9f14/201 O
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
change) must repeat horizontally. Both elements must repeat at intervals
of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
i. New buildings or structures shall use surface materials with texture and finish
similar to other structures in the downtown. The use of contemporary
construction and surface treatment materials is permitted if they have an
expected life of at least fifty years.
j. Any facade facing an adjacent street shall have a finished facade. No loading
docks or trash collection bins shall be placed on or along the facades facing any
adjacent street. ·
k. Roofs of new buildings or structures shall present the appearance of having a flat
roof when viewed from the street.
I. Building Materials:
1. Primary exterior materials shall comprise 75 percent of the wall area
excluding doors and windows. The permitted materials shall be
architectural/commercial grade materials including:
(1} Kiln fired clay brick
,(2) Stone
(3) Cementitious stucco
2. Accent exterior materials shall be permitted on no more than 15 percent of
any one favade. The permitted accent materials include:
(1} Fiber cement board
(2) Wood
(3) Architectural grade split face and ground face block
(4) Tinted/textured decorative concrete masonry units
(5) Synthetic stucco/Exterior Insulation and Finish system (EIFS) and other
minor element provided it is located at a minimum of 8 feet above grade.
At no point shall this material be permitted as a predominant exterior
building material nor shall it be considered as a masonry product
regardless of back-up system.
(6) Cast stone.
3. Prohibited materials are not compatible with existing uses nor do they provide
sufficient durability. The following materials are prohibited:
(1) Vinyl siding
(2) Al~minum
(3) Mirrored or reflective glass
(4) Non-textured concrete masonry unit
K.-H. C. P. C. I - 6 of 7 Printed: 9/'D4/201 O
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
(5) Unfinished concrete block.
• • ' .f•
D. Streetscape improvements':
In order to maintain a unified downtown image, all of streets must share common
features. ·
a. All new sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall utilize the streetscape
design adopted by the City of Kokomo. (Appendix A.)
b. The use of various public art arid architectural features that impart a character
ahd maintain a sense of place in accordance with the· existing downtown ·
environment is encouraged. ·
c. Surface parking lots shall provide a brick masonry half-wall or compact'
evergreen screen along the perimeter of the parking lot in addition to the
landscaping required by Section 6.28. · ·
d. Parking structures shall have ground floor facades with the appearance in the
same style of other structures in the Architectural Control Overlay District. Use of
the ground floor for retail, office or similar uses is preferred.
e. Surface parking lots and parking structures shall have all driveways onto minor
streets. Driveways may use existing alleys for access onto major streets. Major
and minor streets shall be identified in the design guidelines for the Architectural
Control Overlay District. .
f. The design of decorative fences, walls and other architectural features shall be
approved by the Plan Director for ensuring their compatibility with surrounding
structures. ·
Downtown Streetscape Plan
.--~· y • --7:;,~.-~--~~:-~ ~-~ -~~::.~:--·_·~~ :·.~;~:-·~-~-. :~~-'. ~- :--~~-~,-:~:~.~7.~~~;~ .·,".
~ -·· ... -=~- -~~ -~-~~ ~------ ---~·---- .. ~ 1Jl_:·'_
_,,_.. --
:. --:~ _- .. ~- -· -- _-:=:-· ---:-;-:.-::=- -r:-:-::-=;~· '•.-f-'-4_ ·--;r7··~;··~:: ~= :-"' ~::: ;.: --7~ ~ ~' -
··-~ -- - - " ;_ "':•• .- ·- -. ~·,l , •...
••• •,. ·.lo ... ·:~,~~-~.:·.-'.~" ,to••.;,.\. ·-:•,I'~ 'L: a.,.:'-ti":_, ~· ,•·, • :"j /I \
I-,
!
i
' I
Typ~ bat Scape Bloclc.
~ -, - . ' ...
K. - H. C. P. C. l - 7of7 Printed: 9/14/2010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
Architectural Control Overlay District Design Guidelines for:
AC-OL (2), Downtown Perimeter District
The following design guidelines are intended for promoting the intent of the overlay
zoning .<fistrict and meet the goals of the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
A. Structures in the Downtown Perimeter District are within the Central Business
Dislrict (CBD) and outside the Court House Square District and Lake Erie and
Western Depot District. Many of the older structures were demolished as the
demand for vehicle parking grew and changes in retail merchandizi{lg left many CBD
stores empty. Other, older structures were replaced by newer structures. The
Downtown Perimeter District's design guidelines emphasize supporting the Court
House Square District by maintaining a denser, urban character compatible with
CoUtrt House Square District buildings and streetscape. The guidelines do not
enoourage a particular style of architecture.
·"'
K. - H. C . P. C. II - 1' of 6 Printed: 9/14/2010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
C. Changes to existing structures;
a. The distingui$hing original qualities or character of a building, structure or site
and its environment shall not be destroyed. · ·
b. The removal or alterations of.any historic material or destruction of architectural
.features shall be avoided when possible.
c. Contemporary designs for alterations or additions to existing properties are not
discouraged when such alterations or additions do not destroy the architectural
character of the structure. Design proposals for alterati.ons t() existing structures
shall be compatible with the size; s~ale, colqr, material and character of the
property, the immediately surrounding structu.res1 and those in the district.
d. Materials in acjditions greater thah 25 percent of the existing floor area or
alterations to "the exterior fa9ade greater" than 50 percent of the existing fa9ade
shall be consistent with those· of new structures .. Materials for additions of less
than 25 percent of the existing floor area or alterations to the exterior fa~de of
less than 50 percent should strive to be constructed out of materials that were
used on the building when it was originally built.
e. When original materials cannot be replaced, they may be replaced with
architecturally correct materials that simulate the look, dimensions and details of
the original.
f. Previous additions or alterations to the building that detract from or conceal the
character of the building may be removed and the building restored to a previous
condition. Improvements enhancing the original character of the building are
encouraged.
g. Building height shall remain that of the original I previous height.
h. Existing structures, with blank walls along any sidewalk, should provide windows
and other common elements for providing visual linkage with other buildings
al~mg or facing the sidewalk.
D. New buildings and. structures construction:
a. Contemporary designs are encouraged as long as the design maintains the
pattern established by existing structures on the same block. Design proposals
for new construction shall be compatible with the size, scale, color, material and
character of the immediately surrounding structures and those in the district.
b. Heights: ·
1. New structures shall be at least two stories in height or match the height of
either adjoining structure.
2. Stories shall maintain the heights between stories used by other structures on
the same block.
3. All floors above the ground level floor shall enclose a horizontal area of at
least 60 percent of the ground floor area . .
c. Location on Lot:
1. New buildings and structures shall sit on the front and side property lines.
2. New buildings or structures shall be oriented parallel and perpendicular to the
street. ·
3. Fa9ade(s) of new structures may recede from the street wall for providing
· . room for columns, for other protruding architectural elements or for minor
K. - H. C. P. C. 11 - 2 of 6 Printed: 9/141201 O
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
recesses for entrances and outdoor seating I dining provided the upper
stories are built to the street wall.
New Structure Design Compatibility with Neighboring Structures
s aback penritted
fOr reosed main
emanoe
111n.clure &l"IOIJd be
bl.it to the bf Ii&
s Efbock penrilted
tor oLJ'door& ealirg
d. Building Details
All bddngmta ti! b.liltta1he'trll"t Id line 1.111m ~ea
bt t,,e pm mnrrilliD'I
Posmg pen"rilted n &i<le OM reotyalO
·------------- -------------
s aback perrritted forwilerirg
&idEWOlk
s aback penTilled torside or reor/QIO
pollirg
1. , The overall placement and proportion of architectural elements should be
compatible with and of style similar to the character of the surrounding,
existing structures. Patterns should be repeated for creating a sense of
place, harmony and rhythm. The various architectural elements can create
K. - H. C. P. C. ll-3of6 Printed: 9/141.2010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
new innovative patterns that relate to the existing patterns rather than rigidly
following a historical architectural style. ·
2. Fac;ade(s) may have architectural elements, eaves, sills, balconies, bay
windows, cornices which project into the right of way of streets and alleys.
They shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet between the
projected architectural element an~ the sidewalk grade. They are subject to
approval by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety and the Plan ·
Director. ·.. . ·
e. Building Main Entrance . , "'~ .
, 1; The main entrance fo(jt>uildings and structures shall be located.oo·atJeast .
one of the street fronts~· ·· ·.. .. <·'. · - . .. .. ·' ,: · .· · · . · · ·
2. Tfle main entrance ·design shall have ~ design which aids locating it from
nearby streets and parking areas. · ·
3. The entrance can be inset from the sidewalk so as to minimize encroachment
on the sidewalk. . · · .
f. New buildings and.structures shall not have blank walls along any sidewalk.
a. long " fa~des· with lengths of greater than 100 feet.shall provide.additional
architectural interest and variety for avoiding the effect of. a single, long or
massive wall with no relation to human size, by: ' ·
1. A standardized prototype design must be modified if necessary to meet the
provisions of this Article. . · · " ·
2. No wall that faces a street, alley or connecting walkway may have an
uninterrupted length exceeding 100 feet without including at least 2 of the
following design elements: ·
(1)-Change in plane such as projections or recesses with a depth of at least
3% of the length of the fai;ade, ·
~-
(2) Distinguishable change in texture or masonry pattern,
(3) Additional windows which comprise at least 10% of the entire facade area,
or an equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale
proportions,· or . · · · · · · · ·
(4) Building facades must include a repeating pattern that includes color
·change and texture change. At least one (1) element (texture or color
change) must repeat horizontally. Both elements must repeat at intervals
of no more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
b. New buildings or structures shall use surface materials with texture and finish
similar to other structures in the same block. The use· of contemporary
K. - H. C. P. C. 11-4of6 Printed: 9/14/2010
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
.., ,
construction and surface treatment materials is permitted if they have an
expected life of at least fifty years.
c. Any facade facing an adjacent street shall have a finished facade. No loading
docks or trash collection bins shall be placed on or along the facades facing any
adjacent street.
d. Roofs of new buildings or structures shall present the appearance of having a flat
roof when viewed from the street. •
e. Building Materials: s-'
1. Primary exterior materials shall comprise 75 percent of the wall area
excluding doors and windows. The permitted materials shall be
architectural/commercial grade materials including: ·
(1) Kiln fired clay brick
. (2) Stone
(3) Cementitious stucco .
2. Accent exterior materials shall be permitted on no more than 15 percent of
any one fayade. The permitted accent materials include:
(1) Fiber cement board
(2) Wood
(3) Architectural grade split face and ground face block
(4) Tinted/textured decorative concrete masonry units
(5) Synthetic stucco/Exterior Insulation and Finish system (EIFS) and other
minor element provided it is located at a minimum of 8 feet above grade.
At no point shall this material be permitted as a predominant exterior
building material nor shall it be considered as a masonry product
regardless of back~up system.
(6) Cast stone.
K.-H. C. P. C. ll-5of6 Printed: 9/14/2010
~.
•
Proposed AC-OL District Design Guidelines
. .
3. Prohibited materials are not compatible with existing uses nor do they provide
sufficient durability. The following materials are prohibited:
(1) Vinyl siding
(2) Aluminum
(3) Mirrored or reflective glass
(4) Non-textured concrete masonry unit
(5) Unfinished concrete block.
8. Streetscape improvements:
In order to maintain a unified downtown image, all of streets must share common
features. ·
a. The use of various public art and architectural features that impart a character
and maintain a sense of place in accordance with the existing downtown
environment is encouraged.
b. Surface parking lots shall provide a brick masonry half-wall or compact
evergreen screen along the perimeter of the parking lot in addition to the
landscaping required by Section 6.28.
c. Parking structures shall have ground floor facades with the appearance in the
same style of other structures in the Architectural Control Overlay District. Use of
the ground floor for retail, office or similar uses is preferred.
d. Surface parking lots and parking structures ·shall have all driveways onto minor
streets. Driveways may use existing alleys for access onto major streets. Major
and minor streets shall be identified in the design guidelines for the Architectural
Control Overlay District.
e. The design of decorative fences, walls and other architectural features shall be
approved by the Plan Director for ensuring their compatibility with surrounding
structures .
K. -H. C. P. C. 11- 6 of 6 Printed: 9/14/2010

City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
"SR 931-0L" District
4.15 District Intent, Affect on Uses, & Development Standards
District Intent
The purpose of the SR 931-0L (SR
931 overlay district) is to establish a
clear development and
redevelopment standard which will
facilitate new development and
redevelopment opportunities along
the SR 931 corridor in accordance
with the US 31 Corridor
Comprehensive Plan. The SR 931
overlay district includes standards
for building fa9ade, building form,
parking, lighting, landscapes,
access points, and procedure in
order to enhance the character and
the function of the corridor. The SR
931-0L applies to the sub-districts:
Regional Center (RC-OL),
Commercial Center (CC·OL},
Neighborhood Center (NC-OL),
Health/Office Center (HOC-OL), ·
Major Industrial Center (PIC·OL),
and Minor Industrial Center (SICOL)
as indicated on Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map.
Application of District
All areas designated in Map 1: SR
931-0L District Map. Including subdistricts:
Regional Center (RC-OL),
Commercial Center {CC-OL),
Neighborhood Center (NC-Ol-},
Health/Office Center (HOC-OL),
Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL),
and Minor Industrial Center (SICOL).
Affect on Uses
Permitted Uses
See 4.16.1, 4.1,7.~. 4;~8.1 , 4.19.1~·
_4.20.1, 4.21.114.22.1 for pennitted
uses within each $UtH:fistrict within
the SR-931-0L and legal
nonconforming structures, ·1ots and
uses.
Special Exception Uses
See 4,16.1, 4.17.1, 4;18.1,4.19.f,
~.~0 .. 1, 4'.21 :1·:4.22.1 for special
excef:>tion uses within each subdistrict
within the SR-931-0L.
I
·'
Develonrnent Standards
Where the Overlay Districts Zonrng
Ordinance directly conflicts with
other portions of the Zoning
Ordinance, this code shall prevail;
however, no development may be
approved that conflicts with the
Comprehensive Plan. For
Development Standards see 4.16.2,
4.17.2, 4.18.2, 4.19.2, 4:2-0,2,
4;21.2, 4.22.2, and 4.23. See
4.24: 1 t 4~24~2. 4.24:3, 4.24.4,
4.24.5, 4.24.6, 4.24.7, 4.24.8 for
Signage Standards. See 4.25 for
Parking Standards (see Articles
6.47, 6.49, 6:50). See ~.26 for
Landscaping Standards (see
Articles 6.23 to 6.40). See 4.27 for
Architectural Standards. See 4.28
for Procedures. See 4.29 for
Definitions.
'
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.16.1 Regional Center (RC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Regional Center (RC-OL}is
designated to serve as the primary
identity and the central area along
US 931 for Kokomo and Howard
County. The purpose of the RC
Zone is to facilitate a healthy
economic and social hub for
residents, visitors and businesses.
The goal of the zone is to generate
an urbanized field along the corridor
with mixed use and lively activities
such as residential, office,
commercial and entertainment.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Regional Center
(RC-OL).
Permitted Uses
Accessory Use
• Child daycare home
• Home occupation (type 1)
• Outdoor seating
• Walk-up window services
Business: General Business
• Adult daycare
• Bank machine/ATM
• Banquet hall
• Bar/tavern
• Barber/beauty shop
• Billiard/arcade room
• Bowling alley
• Cellular phone/communication
• Child daycare center
• Coffee shop
• Copy center
• Dance/aerobics/gymnastics studio
• Dance/night club
• Emergency medical clinic
• Farmers market
• Fingernail salon
• Fitness center/gym
•Health spa
• HoteVmotel
• 'ce cream shop
• Karate studio
• Lodge or private club
• Miniature golf
• Movie theater
•News stand
• Party/event rental
• Pet grooming
• Photographic studio
• Play center
•Print shop
• Restaurant
• Shoe repair
•Skate park
• Sports fields
• Tailor/pressing shop
• Tanning salon
• Video/DVD store
Business: Office/Professional
• Buslnesslfinancial services office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
• Medical office
Business: Retail
• Verv 1ow intensltv retail
2
Special Exceution Uses
Communication/Utility
• Above-ground utility facility
• Radiorrv station
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site parking Jot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Institutional
• Childcare institution/orphanage
Public Facilities
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
District Intent
• Low intensity retail
• 'Medium intensity retail
Institutional
• Government office
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation -center
.Public Facilities
• Community center
• Ubrary
•Public park
Residential
• Assisted liviAQ facility
• Owellin·g, multi-family,(2--4 units)
• Dwelling, multi-family (5-8 units)
• Dwelling, multi-family (9-16 units)
• Dwelling, multi-family (upper
floors) ·
• Fair housing facility (small)
• f<llursing home
• RetiremeritQOmmu~
3
I
'
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.16.2 Regional Center (RC-OL) District Development Standards
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 20,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage ·
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• n/a
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 95%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 70%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• 24 units per acre
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• o feet
~ront Yard Setback
• 20 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• O feet for attached structure
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 0 feet for attached structure
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• 1 O feet + (( # ofstories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• 800 square feet
• Minimum sleeping ~ooms per hot•l/eotel
• 60
o Height Standards
• Minimum Structure Height
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories, retail outlot
1 story
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 75 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 25 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 40%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 80%
• 24 feet and 2 stor ies; retail outlot 1
story; ho~el$~~t~ls 3 storie~
""' --"- ------ ,..,._ ___ -·
4
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.17.1 Community Center (CC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Community Center (CC-OL} is
designated as. a major civic
activities destination with a mix of
commercial, office and residential
uses at a lower density. It allows the
designated area to gradually
transition to a greater building
height and density as one
transitions to other zones.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Community
Center (CC-OL}.
Permitted Uses
Accessory Use
• Child day care home
• Home occupation (type 1)
• Outdoor seating
• Walk-up window services
Business: General Business
•Adult daycare
• Bank machine/ATM
• Banquet hall
• Bar/tavern
• Barber/beauty shop
• Billiard/arcade room
• Bowling alley
•Car rental
• Cellular. phone/comml!nication
· • Child daycare center
• Coffee shop
• Coin laundry
• Commercial batting cages
• Copy center
• Country club
• Dance/aerobics/gymnastics studio
• Dance/night club
• Delicatessen
• Driving range
• Ory-cleaning service
. • Emergency medical clinic
· • ·Fanners market
·• Fingernail salon
• F,itness center/gym
• Funeral home or mort1,1ary
•Health spa
, • HoteVmotel
• tee cream shop
• Karate studio
• Lodge.,6,r private club
• Miniature golf
• Movie theater
•Newsstand
• Party/event rental
• Pet grooming
• Photographic studio
·'., f'l~y center
~ .Print shop
• Restaurant
• Shoe repair
•Sign shop
•Skate park
• Sports fields
• Tailoripressing shop
• Tannina salon
5
Business: General Business
• Auto oriented facility (low
intensity)
• Auto oriented facility {high
intensity)
• Tattoo/piercing parlor
Communication/Utility
• Above-ground utility facility
• Radio/TV station
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar plac~ of
worship
Institutional
• Childcare institution/orphanage
Publlc Facfllties
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
District Intent
• Video/DVD store
Business: Office/Professional
• Business/financial services office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
• Medical office
Business: Retail
• Very low intensity retail
• Low intensity retail
• Medium intensity retail
• High intensity retail
Institutional
• Government office
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
Public Facilities
• Community center
• l,.ibrary
•Public park
Residential
• Assisted living facility
• Dwelling, multi-family (2-4 units)
• DweJUng, mulfl..famlly (5-8 units)
• Dwelling, multi-family (9.;16 units)
• DweOing, multi-family (upper
floors)
• Fair houSlng facility (smalQ
• Nursing home
• Retirement f:X)mmunity
6
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.17.2 Community Center (CC-OL) District Development Standards
• LOT STA~DARDS SETBACK STANDARDS HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 65 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• nla
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage ·
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• 8 units per acre
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 12 feet (structures less than
3,000 square feet)
• 40 feet (structures greater than
3,000 square feet)
~ti"' Front Yard Setback
• 60 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 0 feet for attached structure
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Strueture
• 0 feet for attached structure
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• 1 0 feet + (( # of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• 800 square feet
-
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories, retail outlot
1 story
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure HeightAccessory
Structure
• · 15 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 40%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 80%
• Hinimwn alee,pini rooms per hotel/motel
· ~
o Height Standards
• Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories; retail outlot 1
story; hotel•~re<?t~l! 3 stories
7
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.18.1 Neighborhood Center (NC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Neighborhood Center (NC-OL)
is designated to provide a mix of
neighborhood oriented commercial
and low impact civic uses in more
residential concentrated areas. The
zone emphasizes the pedestrian
and bicycle connectivity between
the center and the residential
neighborhood and how they function
and serve the surrounding
neighborhoods.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Neighborhood
Center (NC-OL).
Permitted Uses
Accessory Use
• Home occupation (type 1)
Business: General Business
• Bank machine/ATM
• Barber/beauty shop
• Child daycare center
• Coffee shop
• Coin laundry
• Delicatessen
• Dry-cleaning service
• Fitness center/gym
• Health clinic
• Ice cream shop
• Photographic studio
• Shoe repair
• Video/DVD store
Business: Retail
• Convenience store
• Very low intensity retail
• Low Intensity retail
• Medium intensity retail
Institutional
• Government office
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
Public Facilities
• Community center
•Library
•Public park
Residential
• Dwelling, single family (upper
floors)
• Dwelling, multi-family (upper
floors)
8
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Use
• Home occupation (type 2)
Business: General Business
• Bar/tavern
• Drive-through ATM
• Gas station
• Restaurant
• Tattoo/piercing parlor
Business: Office/Professional
• Business/financial services office
Communication/Utility
• Above-ground utility facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Institutional
• Childcare institution/orphanage
Public Facilities
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
Residential
• Dwelling, multi-farrilly (2-4 units)
I
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.18.2 Neighborhood Center (CC-OL) District Development Standards
LOT ST AND ARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 6,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width ,
• 65 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• nla
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• 8 units per acre
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• O feet
~Front Yard Setback
• 20 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 0 feet for attached structure
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 0 feet for attached structure
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• 10 feet+ ((#of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• 800 square feet
9
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 15 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 40%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 80%
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.19.1 Health/Office Center (HOC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Health/Office Center (HOC-OL)
is designated to accommodate a
major medical campus and prime
office space in the city. The zone
permits mainly office and clinical
uses, but other services that
contribute to the well being of the
work environment such as small
scale retail and dining services,
hospitality and recreation facilities
are also allowed with special
permissions. The zone is designed
to enhance the performance
standards of the area by
incorporating development
standards and design guidelines to
facilitate and enhance aesthetics of
the community.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Health/Office
Center (HOC-OL).
Permitted Uses
Business: General Business
• Child daycare center
• Copy center
• Hotel/motel
Business: Office/Professional
• Business/financial services office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
• Medical office
Business: Retail
• Bakery
•Book store
• Convenient store
• Drug store
•Gift shop
• News dealer
• Very low intensity retail
• Low intensity retail
• Medium intensity retail
Institutional
• Government office
• Health clinic
• Hospital
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
• Univ,rsity or college
Publlc Facllltles
• Com!llunity center
•Library
•Public park
10
,-
Special Exceotion Uses
Business: General Business
• Barber/beauty shop
• Dry-cleaning service
• Fitness center/gym
• Health spa
• Restaurant
Communication/Utility
• Above-ground utility facility
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for churcti
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Institution al
• Drug or alcohol rehabilitation clinic
Public Facilities
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
Residential
• Dwelling, single family (upper
floors)
• Dwelling, multi-farnily (upper
floors)
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
·4.19.2 Health/Office Center (HOC-CL) District Development Standards
• LOT STANDARDS SETBACK STANDARDS HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 7,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 70 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• n/a
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• n/a
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• O feet
~ Front Yard Setback
• 40 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 10 feet + (( # of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• nla
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Maximum Structure HeightPrimary
Structure
• 55 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 25 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 35%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 20%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 60%
• Min1aulll deeplng room• per hotelf!Ptel
• 60
o Height Standards
• Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories'; hotels/motels 3
stories
I I
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.20.1 Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception
Uses
District Intent
The Major Industrial Center (PICOL)
is designated to permit light to
heavy industrial development in the
city at a higher density, and
establishment of the zone will
secure the space for future
industrial use and expansion of
existing facilities. The zone
currently accommodates the
existing major industries and the
industries serve as major employers
in the city.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as M_ajor Industrial
Center (PIC-OL).
Permitted Uses
Business: General Business
• Restaurant
Business: Office/Professional
• Construction trade office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
Business: Retail
• Convenient store
industrial
•Assembly
• Bottled gas storage/distribution
• Distribution facility
•Flex space
• Food production/processing
• Heavy -industry
• Light assembly
• Light manufacturing
• Research center
• Scrap metal yard
• Sign painting/fabrication
• Storage tanks (non-tia%ardous)
• Testing lab
•Tool and die shop
• Trucking terminal
•Welding
Institutional
•Crematory
• Government office
• Government operations (non·
office)
• Municipal airport
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
Public Facilities
• Community center
• Library
•Public park
12
Special Exception Uses
Communication/Utility
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Public Facilities
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.20.2 Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL) District
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 87,120 square feet (2 acres)
Minimum Lot Width
• 200 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• n/a
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 85%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• n/a
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet adjacent to arterial
• 15 feet adjacent to collector or
local
~111 Front Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 10 feet+ ((#of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• n/a
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
13
HEIGHT ST AN DAROS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 75 feet
Maximum Structure HeightAccessory
Structure
• 60 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 60%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 10%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 50%
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.21.1 Minor Industrial Center (SIC-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception
Uses
District Intent
The Minor Industrial Center (SICOL)
is designated to permit light to
moderate industrial development in
the city at a lower density. Besides
industrial, office and auto-oriented
business are also allowed in this
zone. The purpose of the zone
facilitates well considered facility
design and sustainable construction
to reduce the environmental impact
to the community. The zone also
emphasizes other forms of
connectivity such as bicycle and
pedestrian paths, as well as building
forms to enhance the aesthetics in
the community.
Application of District
Areas designated In Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Minor Industrial
Center (SIC-OL).
Permitted Us~
Business: General Business
• Restaurant
Business: Office/Professional
· • Construction trade office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
Business: Retail
• Convenience store
Communication/Utility
• Abo~ground utility facility
• RadiofTV station
Industrial
•Assembly
• Distribution facility
•Flex space
• Light assembly
• Research center
• Sign painting/fabrication
• T estiilg lab
• Tool and die shop
.•Welding
Institutional
• Government office
• Government operations (nonoffice)
• Municipal airport
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Publit parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
Public Faclllties
• Community center
• Library
•Public park
14
Special Exception Uses
Business: General Business
• Commercial training facility or
school
• Junk yard
• Race track
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Industrial
• Bottled gas storage/distribution
• Food production/processing
• Incinerator
• Storage tanks (non-flazardous)
Institutional
•Crematory
• Municipal heliport
Public Faclllties
• Church temple, mosque or similar
place of worship
'
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.21.2 Minor Industrial Center (SIC-OL) District Development Standards
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum Lot Width
• 130 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• nla
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 85%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• n/a
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet adjacent to arterial
• 15 feet adjacent to collector or
local
~n1 Front Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Side Yard Setback·
Primary Structure
• 1 O feet + (( # of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• n/a
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
15
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Maximum Structure HeightPrimary
Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 45 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 60%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 10%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 50%
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.22.1 Corridor Residential (RES-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Corridor Residential (RES-OL)
is designated to allow continue use
of existing single-family dwellings
along the corridor. While the zone
supports existing single family
residential, it can be expected that
when redevelopment occurs, there
will be non-residential opportunities
proposed within the Zone, and the
district may open up to the
opportunity for such uses.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: SR 931-
0L District Map as Corridor
Residential Center (RES-OL).
Permitted Uses
Accessory Use
• Child day care home
• Home occupation (type 1)
Institutional
• Government office
• Police, fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public parking lot (garage)
• Recreation center
Public Facllltles
• Community center
• Librafy .
•Public park
Residential
• Dwelling, single famHy
• Fair housing facility (small)
16
Special Exception Uses
Accessory Use
• Home occupation (type 2)
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Residential
• Bed and breakfast facility
• Boarding house
• Dwelling, multi-family (2-4 units)
•Group home
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.22.2 Corridor Residential (RES-OL) District Development Standards
LOT ST AND ARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 4,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 30 feet
. Minimum Lot Frontage
• 25 feet on public street with
public access
Minimum Lot Depth
• 3 times the lot width
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 75%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• 8 units per acre
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet adjacent to arterial
• 15 feet adjacent to collector or
local
-"' Front Yard Setback
• nla
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 3 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 3 feet
Transitional Side Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 10 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 860 square feet for the first floor
• 600 square feet for the first floor
with total greater than 860
square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• 850
17
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 20 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 40%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor ·
• 25%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 80%
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.23 SR-931-0L Sub-District Development Standards
A. General. Where the Overlay Districts Zoning Ordinance directly conflicts with other portions of the Zoning
Ordinance, this code shall prevail; however, no development may be approved that conflicts with the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Non-Residential Site Planning Regulations
a. Commercial uses shall be "master planned" in conjunction with adjacent office uses to facilitate
efficient circulation and shared parking.
b. Where developments include several buildings, they shall be grouped to create outdoor
spaces/plazas.
c. Open space shall be located contiguous to open space on adjacent sites to maximize their combined
visual effect.
d. A straightforward and visually pleasant approach to building entrances shall be provided, with a
drop-off area near office building entrances.
e. No accessory structure shall be located within any required setback.
f. Equipment
1. No storage areas, garbage containers or mechanical equipment shall be located within any
required setback.
ii. Mechanical equipment, garbage containers, and satellite dishes shall be completely and
permanently screened from view of public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. When
attached to the ground, screening methods shall include a solid wall or fence enclosure of a
material that matches the principal building. When roof mounted, screening methods may
include parapet walls or other architectural treatments approved by the Planning Director.
iii. The colors and materials of all screening methods shall match and be in coordination with the
colors and materials of the principal building.
g. Drive-Through
i. Where drive -through uses are permitted, drive-through windows and lanes are not permitted
to front onto any street.
h. Service Vehiclesffrucks
i. Adequate on-site areas must be provided for truck access, maneuvering, loading and storage.
ii. Service vehicle/truck traffic must be separated from automobile traffic.
i. Access Regulations
i. Roads and driveway cuts must be aligned to create four-way intersections. Access points
located on opposite sides of the street should be designed to line up the respective left tum
lanes, where the road has no center median.
ii. Curb cuts are not permitted within 350 feet of an intersection on any arterial street, or within
300 feet of an intersection on any collector street.
iii. Where permitted, outlots in commercial and mixed developments shall only be accessed
from internal roadways, and shall share driveways and parking lots wherever feasible.
1v. Direct access from primary arterials to development sites is prohibited, and direct access
from secondary arterials is only allowed for sites at least 8 acres in size. Direct access from
secondary arterials may not occur more frequently than once every 1,000 feet.
v. Parcels containing a minimum of five (5) acres and a minimum parcel width of 450 feet may
be granted one (l) additional driveway cut based on the merits of unique and/or unusual
circumstances on a case-by-case basis and approval by the Planning Director. The driveway
cut may not be permitted in all cases.
18
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.1 SR 931-0L Sub-District Signage Standards
A. General Requirements (all sub-districts)
a. Signage within the SR 931-0L shall be pennitted subject to the standards of Article .6.34 to 6.42 of
the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance unless otherwise stated below. In cases where Article 6.34 to 6.42
b. ~t :~~:1:~:~: ~~:~~i!~d9!:;h~~ea~:~~;:~~~ ~;t~~{eM~~~t:ie~a:~es~:~~:f.1~tTpremise
signs are not allowed.
c. Street number(s) shall be prominently placed on freestanding signage and shall not count toward the
four word limit of Designation Signs. ·
d. On multi-tenant buildings, all signage must be visually consistent.
e. Signs shall not obstruct views of authorized traffic signs or traffic control devices, create a visual
obstruction at driveway entrances, be animated, cause glare, or be lit by any flashing or moving
light.
.f. :Eleetrie Message Diiipl~' ~MD) signs ma:y contain static messages onl:y 01 chm1ges static copy nor
wore freqneHtly than opce every fi.ftaeR (1 )) seeeHas and shall not have ""fade" or "dissolve"
tJ:aRsitiens, er i?YU aRimetion OJ video, 01 similM st11'tlc transitions OJ• fiatne efteccs that have the
appearance of moviHg text of images. .
g. In no case shall total sign area for any use exceed 500 square feet. Ground sign area does not incJude
the supporting base below signage itself. Individual letters are to be measured as total height
multiplied by total width of each Jetter.
h. Lots fronting on two or more streets are pennitted one sign for each street frontage. When
Designation Signs are used, the Designation Signs shall not count toward an individual user's
pennitted signage.
1. Directional Signs cannot exceed 4 square feet each in size and 16 square feet total for a11 signs,
cannot exceed 3 feet in height, and must not advertise an activity.
J. A maximum of one color plus white or black may be used on any sign. The primary colors of the
sign should be black or white with the other color being used as an accent· color only;
1. Consideration may be given to a sign with more than one color other than black and
white and may be approved administratively only ifthe colors are a muted and dark
earth tone. Full color elevations of the signs must be submitted to the Planning
Department in order to be approved administratively. Garish colors must be avoided,
and the color scheme must relate to the associated building.
k. Off-site signage shall comply with Kokomo Zoning Ordinance regulations.
1. Temporary Signage is not pennitted.
m. All signs shall be constructed with individual lettering flush mounted to either the wall of the
building or the face of the ground sign. Panel, box-type, or back channeling ofletters is prohibited.
n. Where designation signs and multiple ground signs are used in a development, a unifonn design
theme for the development shall be established and fo11owed with each sign.
B. Additional Sign Requirements for Regional Center (RC-OL), Community Center (CC-OL),
Neighborhood Commercial (NC-OL) and Health/Office Center (HOC-OL) Sub-Districts
a. Designation Signs
i. Location Restrictions
1. Designation signage shall be pennitted for integrated, multi-parcel developments of at
least 15 acres in size.
2. Designation signage shall be no closer than 750 feet from any other approved and/or
existing designation sign.
ii. General Requirements
19
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
I. Each integrated, multi-parcel development shall be pennitted one (I) designation sign
on each public street frontage to which the development is adjacent.
2. Designation signage shall be designed as part of the overall "gateway" treatment that
includes landscaping and other improvements such as fencing or water features.
3. Designation signage shall be readily visible from the roadway, and shall consist of
individual letters, up to a maximum of four ( 4) items of infonnation, and mounted to
a solid wall. Signs shall identify the development name only; identification for
individual users is prohibited. Letters shall not exceed 18 inches in height, and shall
be either back-lit or illuminated by ground-mounted lights.
iii. Setback Requirements
I. All designation signage shall be set back a minimum of ten (I 0) feet from the public
right-of-way.
iv. Height Requirements
I. Designation signage shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.
v. Size Requirements · ,
I. Designation signs shall not exceed l 80·square feet in size and may be two sided.
b Ground Siges
LgQati9R R es&=i~i0ft5
c. Wall Signs
1 IPdhzidual sic1:1nd signs are f.'Fehieitcd in tile Regional Center, Community Centcf,
N8igheerhoed Cemmereial and I Iealth/Office Center Stte Distriets . .
1. Location Restrictions
I. One (I) building-mounted sign shall be pennitted on each public street frontage to
which the lot is adjacent.
ii. General Requirements
I. Building-mounted signage shall consist of individual back-lit or industrially
illuminated lettering. Panel, box-type, and back-channeled signs are not pennitted in
any Sub district.
2. For multi-tenant buildings, each tenant is pennitted one (I) wall sign with a
maximum of three (3) items of infonnation.
iii. Height Requirements
I. On buildings up to three (3) stories in height, building-mounted signage shall not
exceed two (2) feet in height. On buildings over three (3) stories in height, building
mounted signage shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, with the exception in the
Industrial Sub district wh.ere they shall not exceed two (2) feet in height. Other
building sign size limitations will be per Article 6.34 to 6.42 -Sign Standards of the
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
20
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.2 Regional Center (RC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
21
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.3 Community Center (CC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS ·
• Not Permitted
22
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Pennitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.4 Neighborhood Center (NC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 3 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 50 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 6 feet
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height .
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 120 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 6 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 20 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
23
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 150 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.5 Health/Office Center (HOC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 3 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 50 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 6 feet ·
PORTABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Max.imum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 120 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 6 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 20 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
24
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 150 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.6 Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
PORTABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
25
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.7 Minor Industrial Center (SIC-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
PORTABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Pennitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
26
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Pennitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.24.8 Corridor Residential (RES-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
• nfa ·
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
PORTABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
• nla
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
• n/a
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
27
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• n/a
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.25 SR 931-0L Sub-District Parking Standards
Follow the Parking Standard of Downtown Commercial District (DC). Please refer to Article 6.47, 6.49, 6.50
in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
4.26 SR 931-0L Sub-District Landscaping Standards
For Corridor Residential Sub-District (RES-OL), follow the Landscaping Standard of Urban Residential District
(R5). Please refer to Article 6.23 to 6.40 in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
For Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL) and Minor Industrial Center (SIC-OL) Sub-districts, follow the
Landscaping Standards for Moderate Intensity Industrial District (MI). Please refer to Article 6.23 to 6.40 in
the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
For Regional Center (RC-OL), Community Center (CC-OL), Neighborhood Center (NC-OL) and Health/Office
Center (HOC-OL) Sub-districts, follow the Landscaping Standard of Downtown Commercial District (DC).
Please refer to Article 6.23 to 6.40 in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
4.27 SR-931 Overlay Sub-District Architecture Standards
A. Architectural Review Procedure
a. With regard to non-residential developments, architectural plans for all primary and accessory
buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the
development, the design of the buildings, and the number, size, and type of structures. A complete
set of color 360-degree elevations detailing the front, rear, and opposite side views of each proposed
above ground structure shall be provided. Key exterior elements such as materials, windows,
architectural breaks, etc. must be rendered in sufficient detail and accompanied by clear descriptions
of materials specifications, colors, and textures.
i. If the architectural standards of the SR 931-0L district are met, the review of the
architectural plans shall be completed by the Planning Staff. Appeals of Staff's
interpretations shall go to the Planning Commission who shall render a decision pursuant
to the procedures established
B. Non-Residential General Architecture Requirements
The following design/architecture requirements shall apply to all non-residential Sub districts within the SR 93 i
Overlay district.
a. High quality building design and construction shall be provided on all elevations (360 degree
architectural treatment) in all Sub districts and architectural detailing shall be focused on the
building entry and on fa.yades visible from any road way.
b. The scale, mass, color and proportion of the building shall reflect the character of the area in which it
is located and shall be compatible with adjoining developments.
c. Multiple buildings in developments (including accessory buildings and detached outlot buildings in
commercial centers, where permitted) must incorporate coordinated architectural styles, materials,
forms, features, colors and applied elements to visually tie the development together.
d. Antennas shall be roof-mounted only, shall project no more than 12 feet above the height of the
building, and shall be positioned to minimize visibility from public rights-of-way. One antenna is
allowed per building, except that at buildings with more than one tenant, a maximum of two shall be
allowed per building.
28
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
e. Signage, fencing, walls and other amenities (benches, lights) must be integrated with building design
and landscaping.
f. Building Trim
g.
h.
i. The use of accent and trim elements (accent panels, banding, cornices, canopies/awnings,
etc.) is recommended to add visual interest and break down the scale of facades.
ii. Permitted building trim materials include: brick (clay), stone, simulated cut stone, tile
(ceramic or porcelain), wood, glass, painted aluminum, formed polymers ("Fypon"), and
EIFS as permitted in the individual Sub districts.
Facades
Roofs
i.
11.
iii.
IV.
Glazing shall not exceed 75% of any fa~de.
Favade treatments shall be designed to break large fa~de areas into smaller facades.
Exterior materials must be consistent on all facades, and material/finish changes should
relate to the "structure" of the building.
Colors used on building facades must be complementary. Natural, muted colors should
serve as the primary fayade color, with brighter colors used only as limited accents.
i. Pitched roofs shall be required on buildings used for all small-scale retail, service, and
office uses. Small-scale shall generally mean one-story buildings; however, the design
and location of some buildings, which are more than orie story in height, may require
pitched roofs to be used as well.
11. Rooflines and roof profiles shall be varied to create visual interest. One-story buildings
must incorporate sloped roofs or tall parapets to architecturally conceal roof-mounted
equipment.
m. All rooftop equipment, including vents greater than 1 foot in height, shall be screened
from view from all ground level vantage points by parapet walls, rooftop walls or
recesses in sloped roofs.
iv. Rooftop equipment screens and rooftop penetrations (vents) shall be of a color
compatible with the overall building or roof color (not an accent color).
v. Roof materials should be traditional in composition and complement the architectural
features of the structure.
vi. Where pitched roofs are required or requested; appropriate pitches shall be used based on
the circumstance.
i. All structures will be evaluated on the overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the
quality of its design and its relationship to the surrounding area.
C. Additional Architecture Standards for Regional Center (RC-OL), Community Center (CC-OL),
Neighborhood Commercial (NC-OL) and Health/Office Center (HOC-OL) Sub-Districts
a. General
i. In pedestrian-oriented commercial areas, a continuous "street wall" of facades shall be
created. There shall be easy access from parking areas to the shopping street or plaza.
ii. Facades shall incorporate three or more vertical planes, and create both a "rhythm" of
favade bays or structural elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.
iii. Main building entrances must be prominently featured through porticos, recessed
entrances, lighting and landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all
entrances.
iv. Appropriate building finish materials include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut
stone, finished (textured and painted) concrete, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or
lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural
asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS ("Dryvit") as a limited trim material only.}
29
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
v. Inappropriate, prohibited building finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished
concrete or concrete panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS ("Dryvit") wall systems, steel
or aluminum curtain wall systems, plasti~s, reflective glass.
D. Additional Architecture Standards for Health/Office Center (HOC-OL) Sub-District
a. Facades shall incorporate three or more vertical planes, and create both a "rhythm" of fac;ade bays or
structural elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.
b. Main building entrances must be prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting .
and landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.
c. Appropriate building finish materials include: brick (clay}, natural stone, simulated cut stone,
finished (textured and painted) concrete, tile (ceramic or porcelain}, glass (clear or lightly tinted),
standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and
EIFS ("Dryvit") as a limited trim material only.}
E. Additional Architecture Standards for Major Industrial Center (PIC-OL) and Minor Industrial
Center (SIC-OL) Sub-Districts
a. The primary fac;ade treatment shall create both a "rhythm" of fac;ade bays or structural elements, and
a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.
b. Appropriate building finish materials include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone,
finished (textured and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete panels, tile
(ceramic or porcelain}, steel/masonry composite wall systems, glass (clear or lightly tinted}, standing
seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS
("Dryvit") wall systems only if at least 8' above grade, and painted concrete masonry units at rear
facades only.
c. Iflappropriate, prohibited building finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or
concrete panels, and steel or aluminum curtain wall systems plastics, reflective glass.
4.28 SR-931 Overlay Sub-District Procedures
A. Review Procedures
All development within the SR 931-0L District shall be subject to site plan review, Kokomo Zoning
Ordinance subdivision regulations, and site development standards, in addition to the use, bulk, and site
development standards of this section. The following types of development proposals shall be required to be
reviewed as planned developments in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance with Article 7, Planned Development
Districts (PD):
a. All proposed subdivisions.
b. All development proposals that include requests for any exceptions from the standards listed for this
district and/or Sub districts.
c. All proposed uses listed as Special Exceptions in Article 4.15.11. These uses are not assumed
permitted by-right and thus, there shall be no presumption of their approval.
d. All development proposals in the Agricultural (AG) District.
e. All other development proposals shall be required to submit all information for a detailed
development plan; however, the plan shall be subject to review by City staff and the Plan
Commission.
4.29 SR-931 Overlay Sub-District Definitions
Sign, Designation: A type of ground sign that identifies an integrated development and may identify one or
more establishments within the development.
30
City of Kokomo-SR 931-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
Sign, Items oflnformation: A word, a logo, an initial, an abbreviation, a number, a symbol, or a geometric.
Sign, Temporary: An on-premise advertising device not fixed to a permanent foundation, for the purpose of
conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject related to the activities on the
premises upon which it is located.
31

City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
"US 31-0L" District
4.30 District Intent, Affect on Uses, & Development Standards
District Intent
The purpose of the US 31-0L (US
31 overlay district) is to manage the
growth and development along the
new corridor on the east rim of the
city. The zone addresses the
appearance and the access points
along the corridor. The land use is
primary reserved for existing uses
such as agriculture and limited
residential. Due to the prime
location to the highway access,
future uses in the area are expected
to include office and industrial with
limited retail development. The US
31 overlay district includes
standards for building fayade,
building form, parl<ing, lighting,
landscaping, access points, and
procedure in order to enhance the
character and function of the
corridor. The US 31-0L applies to
the sub-districts:
I Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA'-"
OL), Gateway Office (G0-01), and
Agricultural (AG-OL) as indicated on
Map 1: US 31-0L District Map.
Application of District
All areas designated in Map 1: US
31-0L District Map. Including subdistricts:
Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIAOL),
Gateway Office (GO-OL}, and
Agricultural (AG-OL).
Affect on Uses
PermitteJt Uses
See 4:31.1, 4.32.1_~4.33.1 for
_permitted uses within each subdistrict
within the US 31·0L and
legal nonconforming structures, lots
and.uses. -
Special Exception Uses
See 4.31,1; 4.32.1,-4.33.1 for
_special exceptl0n uses within each
sub-district within the US 31-0L.
Develonment Standards
Where the Overtay Districts Zoning
Ordinance directly conflicts with
other portions of the Zoning
Ordinance, this code shall prevail:
however; no development may be
approved that conflicts with the
Comprehensive Plan. F"or
Development Standards see 4-.~1.2,
4.32.2-, 4.33.2 and 4.84. See · ·
4.35.t 4.35.2, 4.35.3; 4.35.4 for
Slgnage Standards. See 4.36 for
Parking Standards (see Articles
6.47, 6.49, 6.50). See 4.37 for
Landscaping Standards (see
Articles 6.23 to 6.40). See 4.38 for
Architecb.lrat Standards. See 4.39
for Procedures. See 4.-40 for ·
Definition~.
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
4.31.1 Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special
Exception Uses
Di.strict Intent
The Office/Industrial/Agricultural
(OIA-OL), is designated to preserve
existing farm land in the area;
however the zone also allows future
developments to occur such as
industrial or technology park and
corporate office campus that needs
visibiUty and good accessibility to
US 31. It is anticipated that the zone
will serve as a future employment
and production center in the region.
Zones Ml, OC, AG are the base
zones for this sub-district.
Application of District
All areas designated in Map 1: US
31-0L District Map. Including subdistrict
Officenndustrial/Agricultural
(OJA-Ol).
Permitted U$eS
Agricultural
• Agricultural crop production
•Orchard
• Plant nursery
• Roadside produce sales
• Storage of agricultural products
produced on site
•Tree farm
Business: OfflcelProfesslonal
• Business/financial services office
• Construction trade office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
• Medical office
Communication/Utility
• AbOve-ground utiffty facitlty
• Radio/TV station
Industrial
•Assembly
• Distribution facility
• Flex-space
• Light assembly
• Mini-warehouse storage ~ty
. • Outc:ioor storage
• Research center
• Sign paintinglfabtication
• Testing lab
• Tool and die shop
• Trucking terminal
•Warehouse
•Welding
Institutional
• Government office
• Government operations (non.
office)
• Municipal airport
• Police. fire or rescue station
• Post office
• Public. parldng lot {garage)
• Recreation center
• Recycling sorting/distribution
Public Facllltles
• Community center
• Ubrary
• Public paric
2
Soecial Exception Uses
Agricultural
• Raising of farm animals
Communication/Utility
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
4.31.2
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA-OL) Development Standards
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 1 acre
Minimum Lot Width
• 130 feet '
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• n/a
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 85%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 60%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• n/a
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet adjacent to arterial
• 15 feet adjacent to collector or
local
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 1 O feet + (( # of stories - 2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
3
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories
Minimum Structure HeightAccessory
Office Attached to
Main Structure
• 12 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 45 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 60%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 10%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 50%
4.32.1
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Gateway Office (GO-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Gateway Office (GO-OL)
surrounds the primary interchange
on US 31 , and the area connects
US 31 and the SR 931 corridor. This
zone is designated as a primary
gateway to Kokomo and it
accommodates businesses that
need high visibility. Therefore, the
zone is mainly suitable for
professional office, and light
industry. Zone OC is the base zone
for this sub-district.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1; US 31-
0L District Map as Gateway Office
{GO-OL).
Permitted US¢S
Agricultural
• Agricultural crop production
• Orchard
• Plant nursery
• Roadside produce sales
• Storage of agricultural products
produced on site
•Tree farm
Business: Office/Professional
• Business/financial services office
• Construction trade office
• Design/planning office
• General services office
• Medical office
Communication/Utility
• Above-ground utfllty faclJity
Industrial
• f:lex-space
• Light assembly
• Research center
Institutional
• Drug or alcohol rehabilitation c1intc
• Post office
4
Special Exception Uses
Business: Retail
• Gift shop
• News dealer
• Bakery
•Book store
• Convenience store
• Drug store
Communlcation/Utlllty
• Wireless telecommunication
facility
General
• Off-site par1cing lot for church
temple, mosque or similar place of
worship
Publlc Facilities
• Church temple, mosque or similar
plaoe of worship
• community center
•Library
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4 .. 32 2 Gateway Office (GO-OL) Development Standards
LOT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 20,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width
• 100 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage
• nla
Minimum Lot Depth
• nla
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 95%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 70%
DENSITY STANDARDS .
Maximum Density
• n/a
SETBACK STANDARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 25 feet adjacent to arterial
• 15 feet adjacent to collector or
local
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 60 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 10 feet+ ((#of stories -2) x 5
feet)
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 5 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1,000 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
5
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• 24 feet and 2 stories, retail outlot
1 story (12 feet)
Minimum Structure HeightAccessory
Office Attached to
Main Structure
• 12 feet
Maximum Structure HeightPrimary
Structure
• 75 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 25 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 40%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 85%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 80% .
4.33.1
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
Agricultural (AG-OL) District Intent, Permitted Uses, & Special Exception Uses
District Intent
The Agricultural (AG-OL) is
designated to recognize existing
uses along the conidor, and provide
for their continued operation. Much
of this area is used for agricultural
purposes; however there are areas
within the zone currently used for
residential and non-residential
purposes. It is the purpose of this
zone to allow existing uses to
continue to operate and expand,
however new non-agricultural uses
are discouraged. Zone AG is the
base zone for this sub-district.
Application of District
Areas designated in Map 1: US 31-
0L District Map as Agricultural (AGOL).
Permitted Uses
Agricultural
• Agricuttural crop production
• Orchard
• Plant nursery
• Roadside produce sales
• Storage of agricultural products
produced on site
• Treefann
6
Special Ex~ption Uses
Agricultural
• Raising of farm animals
General Business
• Barber/beauty shop
• Child daycare center
• Commercial training facility or
sehool
• Ory-cleaning sef'Vice
• Fitness center/gym
• Health spa
• Restaurant
Communlcation/Utlllty
• Abov~d utility facility
General
• Off-site parking lot for church
temple, mosque or simffar place of
worship
i
. 4.33.2
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Agricultural (AG-OL) - Urban Development Standards
LOT ST AND ARDS
Minimum Lot Area
• 20 acres
Minimum Lot Width
• n/a
Minimum Lot Frontage
• n/a
Minimum Lot Depth
• n/a
Maximum Lot Coverage
• 15%
Maximum Impervious Surface
Coverage
• 15%
DENSITY STANDARDS
Maximum Density
• n/a
SETBACK ST AND ARDS
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• 50 feet adjacent to arterial
• 40 feet adjacent to collector or
local
Minimum Front Yard Setback
• n/a
Minimum Side Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 40 feet
Minimum Side Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 30 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackPrimary
Structure
• 40 feet
Minimum Rear Yard SetbackAccessory
Structure
• 30 feet
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure
• 1, 100 square feet or
• 800 square feet if the total
finished floor area is greater
than 1, 100 square feet
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
7
HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Structure Height
• n/a
Maximum Structure Height -
Primary Structure
• 45 feet
Maximum Structure Height -
Accessory Structure
• 20 feet
STRUCTURE FACADE
STANDARDS
Minimum Transparency, Ground
Floor
• 25%
Maximum Transparency,
Ground Floor
• 60%
Minimum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 10%
Maximum Transparency, Floors
above Ground Floor
• 50%
4.33.3
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Agricultural (AG-OL) - Rural Development Standards
LOT STANDARDS SETBACK STANDARDS HEIGHT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Front Yard Setback Minimum Structure Height
• 20 acres • 50 feet adjacent to arterial • n/a
• 40 feet adjacent to collector or
Minimum Lot Width local · Maximum Structure Height -
• n/a Primary Structure
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 40 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage • n/a
• n/a Maximum Structure Height -
Minimum Side Yard Setback- Accessory Structure
Minimum Lot Depth Primary Structure • 35 feet
• n/a • 40 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage Minimum Side Yard Setback- STRUCTURE FACADE
• 15% Accessory Structure STANDARDS
• 30 feet
Maximum Impervious Surface Minimum Transparency, Ground
Coverage Minimum Rear Yard Setback- Floor
• 15% Primary Structure • 25%
• 40 feet
DENSITY STANDARDS Maximum Transparency,
Minimum Rear Yard Setback- Ground Floor
Maximum Density Accessory Structure • 60%
• n/a • 30 feet
Minimum Transparency, Floors
FLOOR AREA STANDARDS above Ground Floor
• 10%
Minimum Main Floor Area -
Primary Structure Maximum Transparency, Floors
• n/a above Ground Floor
• 50%
Minimum Main Floor Area per
Dwelling Unit
• n/a
8
-._
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
4.34 US 31-0L District Development Standards
A. General. Where the Overlay Districts Zoning Ordinance directly conflicts with other portions of the Zoning
Ordinance, this code shall prevail; however, no development may be approved that conflicts with the
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Non-Residential Site Planning Regulations
a. The US 31 - OL District shall be developed as a cohesive and harmonized corridor, however, each
sub-district shall have a distinctive use, purpose, and site development standards based in part on its
function, location and desired appearances within the corridor.
b. Where developments include several buildings, they shall be grouped to create outdoor
spaces/plazas.
~- Open space shall be located contiguous to open space on adjacent sites to maximize their combined
visual effect.
d. A straightforward and visually pleasant approach to building entrances shall be provided, with a
drop-off area near office building entrances.
e. No accessory structure shall be located within any required setback.
f. Equipment
i. No storage areas, garbage containers or mechanical equipment shall be located within any
required setback.
ii. Mechanical equipment, garbage containers, and satellite dishes shall be completely and
permanently screened from view of public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. When
attached to the ground, screening methods shall include a solid wall or fence enclosure of a
material that matches the principal building. When roof mounted, screening methods may
include parapet walls or other architectural treatments approved by the Planning Director.
iii. The colors and materials of all screening methods shall match and be in coordination with the
colors and materials of the principal building.
g. Drive-through
i. Where drive-through uses are permitted, drive-through windows and lanes are not permitted
to front onto any street.
h. Service Vehiclesffrucks
i. Adequate on-site areas must be provided for truck access, maneuvering, loading and storage.
ii. Service vehicle/truck traffic must be separated from automobile traffic.
·i. Access Regulations
i. Roads and driveway cuts must be aligned to create four-way intersections. Access points
located on opposite sides of the street should be designed to line up the respective left tum
lanes, where the road has no center median.
ii. Curb cuts are not permitted within 350 feet of an intersection on any arterial street, or within
300 feet of an intersection on any collector street.
iii. Where permitted, outlots in commercial and mixed developments shall only be accessed
from internal roadways, and shall share driveways and parking lots wherever feasible.
iv. Direct access from primary arterials to development sites is prohibited, and direct access
from secondary arterials is only allowed for sites at least 8 acres in size. Direct access from
secondary arterials may not occur more :frequently than once every 1,000 feet.
9
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
v. Parcels containing a minimum of five (5) acres and a minimum parcel width of 450 feet may
be granted one (1) additional driveway cut based on the merits of unique and/or unusual
circumstances on a case-by-case basis and approval by the Planning Director. The driveway
cut may not be permitted in all cases.
4.35.1 US 31-0L District Signage Standards
A. General Requirements (all sub-districts) Base zone for Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA) is C2. Base
zone for Gateway Office (GO) is C2. Base zone for Agricultural (AG-OL) is AG.
a. Signage within the US 31-0L shall be permitted subject to the standards of Article 6.34 to 6.42 of
the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance unless otherwise stated below. In cases where Article 6.34 to 6.42
and the standards of the US 31-0L are in conflict, the US 31-0L District standard or the most
restrictive standard shall apply.
b. All signs must be associated with the permitted use of the property on which they are located.
c. Street number(s) shall be prominently placed on freestanding signage and shall not count toward the
four word limit of Designation Signs.
d. On multi-tenant buildings, all signage must be visually consistent.
e. Signs shall not obstruct views of authorized traffic signs or traffic control devices, create a visual
obstruction at driveway entrances, be animated, cause glare, or be lit by any flashing or moving
light.
f. In no case shall total sign area for any use exceed 500 square feet. Ground sign area does not include
the supporting base below signage itself. Individual letters are to be measured as total height
multiplied by total width of each letter.
g. Lots fronting on two or more streets are permitted one sign for each street frontage. When
Designation Signs are used, the Designation Signs shall not count toward an individual user's
permitted signage.
h. Directional Signs cannot exceed 4 square feet each in size and 16 square feet total for all signs,
cannot exceed 3 feet in height, and must not advertise an activity.
i. A maximum of one color plus white or black may be used on any sign. The primary colors of the
sign should be black or white with the other color being used as an accent color only.
i. Consideration may be given to a sign with more than one color other than black and white
and may be approved administratively only ifthe colors are a muted and dark earth tone. Full
color elevations of the signs must be submitted to the Planning Department in order to be
approved administratively. Garish colors must be avoided, and the color scheme must relate
to the associated building.
ii. Trademark corporate logos may be exempted from color restrictions of this section at the
discretion of the planning director
J. All signs shall be constructed with individual lettering flush mounted to either the wall of the
building nr the face of the ground sign. Panel, box-type, or back channeling ofletters is prohibited.
k. Where designation signs and multiple ground signs are used in a development, a uniform design
theme for the development shall be established and followed with each sign.
B. Additional Sign Requirements for Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OJA) and Gateway Office (GO) sub
districts. Base zone for Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA) is C2. Base zone for Gateway Office (GO) is
C2.
a. Designation. Signs
i. Location Restrictions
1. Designation signage shall be permitted for integrated, multi-parcel developments of at
least 15 acres in size.
10
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
2. Designation signage shall be no closer than 1,000 feet from any other approved arid/or
existing designation sign.
11. General Requirements
1. Each integrated, multi-parcel development shall be permitted one (I) designation sign
on each public street frontage to which the development is adjacent.
2. Designation signage shall be designed as part of the overall "gateway" treatment that
includes landscaping and other improvements such as fencing or water features.
3. Designation signage shall be readily visible from the roadway, and shall consist of
individual letters, up to a maximum of four (4) items of information, and mounted to a
solid wall. Signs shall identify the development name only; identification for individual
users is prohibited. Letters shall not exceed 18 inches in height, and shall be either
back-lit or illuminated by ground-mounted lights.
4. Signs located on, in or above the Right-of-Way of any Street or Alley are prohibited
except for state signs or way finding signs.
iii. Setback Requirements
I. All designation signage shall be set back a minimum often (10) feet from the public
right-of-way.
iv. Height Requirements
i. Designation signage shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height.
v. Size Requirements
i. Designation signs shall not exceed 180 square feet in size and may be two sided.
b. Ground Signs
i. Location Restrictions
1. Individual ground signs are prohibited in the Regional Center, Community Center,
Neighborhood Commercial and Health/Office Center Sub Districts.
c. Wall Signs
i. Location Restrictions
1. One (I) building-mounted sign shall be permitted on each public street frontage to
which the lot is adjacent.
ii. General Requirements
1. Building-mounted signage shall consist ofindividual back-lit or industrially illuminated
lettering. Panel, box-type, and back-channeled signs are not permitted in any Sub
district.
2. For multi-tenant buildings, each tenant is permitted one (I) wall sign with a maximum
of three (3) items of information (See definition for items of information).
iii. Height Requirements
1. On buildings up to three (3) stories in height, building-mounted signage shall not
exceed two (2) feet in height. On buildings over three (3) stories in height, building
mounted signage shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, with the exception in the
Industrial Sub district where they shall not exceed two (2) feet in height. Other building
sign size limitations will be per Article 6.34 to 6.42 -Sign Standards of the Kokomo
Zoning Ordinance.
11
4.35.2
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Office/lndustrial/Agricultural(OIA-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet .
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Window Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
12
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
4.35.3
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Gateway Office (GO-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
Awning Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Awning Sign Maximum Height
• 4 feet
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
Ground Sign Maximum Size
• 100 square feet
Ground Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
Portable Sign Maximum Size
• 32 square feet
Portable Sign Maximum
Quantity
• 2
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
Projecting Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Projecting Sign Maximum
Height
• 10 feet
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
Wall Sign Maximum Size
• 200 square feet
Wall Sign Maximum Height
· • 8 feet
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
Window Sign Maximum Size
• 40 square feet
Window Sign Maximum Height
• 8 feet
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
13
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• 300 FEET
4.35.4
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
Agricultural (AG-OL) Signage Standards
AWNING SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
GROUND SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
PORT ABLE SIGN (A-FRAME
SIGN) STANDARDS
• n/a
PROJECTING SIGNS
STANDARDS
• n/a
WALL SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
WINDOW SIGNS STANDARDS
• n/a
TEMPORARY SIGNS
STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
OFF-SITE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
14
POLE SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
ROOF SIGNS STANDARDS
• Not Permitted
MAXIMUM OF ALL SIGNS
• n/a
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
·4.36 US 31-0L Sub-District Parking Standards
• For retail and commercial uses, parking standards shall follow Downtown Commercial District (DC) in the
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance. Please refer to Article 6.47, 6.49, 6.50 in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
For office and industrial uses, parking standards shall follow Low Intensity Industrial District (LI). Please refer
to Article 6.47, 6.49, 6.50 in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance.
Unless otherwise stated in Article 4.36, the following standards should follow Kokomo Zoning Ordinances. In
case the standards of Article 4.36 and the Kokomo Zoning Ordinances are different, the most restrictive
standards shall apply.
4.37 US 31-0L Sub-District Landscaping Standards
For Office, Industrial, Agricultural Sub district,
If the use is agricultural, reference to the Landscaping Standards for Agriculture District (AG). Please follow
Article 6.23 to 6.30 in the Kokomo Zoning.
If the use is office or industrial, follow the Landscaping Standards for Light Intensity Industrial/ (Business Park)
District (LI). Please follow Article 6.23 to 6.30 in the Kokomo Zoning.
Unless otherwise stated in Article ·4.37, the following standards should follow Kokomo Zoning Ordinances. In
case the standards of Article 4.37 and the Kokomo Zoning Ordinances are different, the most restrictive
standards shall apply.
·4.38 US 31-0L Sub-District Architecture Standards
A. Architectural Review Procedure
a. With regard to non-residential developments, architectural plans for all primary and accessory
buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the
development, the design of the buildings, and the number, size, and type of structures. A complete
set of color 360-degree elevations detailing the front, rear, and opposite side views of each proposed
above ground structure shall be provided. Key exterior elements such as materials, windows,
architectural breaks, etc. must be rendered in sufficient detail and accompanied by clear descriptions
of materials specifications, colors, and textures.
i. If the architectural standards of the US 31-0L district are met, the review of the architectural
plans shall be completed by the Planning Staff. Appeals of Staff's interpretations shall go to
the Planning Commission who shall render a decision pursuant to the established procedures.
A. Non-Residential General Architecture Requirements
The following design/architecture requirements shall apply to all non-residential sub districts within the US 31
Overlay district.
a. High quality building design and construction shall be provided on all elevations (360 degree
architectural treatment) in all Sub districts and architectural detailing shall be focused on the
building entry and on fa~ades visible from any roadway.
b. The scale, mass, color and proportion of the building shall reflect the character of the area in which it
is located and shall be compatible with adjoining developments.
15
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
c. Multiple buildings in developments (including accessory buildings and detached outlot buildings in
commercial centers, where permitted) must incorporate coordinated architectural styles, materials,
forms, features, colors and applied elements to visually tie the development together.
d. Antennas shall be roof-mounted only, shall project no more than 12 feet above the height of the
building, and shall be positioned to minimize visibility from public rights-of-way. As a special
exception, communication antennas for television and radio may exceed the height requirements
listed in this section subject to approval by the planning commission. One antenna is allowed per
building, except that at buildings with more than one tenant, a maximum of two shall be allowed per
building.
e. Signage, fencing, walls and other amenities (benches, lights) must be integrated with building design
and landscaping.
f. Building Trim
1. The use of accent and trim elements (accent panels, banding, cornices, canopies/awnings,
etc.) is recommended to add visual interest and break down the scale of facades.
11. Permitted building trim materials include: brick (clay), stone, simulated cut stone, tile
(ceramic or porcelain), wood, glass, painted aluminum, formed polymers ("Fypon"), and
EIFS as permitted in the individual Sub districts.
g. Fa((ade
1. Glazing shall not exceed 75% of any fa((ade.
11. Fa((ade treatments shall be designed to break large fa((ade areas into smaller facades.
111. Exterior materials must be consistent on all facades, and material/finish changes should relate
to the "structure" of the building.
iv. Colors used on building facades must be complementary. Natural, muted colors should serve
as the primary fa((ade color, with brighter colors used only as limited accents.
h. Roofs
i. Pitched roofs shall be required on buildings used for all small-scale retail, service, and office
uses. Small-scale shall generally mean one-story buildings; however, the design and location
of some buildings, which are more than one story in height, may require pitched roofs to be
used as well.
ii. Rooflines and roof profiles shall be varied to create visual interest. One-story buildings must
incorporate sloped roofs or tall parapets to architecturally conceal roof-mounted equipment.
iii. All rooftop equipment, including vents greater than I foot in height, shall be screened from
view from all ground level vantage points by parapet walls, rooftop walls or recesses in
sloped roofs.
iv. Rooftop equipment screens and rooftop penetrations (vents) shall be of a color compatible
with the overall building or roof color (not an accent color).
v. Roof materials should be traditional in composition and complement the architectural
features of the structure.
vi. Where pitched roofs are required or requested; appropriate pitches shall be used based on the
circumstance.
i. All structures will be evaluated on the overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the
quality of its design and its relationship to the surrounding area.
B. Additional Architecture Standards for Gateway Office (GO) Sub District
a. Facades shall incorporate three or more vertical planes, and create both a "rhythm" of fai;ade bays or
structural elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.
b. Main building entrances must be prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting
and landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.
16
• City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance - Draft August 30, 2012
c. Appropriate building finish materials include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone,
finished (textured and painted) concrete, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted),
standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and
EIFS ("Dryvit") as a limited trim material only.}
C. Additional Architecture Standards for Office/Industrial/Agricultural (OIA) Sub District
a. The primary faiyade treatment shall create both a "rhythm" of fa~ade bays or structural elements, and
a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.
b. Appropriate building finish materials include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone,
finished (textured and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete panels, tile
(ceramic or porcelain), steel/masonry composite wall systems, glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing
seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS
("Dryvit") wall systems only if at least 8' above grade, and painted concrete masonry units at rear
facades only.}
c. Inappropriate, prohibited building finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or
concrete panels, steel or aluminum curtain wall systems plastics, reflective glass.}
4.39 US 31-0L Sub-District Procedures
A. Review Procedures
All development within the US31-0L District shall be subject to site plan review, Kokomo Zoning
Ordinance subdivision regulations, and site development standards, in addition to the use, bulk, and site
development standards of this section. The following types of development proposals shall be required to be
reviewed as planned developments in the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance with Article 7 Planned Development
Districts (PD).
a. All proposed subdivisions.
b. All development proposals that include requests for any exceptions from the standards listed for this
district and/or Sub districts.
c. All proposed uses listed as Special Exceptions in Article 4.16.1. These uses are not assumed
permitted by-right and thus, there shall be no presumption of their approval.
d. All development proposals in the Agricultural (AG) District.
e. All other development proposals shall be required to submit all information for a detailed
development plan; however, the plan shall be subject to review through the standard Planned
Development process.
B. Appeal Process
Appeals of Staff's interpretations shall go to the Planning Commission who shall render a decision pursuant
to the established procedures.
4.40 US 31-0L Sub-District Definitions
Sign, Designation: A type of ground sign that identifies an integrated development and may identify one or
more establishments within the development.
Sign, Items of Information: A word, a logo, an initial, an abbreviation, a number, a symbol, or a geometric.
17
City of Kokomo-US 31-0L Zoning Ordinance- Draft August 30, 2012
Sign, Temporary: An on-premise advertising device not fixed to a permanent foundation, for the purpose of
conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject related to the activities on the
premises upon which it is located.
18
Article Ave
Official Zoning Map
August 12, 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article Five
Official Zoning Map
5.1 Official Zoning Map Title
The official zoning map shall be formally known as the "Kokomo Zoning Map, 2003" and it may be cited
and referred to as the "Official Zoning Map" or the "Zoning Map."
5.2 Official Zoning Map
The "Kokomo Zoning Map, 2003" is hereby incorporated as part of the Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, 2003.
5.3 Location of the Official Zoning Map
The official zoning map will be located in the office of the Planning Director.
5.4 Official Zoning Map Coples
Copies of the official zoning map may be made and distributed to interested persons. The official zoning
map copies shall be labeled as copies and have the date which they were last modified printed on them.
5.5 Zoning District Boundaries
. 5.6
The zoning district boundaries shall be shown on the official zoning map. The abbreviations for the zoning
districts appearing in this Zoning Ordinance shall be used to identify the zoning districts on the map.
Planned developments shall be shown on the map by abbreviations as noted in this Zoning Ordinance
(Article Two and Seven) and shall also be identified by the number and date of passage of the ordinance
approving the planned development.
Regular Revisions
The official zoning map should be formally revised annually, or as the Plan Commission determines
necessary. During interim periods of time, hand drawn lines and text on the official zoning map will be
appropriate to note zoning changes. Copies may be made after the amendments are noted, and each copy
shall be noted as an update with the "date last changed" noted on the map. Other revisions may be made
to correct drafting or other errors and omission in the prior map, but shall not have the effect of amending
the official zoning map except as adopted by the Common Council.
5.7 Damaged, Destroyed or Lost Official Zoning Map
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret due to
the nature or number of changes, the Common Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map
which shall, to the extent possible, duplicate the accuracy of the damaged, destroyed or lost map.
5.8 Official Zoning Map Standards
District boundaries on the official zoning map shall be interpreted as follows:
A. District boundaries shown within or parallel to the lines ofroads, easements, and transportation right-
5-2 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
)
of-ways shall be deemed to follow the center line of the affected road, easement, or right-of-way.
B. District boundaries indicated as following section or fractional sectional lines, platted lot lines, or city or
town corporation lines shall be construed as following such lines.
C. District boundaries indicated as parallel to section or fractional sectional lines, platted lot lines, city or
town corporation lines, shall be construed as parallel to the affected line.
D. District boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines.
E. Where a district boundary line di.vides a lot at the time such line is adopted, the regulations for the less
restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 25 feet into the more restricted portion,
provided the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted district. Further, the exact location of
where the line crosses the property shall be detennined by the Planning Director.
F. The vacation of streets shall not affect the location of the district boundaries.
G When the Planning Director cannot definitely detennine the location of a district boundary by the
".enter lines, by scale or dimensions stated on the official zoning map, because the boundary does not
clearly coincide with a property line, the Director may refuse action and the Plan Commission may
interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the scale of the official zoning map and
the purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
Article Five: Official Zoning Map 5-3
5-4 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
•
Article Six
Development Standards
1 • ,;;-~GroundlRules website w w w . ground r u I es i n c . com
August 12, 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
- - --- ---- --- -- --- - -
Article Six - Development Standards
~:-~a~:{Lo> ............................... ~.~-~-~:~~~:~ §ecti~g ljamg . . Ppajt Number
Performance Standards (PF) ................................ 6-27
Setback Standards (SB) ........................................ .-64 Lighting Standards (LT) .............. ., .. ,. ..................... 6-28
Sewer and water Standards (SW) .......................... 6-5 Sign Standards (SI) ................................... , .......... ,. 6-29
Density and Intensity $tandards (DI) ... :, .................. 6-6 Parking Standards (PK) ......................................... 6-37
Floor Area Standards (FA) ...................................... 6-7 Loading Standards (LO) ......................................... 642
Height Standards (HT} ...... '. ................. : ................... 6-8 Entrance and Driveway Standards (ED) ................ 6-43
Accessory Structu."-~~nda,rp.~ (AS) ..... ,w•r· .. _1.; .. : .. . 6-9
Fence and Wall ~dafds'(fW> ............" '~·"-·•;.;;. ••. 6-12
Vision Clearance Standards (VC) ., .• w .• ,., ...... ,.,. •• ,. 645
Telecommunications Facility Standards (Tc) ....... ; 6-46
Temporary Use/Structure Standards (TU) ..... · ......... 6-13 Corridor Enhancement Standards (CE) ...... , ....... , .. 649
Home Occupation Standards (HO) ....................... 6-15 Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX) ......... 6-51'
Landscaping Standards · ... ..,..:.~ ........ ~.-"' ••. ;,:. .. ;~~~ 6-18
Environmental Standard • · ·:tz;'<l-.{, .. ~ ..... Il.~.,..~{~.:t 6-26
Special Exception Standards (SE) ,>€, ...................... 6-53
Miscellaneous Standards (MC) •1'Jlt,.,,.....,, ........ ,. .. ,., ...... 6-54
6.1 Development Standards Applicability
All new structures, structure alterations, structure relocations, structure demolitions, structure additions,
structure enlargements, uses ofland, changes in the use ofland, expansion of existing uses and the like are
subject to all development standards and regulations for the applicable zoning district.
6.2 How to Use this Article
6-2
Article Six contains Development standards which are arranged by category. There are two ways to
detennine which development standards apply to a specific zoning district. They are:
A. Refer to the two-page layouts in Article Three for a specific zoning district. In the "Additional Development
Standards that Apply" box for that specific Zoning District are listed four-digit codes that
determine which development standards apply. Only the four-digit codes noted in the "Additional
Development Standards that Apply" section apply to that Zoning District.
[As an example, on page 3-7, the four digit code "LY-01" can be found under the ''Additional
Development Standards that Apply" section in the Very Low Density Residential (Rl) District.
Therefore, the Development Standards in the section labeled "LY-01" (on page 6-3) would
apply to Very Low Density Residential (R2) District.]
B. Refer to the icons used below each development standard section in Article Six. Each development
standard section begins with a four-digit code and introductory sentence followed by square icons with
zoning district abbreviations (i.e. CO for the Conservation District or NC for the Neighborhood
Commercial District). These district icons note that the following development standard section
applies to that district.
[As an example, on page 6-3, the R2 icon can be found under the LY-01 development standard
section. Therefore the language in LY-01 would apply to the R2 district.]
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
• 2006
Lot Standards (LO)
6.3 L0-01
This Lot Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ IB]~~~~ 11 111~~
The following lot standards apply:
A. Minimum Lot Area: The minimum lot area shall be as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
B. · Maximum Lot Area: The maximum lot area shall be as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
C. Minimum Dwelling Site Area: The minimum dwelling site area shall be as per each two-page layout in
Article Three.
D. Minimum Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
E. Minimum Dwelling Site Width: minimum dwelling Site width shall be as per each two-page layout in
Article Three. , .
F. Maximum Lot Depth: The maximum lot depth shall be as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
G Minimum Lot Frontage: The minimum lot frontage shall be as per each two-page layout in Article
Three, except that the lot frontage requirement for a cul-de-sac lot is 1/4 the distance required for
standard lots.
H. If one or more of the above listed lot standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning
district, then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
I. Only one primary structure is permitted per lot unless specifically provided otherwise.
tic e Ix: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-3
Setback Standards (SB)
6.4 SB--01
This Setback Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~---~~m~~-~~-
The following setback standards apply:
A. Minimum Front Yard Setback: Article Three establishes for each district the minimum front yard
setback for the district. Where one or more lots are improved, the depth of the front yard need not be
more than the average depth of the front yards of the lots adjoining either side. An unimproved lot on
either side shall be considered as having a front yard depth of the district in which it is located. The ·
minimum front yard setback is measured from the greater of the existing right-of-way or the proposed
right-of-way shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
B. Minimum Dwelling Site Front Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site front yard setbacks shall be
as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
C. Minimum Side Yard Setback: The minimum side yard setbacks shall be as per each two-page layout
in Article Three.
D. Maximum Side Yard Setback: The maximum side yard setbacks shall be as per each two-page layout
in Article Three.
E. Minimum Dwelling Site Side Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site side yard setbacks shall be as
per each two-page layout in Article Three.
F. Minimum Rear Yard Setback: The minimum rear yard setbacks shall be as per each two-page layout
in Article Three.
G Minimum Dwelling Site Rear Yard Setback: The minimum dwelling site rear yard setback shall be as
per each two-page layout in Article Three.
H. If one or more of the above listed types of setbacks does not appear on the two-page layout for a
zoning district, then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
I. The following site features are exempt or partially exempt from the setback requirements as stated.
a. Fences and walls are exempt from setbacks in this section, but must abide by the fence and wall
standards in this article.
b. Utility poles, lines, and junction boxes are exempt from the setbacks in this section.
c. Landscaping is exempt from this section, but must abide by the landscaping standards.
d. Driveways in single family residential districts are exempt. Driveways off of alleys may be
permitted.
e. Entrances and driveways in commercial, industrial, multifamily and institutional districts are
exempt from front yard setbacks, but must abide by the entrance and driveway standards in this
article.
J. Every part of a required yard shall be open from its lowest point to the sky, unobstructed, except for
the projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features not exceeding four (4) inches.
Open ba1conies and cornices may project into a front yard not more than three and one half (3 ~)
feet.
K. When the lot is a comer lot at the intersection of two (2) streets on which there are lots fronting both
streets within the block affected, there shall be a front yard on each street side of such comer lot
conforming to the depths established by this ordinance, except that the available building width of such
lot need not be reduced to less than thirty (30) feet. No accessory building on such lot shall project
beyond the front yard lines as established for either street. ·
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Sewer and Water Standards (SW)
6.5 SW-01
This Sewer and Water Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~ ~~H --~ ~- ~ m-~ m
The following sewer and water standards apply:
A. Sewer and Water: Municipal sewer and water hookup is required when it is noted as such on the twopage
layout in Article Three for each particular zoning district. Proposed hookups shall be installed
according to the permit requirements of the appropriate authorities.
B. If there is not a notation for sewer and water on the two-page layout for a zoning district, then sewer
and water hookup is not required.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-5
Density and Intensity Standards (DI)
6.6 01-01
6-6
This Density and Intensity Standards section applies to the following districts:
~-~~~~ ~ -- - ~~-~~-00~-
The following density and intensity standards apply:
A. Maximum Density: The maximum density shall be as per each two-page layout in Article Three.
B. Minimum Lot Coverage: The minimum lot coverage shall be as per each two-page layout in Article
Three.
C. Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum lot coverage shall be as per each two-page layout in Article
Three.
D. If one or more of the above listed density or intensity standard does not appear on the two-page layout
for a zoning district, then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Floor Area Standards (FA)
6.7 FA-01
This Floor Area Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ -~~~~ ~ --~~ ~~-~ -· -
The following floor area standards apply:
A. The following lot standards apply to all primary and accessory structure, and land uses unless otherwise
stated in this zoning ordinance.
a. Minimum Main Floor Area (as per each two-page layout in Article Three)
b . . Maximum Main Floor Area (as per each two-page layout in Article Three)
c. Minimum Floor Area Per Unit (as per each two-page layout in Article Three)
B. A single family dwelling shall be at least twenty-three (23) feet wide for sixty percent (60%) of its
length.
C. If one or more of the floor area standard does not appear on the two-page layout for a zoning district,
then it does not apply to that particular zoning district.
Artlde Sbc: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-7
Height Standards (HT)
6.8 HT-01
6-8
This Height Standards section applies to the following districts:
~-~~~~ ~ ---~~- ~ ~-~~-
The following height standards apply:
A. Maximum Structure Height: The maximum structure height shall be as per each two-page layout in
Article Three except that the maximum height may be increased by up to twenty (20) feet if the
following conditions are met:
a. The structure can be served by the Kokomo Fire Department and/or includes adequate fire
suppression measures deemed appropriate by the Kokomo Fire Department.
b. The side yards and rear yards shall be increased one ( l) foot for each additional one (l) foot
increase in height above the height permitted in each two-page layout.
c. The additional height will not cause increased shadows on adjacent properties.
B. Minimum Structure Height: The minimum structure height shall be as per each two-page layout in
Article Three.
C. If either of the above listed types of height standards does not appear on the two-page layout for a
zoning district, then height requirements do not apply to that particular zoning district.
D. The following structures or building features are exempt or partially exempt from the maximum
structure height standard as stated:
a. Church steeples are allowed up to a height of 60 feet.
b. Water towers are allowed up to a height of 150 feet.
c. Noncommercial radio and television antennae are aJlowed up to a height of 70 feet.
d. Chimneys are allowed to extend I 0 feet above the roofs highest point.
e . Mechanical appurtenances are alJowed to extent IO feet above the roofs highest point, but must
~ .
1. located such that it is not visible from adjacent private and public streets, or
2. shielded from view with a parapet or other architectural feature such that it is not visible from
adjacent private or public streets.
e. Elevator bulkheads are al1owed to extent 15 feet above the roofs highest point, but must be:
l . located such that it is not visible from adjacent private and public streets, or ·
2. shielded from view with a parapet or other architectural feature such that it is not visible from
adjacent private and public streets, or ·
3. be constructed with the same or predominant exterior building materials, or
4. architecturally integrated into the building's designs as to not look like an elevator bulkhead.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
J
•
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
6.9 AS-01
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~mmm~~~~~-~~-
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. Accessory structures shall comply with all development standards for the subject Zoning District
unless specified otherwise.
B. Accessory structures must relate to the primary structure and its uses; and be commonly and usually
used in connection to the specific primary use.
C. Accessory structures must not be used as residences.
D. Accessory structures must not encroach on any platted easement.
E. An accessory structure must be located to the rear or side of the primary structure unless specifically
permitted otherwise. Accessory structures are allowed in front yards facing watercourses or lakes.
F. A mobile home, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, semi-tractor trailer, shipping containers,
truck cargo boxes, boat or motor vehicle may not be used as an accessory structu're in any zoning
district.
1 G Accessory structures are not permitted on a lot prior to any primary structure being constructed
except where the accessory structure is being used in conjunction with the act of constructing a ·
primary structure or for agricultural purposes.
H. Dumpsters, compactors, and other trash receptacles are not regulated as accessory structures. See
MC-06 on page 52 in this Zoning Ordinance.
I. Swimming pools must abide by this zoning ordinance as well as Indiana State Code (675 IAC 20).
J. Accessory structures, other than swimming pools, must be at least six (6) feet from other structures on the
same or adjoining lots.
6.10 AS-02
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. No more than 2 enclosed accessory structures (i.e. detached garage, pool house, shed, etc.) are
permitted on a lot. This regulation does not restrict the number of non-enclosed accessory structures
on a lot.
B. The cumulative square footage of all enclosed accessory structures cannot exceed 1000 square feet
or 100% of the square footage of the primary structure, whichever is less .
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-9
Accessory Structure Standards (AS)
(continued)
6.11 AS-03
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. No more than one (I) detached garage or carport facility per primary structure.
B. No more than one (1) additional enclosed accessory structure (i.e. pool house, storage building, etc.)
per primary structure. This regulation does not restrict the number of non-enclosed accessory structures
on a lot. .
C. The cumulative square footage of all enclosed accessory structures and carports cannot exceed 50%
of the square footage of the primary structure(s ).
D. The exterior finish and facade of each enclosed accessory structure must match or closely resemble
the finish and facade materials used on the primary structure. Further, enclosed accessory structures
must have a residential appearance and. character suited for a residential district.
6.12 AS-04
6-10
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following district:
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. Management offices, sales offices, storage, mini-warehouses, laundry, dry cleaning facilities, and other
structures customarily incidental to manufactured home parks or niobile home parks are permitted,
provided the following criteria are met.
a. The Accessory Structure is subordinate to the residential component of the park and adds aesthetic
value to the park; and
b. The Accessory Structure is located, designed and intended to serve only the needs of the park;
and
c. The establishments located within the Accessory Structure present no visible evidence of their
business nature to areas outside the park.
B. Each manufactured home or mo~ile home is entitled to two (2) accessory structures. The total area
of all accessory structures may not exceed 20% of the dwelling site. Permitted accessory structures
are as follows:
• carport
• decks/patios
• garage (attached or detached)
gazebos
greenhouses
hot tubs
mini barns
sheds
sport courts
boat houses
C. Model manufactured or mobile homes as sales units are permitted provided that the number of model
homes is limited to 5% of the authorized number of dwelling sites in the park. Model homes must
comply with all standards set forth in the MP District. One {I) unit may be used as a sales office.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Accessory.Structure Standards (AS)
(continued)
6.13 AS-05
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. No more than one (I) enclosed accessory structures (i.e. detached garage, shed, storage building,
etc.) is pennitted per primary structure. This regulation does not restrict the number of non-enclosed
accessory structures on a lot.
B. The cumulative square footage of all enclosed accessory structures cannot exceed 500 square feet or
50% of the square footage of the primary structure, whichever is less.
C. · The exterior finish and facade of each enclosed accessory structure must match or closely resemble
the finish and facade materials used on the primary structure. Further, enclosed accessory structures
must have an appropriate appearance and character suited for the adjacent district.
6.14 · AS-06
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ ~ -
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. No more than 2 enclosed accessory structures (i.e. detached garage, shed, storage building, etc.) are
permitted on a lot. This regulation does not restrict the number of non-enclosed accessory structures
ooa~ ·
B. The cumulative square footage of all enclosed accessory structures cannot exceed 1500 square feet
or 50% of the square footage of the primary structure(s), whichever is less.
C. The exterior. finish and facade of each enclosed accessory structure must match or closely resemble
the finish and facade materials used on the primary structure. Further, enclosed accessory structures
must have a commercial appearance and character suited for a commercial district.
6.15 AS-07
This Accessory Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ran
The following accessory structure standards apply:
A. There is no limit to the number of enclosed accessory structures (i.e. detached garage, shed, storage
building, etc.) on a lot.
• B. The exterior finish and facade of each enclosed accessory structure must match or closely resemble
the finish and facade materials used on the primary structure. Further, enclosed accessory structures
must have a commercial or industrial appearance and character suited for an industrial district.
· Development Standards, as amended by
No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-t 1
Fence and Wall Standards (FW)
6.16 FW-01
6.17
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following districts:
~mm~~~~~~1111
The following fence and wall standards apply:
A. All fences and walls:
a. Must present the non-structural face outward (e.g. the finished side outward).
b. Are pennitted up to the property line. However, a fence must not be closer than 2 feet from any
public right-of-way. In addition, fence and wall footers shall not cross the property line.
c. Must not be greater than 6 feet in height in the side yard and rear yard or greater than 4 feet in
height in the front yard.
d. Must not exceed 70% opacity when used in the front yard (e.g. cannot be a solid screen).
e. Must abide by the vision clearance regulations.
f.
FW-02
Must n~t incorporate security wire, barbed wire,
or sharpened top spikes.
This Fence and Wall Standards section applies to the following districts:
~Qfil-~ll~llDll
The following fence and wall standards apply:
A . . All fences and walls must present the non-structural face outward (the most aesthetically pleasing side
toward neighboring properties).
B. The maximum heights of a fence or wall is as follows:
a. 68 feet in a side yard.
b. 6% feet in a rear yard.
c. S feet in a front yard.
~ C. Structural posts and columns between fence sections
may extend up as much as 5% ·higher thanE-fteft the
maximtunS stated above. --
D. Fences and walls are permitted up to the property line. However~ a fence must not be closer than 2
feet from any public right-of-way. In addition, fence and wall footers shall not cross the property line.
E. Fences and walls must abide by the vision clearance regulations.
F. Fences and walls must be maintained to community standards and remain in good repair
at all times.
Amending Ordinance #6719
5/13/13-Adopted by City Council
6-12 City of Kof<omo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Temporary Use/Structure Standards (TU)
6.18 TU-01
6.19
This Temporary Use/Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~mmm~~ ~~-~~-
The following temporary use and structure standards apply:
A. Temporary uses or structures must meet all standards for a pennanent use or structure.
B. If the intent is for a temporary use or structure to transition to a pennanent use or structure and it is
not disclosed at the time of application the transition to a pennanent use or structure will not be
permitted for one (1) year from the application date.
C. The Planning Director may extend the duration of a temporary use or structure one (1) time with
findings of substantial need. The duration of the extension cannot exceed the lehgths of the originally
permitted time (e.g. if the originally permitted time was 14 days, the extension cannot exceed another
14 days). ·
D. All temporary uses or structures must be removed and the original site reverted to its original condition.
Such reversion to the original state must be completed prior to the expiration of the temporary
use or structure pennit.
TU-02
This Temporary Use/Structure Standards section applies to the following distri~ts:
~mm~~~tMl ~ . '
The following temporary use and structure standards apply:
A. Garage sales and yard sales are permitted for a total of 14 days per calendar year. No permit is
required unless an applicant wishes to exceed the permitted duration. Upon successful completion of
a temporary use/structure pennit, a petitioner may be granted up to a total of 28 days per calendar
year for a garage or yard sale, at the discretion of the Planning Director.
B. Roadside stands are pennitted for a total of 14 days per calendar year. No permit is required unless
an applicant wishes io exceed the permitted duration. Upon successful completion of a temporary
use/structure pennit, a petitioner may be granted up to a total of 28 days per calendar year. for a
roadside stand, at the discretion of the Planning Director.
C. Tents for a private party or event are permitted for a total of 14 days per calendar year. No permit is
required unless an applicant wishes to. exceed the permitted duration. Upon successful completion of
a temporary use/structure pennit, a petitioner may be granted up to a total of 28 days per calendar
year for a private party tent, at the discretion of the Planning Director.
D. Construction trailers for a residential construction project are pennitted for up to 12 months. A
temporary use/structure pennit is required.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-13
Temporary Use/Structure Standards (TU)
(continued)
6.20 TU-03
6-14
This Temporary Use/Structure Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~-reg~llr@J
The following temporary use and structure standards apply:
A. Construction trailers for a commercial or industrial construction project are permitted for up to I 2
months. A temporary use/structure permit is required. The Planning Director shall have discretion as
to the placement, quantity, duration and size of construction trailers used.
B. Roadside stands, outdoor sales or events are permitted for a total of 14 days per calendar year. No
permit is required unless an applicant wishes to exceed the permitted duration. A petitioner may be
granted a temporary use/structure permit for up to 60 days per calendar year. The permit may be
extended for up to 2 additional 60 day periods during the same calendar year at the discretion of the
Planning Director after his inspection of the permitted site. The Planning Director shall have discretion
as to the placement, quantity, duration, site condition and size of temporary use/structure permitted
roadside stands, outdoor sales or events.
C. Roadside sales of fireworks are not permitted under any circwnstances.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
...• • ., · Home Occupation Standards (HO)~ ryp£
6.21 H0-01
This Home Occupation Standards section applies to the following districts:
~IB]~~~~llllll~~
The following home occupation standards apply:
A. The home occupation must not involve retail sales (i.e. walk-in sales) or manufacturing operations.
B. The home occupation must not involve the employment of any person other than those residing at the
location of the home occupation.
C. The equipment used for the business must be limited to computers, fax machines, telephones, copy
machines, and other small office equipment.
D. There may not be any exterior storage or display of products, equipment or materials used in connection
with the home occupation.
E. No more than 15% of the total floor area of the primary structure may be used for the home occupation.
F. There shall not be any exterior, structural or aesthetic alterations to the dwelling unit to accommodate
the home occupation.
G There shall not be any room additions, structural or aesthetic alterations that change the residential
character of the dwelling unit to accommodate the home occupation.
H. There may not be additional entrances to the dwelling unit for the purpose of conducting business or to
accommodate the business.
I. Busi.ness operations in any accessory structure are not permitted .
. J. The home occupation may not generate any additional traffic.
K. No signage for the business is allowed on or off the property.
L. No business practice, function, equipment, or process shall create electrical interference, odors, noise,
vibration, light, smoke, fumes, or any thing offensive. .
M. The home occupation may not demand increasing or enhancing the size, capacity, or flow of the water,
gas, septic, sewer, or electrical systems beyond what is standard for a residence.
N. No additional parking may be added to the property on which the residence· is located to accommodate
the home occupation.
0. Use of commercial vehicles for pickup and deliveries other than from the U.S. Postal Service, UPS,
and other express couriers is not permitted.
P. A home office, telecommuting office, professional service, design service, catalog business, internet
business, clergy office or the like is permitted.
Q. The following types of business are not permitted as home occupations:
• medical clinic ofany kind
clothing shop
funeral home
tourist home
animal hospital
kennel
trailer rental
automobile, motor vehicle, or equipment repair ofany kind
painting of automobiles, motor vehicles, or equipment of any kind
• photo developing
television, radio or other electronics repair
tooling, welding, or machining of any kind
retail or manufacturing ofany kind
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-15
Home Occupation Standards (HO)
(Continued)
tool or equipment rental of any kind
restaurant or similar establishment
salvage operation of any kind
freight or trucking operation of any kind
contractor business
landscaping/lawncare business
fortune telling
tattooing, piercing or body art
similar businesses
R. Any home occupation may be deemed not-permitted if in a public hearing on the matter the Board of
Zoning Appeals rules the home occupation to be a nuisance. Any person reasonably affected by the
home occupation or the Planning Director may request such a hearing. ·
S. Uses not specifically mentioned will be interpreted by the Planning Director or BZA as to whether the
use is permitted or not.
6.22 HC-02 -(T't'PE 2.)
6-16
This Home Occupation Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~tM~~~
. The following home occupation standards apply:
A. The home occupation must not involve retail sales (i.e. walk-in sales) or manufacturing operations.
B. At least one (1) member residing on the premises must be the primary operator of the business and
· that business must be that person's primary work.
C. The equipment used for the business must be limited to computers, fax machines, telephones, copy
machines, small office equipment, beautician/barber chair and mechanic~) equipment used for purely
domestic or hobby purposes.
D. There must not be any exterior storage or display of products, equipment or materials used in connection
with the home occupation.
E. No more than 25% of the total floor area of the primary structure shall be used for the home occupation.
F. There shall not be any exterior, structural or aesthetic alterations to the dwelling unit to accommodate
the home occupation.
G There shall not be any room additions, structural or aesthetic alterations that change the residential
character of the dwelling unit to accommodate the home occupation.
H. There shall not be an additional entrances to the dwelling unit for the purpose of conducting business
or to accommodate the business.
I. Accessory structures may be used provided the use does not create a nuisance.
J. Minimal traffic generation due to the business will be permitted.
K. A small sign not exceeding 2 square feet will be allowed on the primary structure. No off-site signs or
signs in the yard of the property shall be permitted.
L. No business practice, function, equipment, or process shall create electrical interference, odors, noise,
vibration, light, smoke, fumes, or any thing offensive beyond the property lines for the dwelling unit.
M. The home occupation may not demand increasing or enhancing the size, capacity, or flow of the water,
gas, septic, sewer, or electrical systems beyond what is standard for a residence.
N. One (I) additional parking space shall be added to the property on which the residence is located to
accommodate the home occupation.
0. Use of commercial vehicles for pickup and deliveries other than from the U;S. Postal Service, UPS,
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
(.
Home Occupation Standards (HO)
(Continued)
and other express couriers is not permitted.
P. A home office, telecommuting office, professional service; domestic crafts (i.e. weaving, sewing,
dressmaking), furniture repair, art and music training, tutoring, hair cutting/styling, design service,
catalog business, internet business, clergy office or the like is permitted.
Q. The following types of business shall not be permitted:
medical clinic of any kind l
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
clothing shop
funeral home
tourist home
animal hospital
kennel
· trailer rental
automobile, motor vehicle or equipment repair of any kind
painting of automobiles, motor vehicles, or equipment of any kind
photo developing
television, radio or other electronics repair
tooling, welding, or machining of any kind
tool or equipment rental of any kind
restaurant or similar establishment
salvage operations of any kind
freight or trucking operations of any kind
contractors business
landscaping/lawncare business
fortune telling
tattooing, piercing or body art
similar businesses
R. Any home occupation may be deemed not-permitted if in a public hearing on the matter the Board of
Zoning Appeals rules the home occupation to be a nuisance. Any person reasonably affected by the
home occupation or the Planning Director may request such a hearing.
S. Uses not specifically mentioned will be interpreted by the Planning Director or BZA as to whether the
use is permitted or not.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-t 7
·'
Landscaping Standards (LA)
6.23 LA-01 [General Landscaping Standards]
6-18
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~IB]~~~~mll ~ITIDll~~
The following landscape standards apply:
A. Softscape material (i.e. trees, shrubs, mounds, etc.) and hardscape material (i.e. accent lighting,
retaining walls, sculpture, etc.) may extend into any existing or proposed right-of-way with the written
permission of the Board of Public Works.
B. Softscape material and hardscape material may extend into an existing or proposed easement with the
written permission from the utilities using or which may use the easement.
C. The landowner and their successors in interest are responsible for the regular maintenance of all
landscaping elements.
D. All softscape material shall be maintained free from disease, pests, weeds, litter and erosion.
E. All hardscape material shall be refinished, repaired, cleaned and/or replaced periodically to maintain a
structurally and aesthetically sound condition.
F. Any softscape material required by this Zoning Ordinance, the Plan Commission, or the Board of
Zoning Appeals that dies, or is otherwise removed, must be replaced within 60 days of death. The
Planning Director may grant up to a 90 day extension due to the weather.
G The use of species native to the region is encouraged.
H. Under no circumstances may the species identified and listed in Schedule A - Invasive, Pest or Poor
Characteristic Plants be used for minimum planting requirements in this ordinance.
Schedule A
Scientific Name
Acer ginnala
Acer plantonoides
Ailanthus altissima
Albizza julibrissin
Euonyumus alata
Euonymus fortunei
Ligustrum soo.
Ligustrum vulgare
Lonicera japonica
Lythrum salicaria
Pinus nigra
Pofygonum cuspidatum
Pueraria lobata
Rhamnus davurica
Rhamnus davurica
IKnamnus frangula
Pest Plants
Common Name
Amur maple
Norway maple
Tree-of-heaven
Mimosa
Winged wahoo-buming bush
Winter creeper
Privets
Privet
Japanese honeysuckle
Purple loosestrife
Austrian pine
Japanese knotweed
Kudzu vine
Common buckthorn
Dahurian buckthorn
Alder buc1ctnorn
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
I. This ordinance recognizes the need for landscaping requirements in four different areas on a property.
They are yard planting areas, parking lot planting areas, foundation planting areas; and bufferyard
areas. The below image conceptually demonstrates the location of each landscape area.
i
I
I
i
I
l
'j
g;
~j
~
8: O•
~. n..
!
!
!
I ! ~ .
!
Arterial R. O.W.
~rimeter PlanJing;
'·i.·.
Loc:al Street R.O.W. L
J. Under no circumstances may any artificial plant be installed and/or counted as part of the minimum
planting required in the Zoning Ordinance. '
K. The preservation of an existing healthy tree shall constitute a credit toward the minimum landscape
requirements in this ordinance. A credit will be given per tree that contributes to and ~tisfies the
intent of a particular section of the landscape standards in this article. The following credits shall be
granted for an existing tree as follows:
a. For each preserved deciduous tree over 2 inches but less than five 5 inches diameter at breast
height (DBH) a credit for 2 deciduous tree shall be granted.
b. For each preserved deciduous tree over 5 inches but less than 8 inches DBH a credit for 3
deciduous trees shall be granted.
c. For each preserved deciduous tree over 8 inches but less than 12 inches DBH a credit for 4
deciduous trees shall be granted.
d. For each preserved deciduous tree over 12 inches DBH a credit for 5 deciduous trees shall be
granted. The Planning Director may grant larger credits for trees over 12 inches DBH upon
request.
e. For each preserved evergreen tree over 6 feet tall but less than 10 feet tall shall be granted credit
for 2 evergreen trees.
f. For each preserved evergreen tree over 10 feet tall shall be granted credit for 3 evergreen trees.
The Planning Director may grant larger credits for evergreen trees over 10 feet tall upon request.
L. Any trees to be preserved must have orange construction fencing installed around them at or beyond
their drip lines. '
' · Artid~1Slx: 5evelopment Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-t9
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
M. Any trees marked "Do Not Remove" on the site plan that are removed or injured beyond repair must
be replaced by one or more similar specie trees with a cumulative DBH of 1.25 times the DBH of the
tree which was to be preserved.
N. All deciduous trees planted for a bufferyard must have at least a 1.5 inch caliper and all evergreens
must be at least 3 feet in height when planted.
0 . All tree caliper's must be measured using DBH.
P. If the applicant can produce evidence that the planting area is unsuitable for the required tree due to
soil or site conditions, the applicant may substitute another type of tree as approved by the Planning
Director.
Q. The use ofrock, stone, sand or gravel as a primary groundcover is discouraged. Rock, stone, sand or ·
gravel used for landscaping of any planting area shall not exceed 36 square feet per tree or shrub
planted or preserved.
6.24 LA-02 [Single Family Residential Planting Standards]
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~
The following landscaping standards apply:
A. Lots with less than 10,000 square feet shall be required to plant one (1) tree in the yard planting area.
B. Lots over 10,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet shall be required to plant 2 trees in the
yard planting area.
C. Lots over 20,000 square feet shall be required to plant 3 trees plus one (I) additional per ~very 10,000
square feet over 20,000 square feet.
D . All primary structures shall have a minimum of 2 shrubs or trees planted in the foundation planting
area (e.g. along each side of a home's foundation facing a street). These foundation planting shall be
within 6 feet of the foundation.
E. Substitutions or alterations of minimal planting required may be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Director, but must be equal to or greater than that which is required.
6.25 LA-03 [Multifamily Residential Planting Standards]
6-20
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts: mm
The following landscaping standards apply:
A. Lots with less than 10,000 square feet shall be required to plant 2 trees in the yard planting area.
B. Lots over 10,000 square feet but less than 20,000 square feet shall be required to plant 3 trees in the
yard planting area. ·
C. Lots over 20,000 square feet shall be required to plant 4 trees plus one (I) more per every I 0,000
square feet over 20,000 square feet.
D. All primary structures shall have a minimum of one (I) shrub or tree planted per 20 lineal feet of
foundation facing a street or parking area. These foundation planting shall be located within I 0 feet of
the foundation.
E. Substitutions or alterations of minimal planting required may be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Director, but must be equal to or greate~ than that which is required.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Landscaping Standards (LA)
t (continued)
6.26 · LA-04 [Manufactured Home Park Planting Standards]
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts:
II
The following landscaping standards apply:
A. Each manufactured home park shall be required to plant two (2) trees per 15,000 square feet of lot
area.· These planting may be located on dwelling sites or common areas.
B. For every I 0 dwelling sites in a manufactured home park one (1) tree must be planted in the yard
planting area. .
C. All dwelling sites shall have a minimum of2 shrubs or trees planted in the foundation planting area or
next to the main entrance into the home. These foundation planting shall be within 6 feet of the
foundation.
D. All common or administrative buildings shall have a minimum of one (1) shrubs or trees planted per20
lineal feet of foundation facing a street or parking area. These foundation planting shall be located
within 10 feet of the foundation.
E. Substitutions or alterations of minimal planting required may be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Director, but must be equal to or greater than that which is required.
6.27 LA-05 [CommerciaUlndustrial Landscaping Standards]
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ II~ II WfJ1l lflf.I II ~ ~ ~MU
The following landscaping standards apply:
, A. Lots with less than 20,000 square feet shall be required to plant 2 trees in the yard planting area.
B. Lots over 20,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square feet shall be required to plant 3 trees in the
yard planting area.
C. Lots over 40,000 square feet shall be required to plant 4 trees plus one (1) additional tree per every
20,000 square feet over 40,000 square feet.
D. Foundation planting are required for all primary structures when they face a street or parking area.
E. Foundation planting must be provided at a ratio of one (1) tree or large shrub per 50 lineal feet of
foundation facing a street or parking area. These foundation planting shall be located within 30 feet of
the building's foundation. The foundation planting shall not be placed at regular intervals. Rather,
clustering and variation of distJnce between the plant and the foundation is required.
F. Parking lot plantings are requi~ for all parking lots. The quantity and tvne deoe~ds nn th,. number
· of parking spaces. ""' .
a. All parking Jots shall be screened by a continuous shfu9 t ree row with shrubs between the trees along any
portion of a parking Jot near any property line. Individual shm9s trees shall be planted at a rate of at least 1
shfu9 tree per :l 30 feet of yard length. The shRt9 tree row and shrubs shall form a continuous visual
· screen. at 3 feet ah0ve gr:aEle w~i8 I year uaEler 90rmal gf0Wi8g e08Eliti08s. It is preferreEI that the sh."'llBs
be plaeted in ae altereati8g pattere ef2 r0.,¥S, 2 feet apart 08 ee8ter, whieh 0fwhieh is maEie up efshRtbs
trees~ feet 09 ee9ter (See Figure I) Retaining existing shrubs and/or trees as part of the shRt9 tree row is
encouraged. -------·--· ~·· --··;;~~~;;h:~bs : : ., • I I
-:.t....~<- .. ..- .... I~--- 1t-------1-I 1~=._1
Amending Ordinance #6719
5/13113 .. Adopted by City Council
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by Ordinances
No. 6564, 6565, 6566, 6571 and 6574, Apr il 14, 2009
6-21
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
6.28
b. Additional parking lot plantings are required for any parking lot over 20 ~paces.
Parking lots over 20 spaces must provide perimeter and interior landscaping as
follows: ·th hrub
I. One (1) tree per 30 lineal feet of circumference around the parking lot w1 s s
between the trees. .
2. One (1) tree per 30 lineal feet of a parking lot facing a public street with shrubs
between the trees .
. 3. Parking lot landscape islands or hmp-.o11ts mast be placed at the end of each row of parking and within each
row of parking at a maximum interval of one per fifteen (15) lineal adjacent parking spaces. Islands or bumpouts
must be~ 360 square feet in area or greater, bordered by a concrete curb, contain at least two t rees, and be
mulched or hardy ground cover used (i.e. plant material, shrubs).
G Substitutions or alterations of minimal plantings required may be reviewed and approved' by the
Planning Director, but must be equal to or greater than that which is required.
This Landscaping Standards section applies to all newly
constructed, reconstructed, or resurfaced off-street
parking areas containing 20 parking spaces or more,
regardless of whether the improvements of the parking lot
or increase of parking spaces occurs at 1 time or in
successive stages ane tA:e fellewiR§ eistFiet1 DC
The following landscaping standards apply:
: Parking lot plantings are required for ~n; ~arking lotl leasteYEif 20 spaces ·must provide· perimeter
2th at leaste-Yef 2~ spac~s. Parking lots with at _ landscaping as follows :
a. One (I) tree or shrub per 20 parking spaces must be planted. It is strongly recommended to not
plant ornamental trees or trees with surface r~t growth.
b. Trees and shrubs may be spaced irregularly in infonnal groupings.
c. The trunk of any tree or shrub must not be planted within 4 feet of the parking lot edge or impervious
surface.
d. The petitioner may plant the required tree and shrub plantings around the perimeter or in parking
lot landscape islands or bumpouts. No landscape island or bumpout may be less than 150 square
feet in area. All islands must be mulched or use a hardy ground cover (i.e. plant material).
B. Substitutions or alterations of minimal plantings required may be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Director, but must be equal to or greater than that which is required.
C. Reasonable substitutions for trees and shrubs in an urban. environment may include:
a. Brick masonry half-walls used along perimeter areas of a parking lot (generally, I 0 feet of wall
can be substituted for I tree or shrub).
b. Large planters with plants (generally, 2 large planters can be substituted for I tree or shrub).
c. Earthen berms with hardy gro}lnd cover (generally, 10 feet of berm 30 inches tall can be substituted
for 1 tree or shrub). ""
d. - Window boxes with plants (generally, 15 lineal feet of window boxes can be substituted for I tree
or shrub).
e. Combinations of the above items will also be considered by the Planning Director.
D. In the event the petitioner and Planning Director cannot reach an agreem~nt for substitutions which
are equal to or greater than the required standards, then the standard requirements shall be required.
E. The BZA approval of a special exception of an off site parking lot may include additional conditions as
it deems necessary.
Amending Ordinance #6719
5/13/13-Adopted by City Council
6- 22 City of Kokomo Zonihg Ordinance, as ame nde d by Ordinances
No. 6564 , 6565, 6566, 6571 and 6574, April 14, 2 009
~'
•
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
6.29 LA-07 {Bufferyard Planting Standards)
This Landscaping Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ tm r@~ll
The following landscaping standards apply:
A. The bufferyard standards only apply along the property lines where the two (2) conflicting Zoning
Districts meet.
B. The property which is zoned for higher intensity uses is responsible for in.5talling the bufferyard.
C. ~A natural or irregular row and spacing of trees is preferred in~ bufferyard.
D. The following matrix detennines the type ofbufferyard which must be installed. First find the Zoning
District of the Subject Property (across the top). Second, find the Zoning District of the Adjacent
property (in the left column). Where the two intersect on the matrix there is the letter "A'', "B", "C",
"D" or a blank space. When there is a blank space no bufferyard is required. If an "A", "B", "C" or
"D" is indicated in the matrix, a bufferyard is mandatory.
Adjacent Zonina District of Sublect Property
District M1 M2 MP NC IS oc DC C1 C2 LI Ml HI
AG A A B B B B B B B B
, PR A A A A A B B B c c D
R1 A B B B B c c c c D D
R2 A B B B B c c c c D D
R3 B B B B c c c c D D
R4 A B A B B c c c c D
·RS A B A B B c c c c D
M1 A B A B B c c c c D
M2 A A B B B c c c c
MP A B B B c c c c
NC A A B B B c c
IS A (A, B B B c
oc A A A B c
DC
C1 A B B
C2 A B B
LI A
Ml
HI
A= "A" Buffer Yard C = "C" Buffer Yard
B = "B" Buffer Yard D = "D" Buffer Yard
Bufferyard "A": lfbufferyard "A" is required the following standards must be met.
a. One ( l) canopy tree and one ( l) evergreen tree must be planted for every 70 feet of contiguous
boundary with the conflicting district All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of
7Q I
b. All trees must be planted between 5 and 15 feet from the property line that is contiguous to the
conflicting property.
F. Bufferyard "B": Ifbufferyard "B" is required the following.standards must be met.
a. An additional 10 feet of setback is required in addition to the normal setback. A lot established,
before the effective date of this ordinance, may substitute a solid wall, compact evergreen screen
or board fence of uniform color having a height ofnot less than five (5) feet for the 10 feet
additional setback. Any compact evergreen screen shall screen any ground level windows on
adjoining lots from any lights on the lot at the time of planting.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-23
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
6-24
b. One (1) canopy tree and 2 evergreen trees must be planted for every 50 feet of contiguous
boundary with the conflicting district. All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of
50.
c. All trees must be planted between 5 and 15 feet from the property line.
G Bufferyard "C": Ifbufferyard "C" is required the following standards must be met.
a. An additional 20 feet of setback is required in addition to the normal setback. A lot established,
before the effective date of this ordinance, may substitute a solid wall, compact evergreen screen
or board fence of uniform color having a height of not less than five (5) feet for the 20 feet
additional setback. Any compact evergreen screen shall screen any ground level windows on
adjoining lots from any lights on the lot at the time of planting.
b. One ( 1) canopy tree must be planted for every 30 feet of contiguous boundary with the conflicting
district. All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of 30.
c. One (I) evergreen tree must be planted for every 50 feet of contiguous boundary with the conflicting
district. All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of 50.
d. Irregular spacing is allowed, but no two trees shall be planted more than 60 feet from one another.
e. A 5 foot tall opaque fence, or 4 foot tall undulating. berm, may be used along 90% of the entire
length of the abutting property lines as a substitute for either 50% of the evergreen trees required
or 25% of the canopy trees required.
f. All trees must be planted between 5 and 25 feet from the property line of the subject property.
H. Bufferyard "D": Ifbufferyard "D" is required the following standards must be rnet.
a. An additional 30 feet of setback is required in addition to the normal setback. A lot established,
before the effective date of this ordinance, may substitute a solid wall, compact evergreen screen
or board fence of uniform color having a height of not less than five (5) feet for the 30 feet
additional setback. Any compact evergreen screen shall screen any ground level windows on
adjoining lots from any lights on the lot at the time of planting.
b. A 6 foot tall opaque fence, or 5 foot tall undulating berm, and/or a row of evergreen trees, that are
6 feet in height when planted and no more than 12 feet apart, must also be placed parallel to the
property line and at least 25 feet back from the property line.
c. One (1) canopy tree must be planted for every 40 feet of contiguous boundary with the conflicting
district. All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of 40.
d. One ( 1) evergreen tree must be planted for every 50 feet of contiguous boundary with the conflicting
district. All numbers shall be rounded up to the nearest multiple of 50.
e. The trees required in "c" and "d" above are required to be irregularly spaced. No two trees shall
be more than 60 feet from one another.
f. The trees required in "c" and "d" above are required to be planted within 20 feet of the property
line.
I. The Planning Director may lessen these requirements by as much as 25% due to site conditions or
special site features.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Landscaping Standards (LA)
(continued)
6.30 LA-08 [Expressway Bufferyard Standards]
This Bufferyard Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ ~~~~~ --~~ · ~-~ -:-
The following bufferyard standards apply to properties which are adjacent to an expressway:
A. All primary structures must be a minimum of I 00 feet from the lot line that is adjacent to the expressway.
In addition the following buffer requirements apply: ·
a. A staggered row of deciduous canopy trees must be planted such that there is one tree every 30
feet along the entire property line that abuts the expressway.
b. Additionally, a 6 foot tall fence, or 5 foot tall undulating berm, or a row of evergreen trees no less
than 12 feet apart must also be planted parallel.to the property line and the evergreen trees must
be at least 20 feet from the deciduous canopy trees.
c. All trees must be planted between 10 and 40 feet from the property line and within the subject
property.
B. Trees, vegetation, irrigation systems, fences, walls and other landscape elements shall be considered
as elements of the project in the same manner as parking and other site details. The applicant and/or
landowner, and their successors in interest, are responsible for the regular maintenance of all landscaping
elements so that they are kept in good condition. All landscaping must be maintained free
from disease, pests, weeds and litter. All landscape structures such as fences and walls must be
repaired and replaced periodically to maintain a structurally and aesthetically sound condition.
C. Any landscape element that dies, or is otherwise removed, must be promptly replaced based on the
requirements of Article Six.
D. The Planning Director may waive the requirements for a wall or berm if the expressway has a natural
or built feature that serves the same purpose.
Ai&l~ Sbc: Developm~nt Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-2.5
Environmental Standards (EN)
6.31 EN-01
6-26
This Environmental Standards section applies to the following districts:
~e~~~~~---~~ ~~-~~-
The following environmental standards apply:
A. Erosion Prevention: All land, regardless of slope, from which structures or natural cover has been
removed or otherwise destroyed, must be appropriately graded and seeded after the removal or
destruction of said natural cover to prevent erosion. Any development or site improvement shall
provide erosion control measures in accordance with local erosion control ordinances, adopted guidelines
and standards, and all State.and Federal requirements.
B. Alterations to Shoreline: No alteration of a shoreline, wetland or bed of a stream or creek shall be
made until written approval is obtained from the appropriate government agency and the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance are complied with. Alterations include, among other things, filling of a stream,
creek, regulated ditch or wetlands, and dredging of a stream, creek or ditch.
C. Retention, Detention, and Pond Edges:
a. The use of engineered hard edges is not permitted except around inlets and outlets. The use of
engineered hard edges may not exceed 5% of lineal feet of the total edge of any retention facility,
detention facility, or pond. "Rip-rap" above the water level is discouraged.
b. All retention ponds shall be designed in a manner to allow a person or child to stand-up when
within 5 feet of the waters edge. For this reason, the maximum depth of water within 5 feet of
the waters edge (shore line) shall not exceed 2 feet in depth.
c. All retention facilities shall allow a person or child to walk-out if they inadvertently fall into the
retention facility. For this reason, the maximum slope into and out of the retention pond shall be 1
foot of rise per every 8 feet of run ( 1 :8 slope). .
D. Waste Disposal: No waste materials such as garbage, rubbish, trash, construction material, gasoline,
oil, flammables, soils, tars, chemicals, greases, industrial or agricultural waste, or any other material of
such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or temperature that may contaminate, pollute, or harm
the waters may be deposited, located, stored, or discharged on any lot in a way that would be likely to
runoff, seep, or wash into surface or ground water.
E. Fuel Storage: No flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gasses as specified by the State Fire
Marshal may be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel connected directly with
energy devices or heating appliances located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of
fuel.
F. Debris/Refuse: Debris, refuse, trash, construction material, garbage, litter, unfinished buildings without
proper permits, scrap metals, or rotting wood may not accumulate on any property.
G Plumbing Systems: Any development or site improvements shall provide adequate, operational plumbing
systems to connect to public water and sanitary sewer systems. The systems shall conform tO the
standards adopted by the appropriate governing body.
H. Drainage: Any development or site improvement shall include adequate provisions for accommodating
surface drainage, storm water detention and storm sewer system design in accordance with local
drainage ordinances, adopted drainage design guidelines and standards, and all State and Federal
requirements.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Performance Standards (PF)
;
I
6.32 PF-01
This Performance Standards section applies to the following districts:
. ~ ~~~~~ --~~ ~~-~ ·- The following performance standards apply:
A. Air Pollution: No use on a property shall release fly ash, dust, smoke, vapors, noxious, toxic or corrosive
matter or other air pollutants in such concentration as to be detrimental to health, animals, vegetation
or property, or to conflict with public air quality standards.
B. Electrical Disturbance: No use on a property shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting
radio, television or other equipment in the vicinity.
C. Fire Protection: Fire fighting equipment and prevention measures acceptable to the local Fire Departments
shall be readily available and apparent when any activity involving the handling and storage of
flammable or explosive materials is conducted.
D. Noise: Noise levels shall not exceed the following:
a. No use on a property shall produce sustained noise over 50 decibels when adjacent to residential
uses or 70 decibels when adjacent to all other uses. Decibels levels apply at all times of the day
and shall be measured at any property line.
b. No use on a property shall produce repetitive noise over 70 decibels when adjacent to residential
uses or 83 decibels when adjacent to all other uses. Decibels levels apply at all times of the day
and shall be measured at any property line. ·
c. No use on a property shall produce short bursts of noise over 83 decibels when adjacent to any
land use. Decibels levels apply at all times of the day and shall be measured at any property line.
d. Any noise that exceeds the above limits shall be muftled or otherwise controlled so as not to
exceed these limits. Public safety sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes shall
be exempt from this standard.
E. Odor: No use on a property shall emit across Jot lines any gas or matter with a bad odor in such
quantity as to be readily detectable at any point along such lines.
F. Vibration: No use on a property shall cause vibrations detectable beyond Jot lines without the aid of
instruments.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-27
Lighting Standards (LT).
6.33 LT-01
6-28
This Lighting Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~---~~-~~-~~-
The following lighting standards apply:
A. All lot lighting must be shielded with opaque material to prevent direct lighting on streets, alleys, and
adjacent properties.
B. All ground lighting used to cast light on building facades, features of buildings or signs must have
shields to assure that light does not project beyond the building or sign and must utilize the least amount
of light necessary to light the facade, building feature or sign. The light fixture and bulb must be
shielded from view of any street, sidewalk, or parking lot.
C. Lighting fixtures and poles for parking lots must all be consistent in color, size, height, and design.
D. All parking lot lights must utilize cutoff luminaires with 90° or less of an angle ( downlighting).
E. Parking lot lights must not exceed 25 feet in height.
F. All freestanding lights and lights mounted on walls or facades must have cutoff luminaires with 90° or
less of an angle ( downlighting).
G All lighting fixtures and poles within a single development must be consistent in style, design and color.
H. Lighting from a property may not cause more than a l /2 foot candle of illumination beyond the property
line of that property. The only exceptions to this standard are as follows:
a. When the subject property is zoned for business use and the adjacent property is also zoned for
business or industrial use, then the allowable light at the property line is one ( 1) foot candle (only
on the sides of the property that are adjacent to the similar Zoning District).
b When the subject property is zoned for industrial use and the adjacent property is also zoned for
industrial use, then the allowable light at the property line is 2 112 foot candles (only on the sides of
the property that are adjacent to the similar Zoning District).
I. Measurements of light readings shall be taken along any property line of the subject property with a
light meter facing the center of the property at a height of 6 feet.
J. Commercial, industrial and institutional parking lots and entryways must be illuminated
sufficiently to provide a safe and secure lighted area for patrons and employees. Broken or
non-functioning light fixtures and poles must be repaired to working condition within five
(5) days. .
Amending Ordinance 6719
5/13/13: City Council adoption
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63751 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
SIGN STANDARDS
6.34 SI-01 (General Sign Standards)
~~l~J~;d~s~ti~ap~esHDth~lo;g~tri~: QQ ~ ~ g g ~ ~
The following sign standards apply:
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge,
move or convert any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Planning Director.
B. Abandoned Signs: A sign, all mountings, and related components shall be removed by the owner or
lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business which it advertises is no longer
conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign within ten (10) days after the
owner's receipt of the notice to remove the sign, the Planning Director should follow the procedure
in H. RemovaL of Signs.
C. Illuminated Signs: All illuminated signs shall comply with the following standards:
a. All illuminating elements shall be kept in satisfactory working condition and immediately repaired or
replaced if damaged or burned out.
b. All electrical wiring for permanent signs shall be in conduit and shall meet or exceed all applicable
electrical codes.
c. The direct or reflected light from a primary light source shall not create a traffic ha7Md to operators of
motor vehicles on public and/or private roadways.
d. The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or directed such that the light intensity
or brightness will not be objectionable to the surrounding properties. No light shall shine directly onto
an adjacent property.
D. Exempt Signs: The following items are allowed and are exempt from the sign provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance, except as listed in subsection "e" below.
a. Flags of any country, state, unit of local government, institution of higher learning, or similar
institutional flags.
b. Names of buildings, date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like
when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or denoted on a commemorative plaque made of
bronz.e, brass, or other permanent material and made an integral part of the structure. No commercial
messages or logos are permitted on such signs.
c. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest erected by an officer of the City,
including signs to promote safety, no trespassing, traffic signs, memorial plaques, historical interest
signs, and signs directing people to public and quasi-public facilities.
d. Utility signs used to mark cables, pipes and lines for public and private utilities except if determined
to be a hazard by the Planning Director.
e. Under no circumstances may an exempt sign exceed the maximum height standard for its district, or
be placed in the vision clearance triangle, or otherwise constitute a public hazard.
f. Freedom of speech signs (e.g. political campaign or anti-policy signs) are permitted. They shall
not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in size in agricultural or residential zoning districts; or thirty two
(3°2) square feet in commercial or industrial districts. These signs shall not include changeable copy.
E. Prohibited Signs: The following types of signs are expressly prohibited in all Zoning Districts.
a. Signs that utilize any motion picture, laser, or visual projection of images or copy.
b. Signs that emit audible sound, odor or visible matter.
c. Signs that purport to be, are imitations of, or resemble an official traffic sign or signal.
.d. Signs which bear the words "stop", "slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or similar words.
e. Lights that resemble an emergency or road equipment vehicle.
f. Signs in a right of way.
g Signs that hide or partially hide from view any traffic or roadway sign, signal or device.
h. Signs within the vision clearance triangle.
i. Signs that extend above the roof line or parapet of a building.
j. Signs mounted on the roof of a structure.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-29
k. Signs that have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights.
I. Signs that have changing light intensity, brightness or color, or give such illusion.
m. Signs that obstruct any door, fire escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide entrance or exit for
a building or structure.
n. Signs placed on vehicles parked on public or private property primarily for the purpose of displaying
the sign. Prohibited signs do not include those displayed on vehicles parked for the purpose of
lawfully making deliveries or random sales or service. Prohibited signs do not include vehicles which
are customarily used for transporting persons or properties, and vehicles parked at a driver's place of
residence during non-business hours or for incidental purposes.
o. Any sign that is not expressly permitted in this Zoning Ordinance.
p. Signs which contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character, such
as will offend public morals or decency.
q. Advertising benches.
r. Temporary or moveable signs that have been altered or fixed to the ground to create a permanent sign.
s. Permanent signs with changeable copy encompassing more than fifty percent (50%) of the total sign
area.
t. Off-premise signs.
F. Noncommercial message: Noncommercial messages are permitted on all permitted signs.
G. ·Sign Area: the following items are used for determining the area of signs:
a. Single Faced Signs -Area shall be determined by the smallest circle, triangle or rectangle that can be
used to enclose the sign, exclusive of supporting members that bear no message.
b. Double Faced Signs-The area of such signs shall be detennined in the same manner as single
faced signs and shall be allowed on each side, provided that the facings are bru::k-to-back. A V-type
sign may be permitted, if the greatest point of separation between the sign faces does not exceed 15
feet.
c. Multi-faced Signs - Area shall be determined by the smallest circle, triangle or rectangle that can be
used to enclose the largest single surface or largest cross-section of the sign, exclusive of supporting
members that bear no message.
H. Removal of Signs
a. Whenever a sign within the city, by reason of its dilapidated, decayed or rotten condition,
shall become dangerous to public or private safety or property or has been rendered obsolete,
the Planning Director shall notify the sign owner to have the sign removed within ten (10)
days after the owner's receipt of the notice to remove the sigri. Thereafter, should the sign
not be removed, the Planning Director shall give notice of the condition to the City Code
Enforcement Department. .
b. The order of the Planning Director to remove a sign is not appealable to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, but shall be subject to review by the hearing authority designated under the ·
Kokomo City Code in the same manner as any manner brought before the hearing authority
under the city ordinance concerning enforcement of building standards. The hearing
authority may confirm, modify, or rescind the order of the Planning Director as to the sign
made subject to the Planning Director's order.
I. Permitted Signs not reguiring an Improvement Location Permit
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the following signs are allowable in all
zoning districts established in this Zoning Ordinance and shall not require an improvement location
permit.
a. Residential identification sign. One residential identification sign for each residential dwelling may
be affixed to a mailbox, fence or structure. In addition, house numbers not to exceed three (3)
square feet depicting the address of the property are permitted.
b. Building directories. An exterior building directory on a multiple tenancy structure shall not
exceed six (6) square feet in area.
6-29a Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
• c. Directional or warning signs. Signs erected by a duly constituted governing body or public utility
such as traffic-control and safety signs, handicapped parking signs, railroad signs, entrance and exit
signs, municipal facility signs, public directional signs, and memorial plaques are permitted. If such
signs are illuminated, the light source shall not be directed towards any street or any adjoining
property in a residential zone if at all avoidable. Such identifying ingress and egress points of a
property shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the visibility of motorists or
pedestrians.
d. Home occupation signs. Home occupation signs are permitted only und~r standards set in Section
6.22 H0-02 Home Occupation Standards (HO). (NOTE: these standards require an ILP)
e. On-premise directional signs. On-premise directional signs shall be allowed for the purpose of
directing traffic on the same premise as the sign or signs. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square
feet and shall not be located in any public right-of-way and any such sign, including a structure to
which it is attached, shall not exceed five (5) feet in height.
f. On-premise warning signs. Signs located on-premise warning the public against hunting, fishing,
dumping, trespassing, dangerous animals, swimming or the like shall be permitted. Such signs must
be attached to a fence or structure. Such signs shall be no more than four (4) square feet in area.
g. Public service sign. A public service sign can be any specifically licensed sign, permitted by
legislative body, by franchise, or by any special permit of the City Plan Commission. A public
service sign may be a sign established by a public service agency as an aid to safety or service. A
public service sign may also be a governmental or traffic sign.
h. Real estate signs. Two (2) real estate signs are permitted on any property being sold, leased, or
developed if they are not illuminated, not located in the existing right-of-way, and are no larger than
eighteen (18) square feet in any residential district, or thirty-two (32) square feet in any commercial
or.industrial district. Such signs shall be removed no later than thirty (30) days after the sale, lease,
or development of the property has been completed.
i. Seasonal displays and decorations. Seasonal displays and decorations for events such as religious or
civic holidays, are permitted unless they advertise a product or service.
j. On-premise construction signs. Construction signs having a maximum sign surface area of thirtytwo
(32) square feet shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall be limited to one sign per
entrance for each parcel of land, provided that an improvement location permit shall be required
prior to placement to be removed within thirty (30) days after completion or occupancy of the
project.
J. Signs Requiring Improvement Location Permits
The following provisions shall apply to signs for which an improvement location permits are required,
and shall designate total cumulative signage, maximum sign areas, zoning districts in which sign are
permitted, sign location, and separation distances ·required, where appropriate. Improvement location
permits, as required in this section, shall be obtained prior to sign placement from the City Plan
Commission office. An improvement location permit is required for any alteration to an existing sign
or sign face (re-facing) except in cases of minor repairs. Signs regulated by this section shall include
the following:
a. On-premise wall signs.
b. On-premise gateway signs. Gateway signs which identify a planned district or plat, including office
parks, industrial parks, or subdivisions, shall be permitted in all zoning districts and shall be
permitted to be placed on both sides of the ingress point, provided that the combined sign surface
area of the two such signs does not exceed two-hundred (200) square feet.
c. On-premise ground signs.
d. On premise identification signs. Identification signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts under
specific zone regulations, or where a use is allowed as a nonconforming use, or is permitted by
reason of a variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, provided that the placement of such
signs shall be subject to the obtaining of an improvement location permit.
e. On-premise institutional signs. One sign shall be permitted per frontage in the IS zoning district.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-29b
h.
f. On-premise portable signs. One sign is pennitted per premise. Off-premise portable signs are not
pennitted. Portable signs may not be altered or fixed to the ground or other structure to create a
pennanent sign.
g. On-premise projecting signs.
P I . A 1 . 1. Allowable in NC, IS, OC, DC, C 1, C2, LI, MI, and HI districts only, a projecting sign shall be
o e signs. po e sign h f:. f th · · ·
shall have a minimum of placed at a distance not greater than two (2) feet from t e ace o e wall to which 1t 1s attached.
ten (10) feet between the No projecting sign or part thereof shall extend nearer to the curb line than five (5) feet, nor be
~;'::d0~~~:~::i~d placed lower than ten (I 0) feet above grade or sidewalk level. No projecting sign shall be erected
no ~ore t~an twenty (20) to a height of greater than sixty ( 60) feet above grade or higher than the cornice of any building
f~t ·~ he•gh1
11
· ldfthbepole which is three (3) stories or more in height. No projecting sign shall be erected to a height greater
sign 1s suppo e y more • • •
than one pole, the space than sixty (60) feet above grade or higher than the cornice of any building which is three (3)
between the poles shall stories or more in height.
not be enclosed in a . • •
manner that infringes 2. Any moveable part of the proJectmg sign shall have an area no to exceed twenty (20) square feet
upon the minimum clear to a vertical sign, or twenty (20) square feet for a horizontal sign.
wne of ten ( 10) venical · ·
feet as herein established.
6.35 SI-02 [Residential Temporary Signs)
6.36
6-30
1filJ Te~rary~gn ~dar~ectfu1jppl~to th~llowing districts:
The following sign standards apply:
A. Two (2) temporary signs no larger than 18 square feet each in size are allowed without a pennit
for the duration of a temporary event (i.e. garage sale, yard sale, sale of property, etc.). A grace
period of one (I) week is allowed for the removal of said sign. These signs shall not include
changeable copy.
B. One (I) temporary sign no larger than 32 square feet in size is allowed without a pennit for one
(I) week during each calendar year. This sign may include changeable copy.
C. This temporary sign shall be at least 5 feet from any property line.
D. This temporary sign shall not exceed 5 feet in height.
s~ rcimOOa1 ~In~tri~emgora~si~
The following sign standards apply:
A. Two (2) temporary signs no larger than 32 square feet each in size are allowed without a pennit
for the duration of a temporary event or special promotion. A grace period of one ( 1) week is
allowed for the removal of said sign. A third temporary sign no larger than thirty (30) square
feet in size and used for the same purpose is allowed ifthe subject property has over 200 lineal
feet of frontage on a public street or has a primary structure over 50,000 square feet. These
signs shall not include changeable copy (for these, see E below).
B. A temporary sign shall be at least ten (I 0) feet from the property line. .
C. Streamers, pennants, and inflatables are allowed without a permit for grand openings or special
promotions. Such devices shall be pennitted under the following conditions:
a. Such devices shall not pose a risk to pedestrian or vehicular safety.
b. Such devices shall be at least ten (I 0) feet or a distance equivalent to the height of the
inflatable device from the property line, whichever is greater.
D. Temporary signs in windows are allowed without a pennit as follows:
a. Window signs shall only be used on first floor windows.
b. No single window shall exceed 70% coverage by a sign.
c. The number of windows on a structure's first floor used for signs shall not exceed 50% of the
total number of windows.
E. Additional temporary signs require a temporary sign permit and must meet the following
standards:
a. Only one ( 1) temporary sign permit shall be issued per calendar year location and temporary
signs shall not be displayed for more than a consecutive thirty (30) day period.
b. Any additional temporary sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in size.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
• c. The maximum number of additional temporary signs permitted per property at any time shall
be one (1) per location .
d. Such signs shall not pose a risk to pedestrian or vehicular safety.
f. Such devices shall be at least ten (10) feet from the property line.
6.37 SI-04 [Residential Permanent Signs]
This Peirnanent Sign Standards section applies to the following districts:
![TI ~ ~ ~ ~
The following sign regulations apply:
A. A permanent wall sign no larger than 3 square feet in size is allowed per dwelling unit without a
permit.
B. Special illumination of any wall sign is not permitted.
C. A permanent gateway ground sign, no larger than 40 square feet in sign area, is allowed at the
primary entrance of a subdivision or development containing more than 20 lots or dwelling
· units.
6.38 SI-05(High Intensity Residential Permanent Signs]
IM1i Pe~ent m Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following regulations apply:
A. A permanent wall sign no larger than 10 square feet in size is allowed per apartment building or
manufactured home parlc without a permit.
B. Special illumination of any wall sign is not permitted.
C. A permanent gateway sign, no larger than 40 square feet in size is allowed when a multifamily
· development includes 20 or more dwelling units or a manufactured home park contains 20 or
more dwelling sites.
6.39 SI-06[Miscellaneous Permanent Signs]
~ rn The following sign regulations apply:
A. A permanent wall sign no larger than 10 square feet in size is allowed on one ( 1) primary structure
without a permit.
B. A ground sign per primary entrance to a public space or place not exceediilg 5 feet in height and 40
square feet in area is allowed without a permit. ·
6.40 Sl-07 [Low Intensity Commercial Permanent Signs]
This ~rman~t Si~Stan~ds section applies to the following districts:
The following sign regulations apply:
All signs require a permit unless otherwise specified.
A. Single-tenant structure on a lot shall be regulated as follows:
a. Any combination of wall, ground, awning, projecting or permanent window signs are allowed.
b. The cumulative square footage of all permanent signs shall not exceed 150 square feet or 2 square
feet times the length of the primary structure's facade(s) facing a public roadway, whichever is
less, subject to Section 6.40.H.a. ·
c. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, subject to
Section 6.40.H.f.
d. Any single ground sign shall not exceed 50 square feet per' side in area and 6 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.40.H.b.
e. Any single awning sign shall not exceed ~O square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
f. Any single window sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-30a
g. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than 2 feet from the face of the building wall to
which it is attached; project nearer than 5 feet of the curb; extend lower than 10 feet above the
grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed 20 square feet in sign area per face. Projecting signs may
encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of way and the sign is
approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
B. Multi-tenant structure(s) on a lot with 2 or more tenants shall be regulated as follows:
a. Tenant Signs:
1. Any combinations of wall, awning, projecting sign or pennanent window signs are allowed per
tenant space.
2. The cumulative square footage of all pennanent signs per tenant space shall not exceed 150
square feet or 2 square feet times the length of the tenant's facade which includes the primary
entrance, whichever is less, subject to Section 6.40.H.a.
3. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, subject to
Section 6.40.H.f.
4. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
5. Any single window sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
6. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than 2 feet from the face of the building wall
to which it is attached; project nearer than 5 feet of the curb; extend lower than 1 O feet above
the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed 20 square feet in sign area per face. Projecting signs
may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of way and the
sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
b. Multi-Tenant Structure(s) Signs:
1. A multi-tenant structure(s) is pennitted any combination of wall signs, projecting signs, awning
signs, l gateway sign at the primary entrance into the multi-tenant structure(s), and single
secondary gateway sign(s) at any entrance into the multi-tenant structure(s) off a street not
used by the primary entrance, in addition to any tenant signs.
2. The cumulative square footage of all multi-tenant structure(s) permanent signs shall not to
exceed l square foot times the length of the fa9ade(s) facing public roadways up to a maximum
of 150 square feet per fa~de, subject to Section 6.40.H.
3. Any single gateway sign shall not exceed 150 square feet in area per side and 15 feet in
height, subject to Section 6.40.H.c.
4. A secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in· area per side and 15 feet in
height, subject to Section 6.40.H.d.
5. Any single tenant sign on a gateway sign shall not exceed 35 square feet per side and is in
addition to signs penititted for the tenant by 6.41 B. b.
6. Any single tenant sign on a secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 15 square feet per side
and is in addition to signs permitted for the tenant by 6.41 B. b.
7. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 150 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, subject to
Section 6.40.H.f.
8. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
9. Any single window sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area and 3 feet in height.
10. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than 2 feet from the face of the building wall
to which it is attached; project nearer than 5 feet of the curb; extend lower than 10 feet above
the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed 20 square feet in sign area per face. Projecting signs
may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of way and the
sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
D. Directional signs are permitted on a lot as follows.
a. Directional signs shall only contain language and icons to guide pedestrians or motor vehicles into,
out of, or around a development.
b. Any single directional sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
c. No more than 2 directional signs shall be used per curb cut onto a public street.
6-31 Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
E. All permanent signs must be located on the lot for which they relate unless approved as a special
exception.
F. On lots without a structure a permanent noncommercial ground sign up to 24 square feet in area is
permitted.
G. All permanent ground signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the property line.
H. The maximum cumulative square footage of signs and the maximum area of certain signs for single
tenant structures, tenant signs within multi-tenant structures, and multi-tenant structure(s) permanent
signs are increased ~here the structures have facades facing higher speed public roadways or where the
facades have very large setbacks from the public roadways.
a. The cumulative maximum sign area for facades, facing public roadways with posted speed limits
greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding l 00 square feet to the maximum size listed in
A. b., B.a.2. or B. b.2. Each fa~ade facing different public roadways is calculated separately.
b. The maximum sign area for a single ground sign per single-tenant structure, along a public roadway
with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet to the
maximum size listed in A. d.
c. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) gateway sign, along a public roadway with
posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet to the
maximum size listed in B.b.3.
Facade (Average) Setback Added Cumulative Maximum Sign Area
0 ft. to 200 ft. + 0 SQ. ft.
201 ft. to 400 ft. + 100 sa. ft.
Over 400 ft. + 200 sa. ft.
d. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) secondary gateway sign, along a
public roadway with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by
adding 50 square feet to the maximum size listed in B.b.4.
e. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade with a very large setback from a public roadway
is increased by adding the amount indicated in the table below to the maximum size listed in A. b.
or B.b.2. ·
Facade (Average) Setback Add to Maximum Area for One Wall Sign
0 ft. to 200 ft. + 0 sa. ft.
201 ft. to 400 ft. + 100 sa. ft.
Over 400 ft. + 200 SQ. ft.
Each fa~ade facing different public roadways is calculated separately. The fa~de setback is
measured from and perpendicular to the centerline of the public roadway. Facades with changes
in wall plane such as projections or recesses which have different setback distances or which are
not parallel to the public roadway centerline use the average of the setbacks measured at 100 foot
intervals along the public roadway centerline.
f. The maximum sign area for one wall sign on a facade with a very large setback from a public
roadway is increased by adding the amount indicated in the table above to the maximum size listed
in A. c., B.a.3, or B.b.7.
g. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade facing a higher speed public roadway and having a
very large setback from the public roadway adds both H.a. and H.e. amounts.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-31a

6.41 SI-08[Medium Intensity Business Permanent Signs]
This Pennanent Sign Standards section applies to the following districts:
g] ~
The following sign regulations apply:
All signs require a pennit unless otherwise specified.
A. A single-tenant structure on a lot shall be regulated as follows:
a. Any combination of wall, ground, pole, awning, projecting or permanent window signs are allowed.
b. The cumulative square footage of all permanent signs shall not exceed 300 square feet or 2 square
feet times the length of the primary structure's facade(s) facing a public roadway, whichever is
less, subject to Section 6.41.J .a. I.
c. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, subject to
Section 6.41.J.b.2.
d. Any single ground sign shall not exceed I 00 square feet per side in area and 8 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.41 J .a.2. .
e. Any single pole sign shall not exceed I 00 square feet per side in area and 20 feet in height, subject
to Section 6.41.J .a.2. .
f. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
g. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
h. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building
wall to which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet of the curb; extend lower than eight (8)
feet above the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area per
face. Projecting signs may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street
right of way and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
B. Multi-tenant structure(s) on a lot with 2 or more tenants shall be regulated as follows:
a. Tenant Signs:
I. Any combinations of wall, awning, projecting sign or permanent window signs are allowed per
tenant space.
2. The cumulative square footage of all permanent signs per tenant space shall not exceed three
hundred (300) square feet or 2 square feet times the length of the tenant's fayade which includes
the primary entrance, whichever is less, subject to Section 6.41.J.a.1.
3. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 120 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, subject to
6.41.J.b.i.
4. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
5. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
6. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building
wall to which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet from the curb; extend lower than
eight (8) feet above the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area
per face. Projecting signs may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the
street right of way and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
b. Multi-Tenant Structure(s) Signs:
6-32
l. A multi-tenant structure(s) is permitted any combination of wall signs, projecting signs, awning
signs, one ( l) gateway sign at the primary entrance into the multi-tenant structure(s), and single
secondary gateway sign(s) at any entrance into the multi-tenant structure(s) off a street not used
by the primary entrance, in addition to any tenant signs.
2. The cumulative square footage of all multi-tenant structure(s) permanent signs shall not exceed
one (1) square foot times the length of the fayade(s) facing public roadways up to a maximum of
250 square feet per fa9ade, subject to Section 6.41.J. [For example: If a multi-tenant structure(s)
has 150 feet of fa9ade facing a public roadway then it would be allowed to have a gateway sign
up to 150 square feet in size for the multi-tenant structure(s).]
3. Any single gateway sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area per side and 20 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.41.J .a.4.
4. A secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area per side and 15 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.41.J.a.4.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
5. Any single tenant sign on a gateway sign shall not exceed 35 square feet per side a is in
addition to signs permitted for the tenant by 6.41.B.b.
6. ny single tenant sign on a secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 15 square fe t per side and
1 · n addition to signs permitted for the tenant by 6.4.B.b.
7. An single wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and 8 feet in hei t, subject to
6.41. .2.
8. Any si le awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in eight.
9. Any sin e window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet n height.
10. Any singl rojecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet fro the face of the building
wall to whic it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet from the c b; extend lower than
eight (8) feet a ove the grade of the sidewalk level; nor exceed twen (20) square feet in sign
area per face. ~ecting signs may encroach on street right ofwa.x here the building adjoins the
street right ofwa and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Boar of Public Works and Safety.
C. Directional signs are perm ed on a lot as follows.
a. Directional signs shall on contain language and icons to guide p estrians or motor vehicles into,
out of, or around a develop ent. . ·
b. Any single directional sign s II not exceed 4 square feet in ar and. 5 feet in height.
c. No more than 2 directional si s shall be used per curb cut o o a public street.
D. When considering a variance for a off-premise sign, the Boa of Zoning Appeals may consider the
following guidelines:
a. The maximum area of display su e per off-premise gn shall not exceed 300 square feet per side.
b. Only one sign board per side is pe "tted.
c. The minimum separation between an
shall be 1 000 feet.
d. Off-premise signs shall not be located clo er th 25 feet to any existing or proposed right of way of
any street or highway.
e. All off-premise signs shall be at least 150 fe from any residential zone and from the nearest property
line of any school, church, or institution fo h an care. Existing signs erected before enactment of
this ordinance shall be exempt from this uire ent. .
f. Off-premises signs shall have a max· m height f 50 feet from the grade to the top edge of the sign.
Grade shall be defined as the level o e street or · hway from which the sign is intended to be .
viewed.
g. Off-premises signs shall have a 0 foot clearance fro grade to the bottom edge of the sign,
including any embellishments
h. Back-to..:.back off-premises gns may be separated in the hape of the letter "V" if the greatest point
of separation between the o sign faces does not exceed l feet.
i. Embellishments allowe shall not exceed 200 square feet in ea. Maximum embellishment of cutouts
shall be: above t sign board, 6 feet; below the sign bo , 1 foot; and any sides of the sign
board, 3 feet.
j. Any existing off- remises sign may be upgraded to a multi-disp y off-premises sign where the offpremise
sign c plies with the standards of 6.41.D. of this ordin ce (See 8.6. Nonconforming
Signs) Com~ ance may require removal of other nearby off-prern1 e signs.
E. No two grou or pole signs may be within 75 feet of one another.
F. All perman t signs must be located on the lot for which they relate un s~ approved as a special
exception
G. On lots ithout a structure a permanent noncommercial ground sign up t 24 square feet in area is
permi ed.
H. All ermanent ground signs shall be located at least ten (I 0) feet from the p perty line.
I. A ole sign shall have a minimum clear zone of 10 feet between the bottom the face of the sign and
ound level. lfthe pole sign is supported by more than one pole, the space b een the poles shall not
e enclosed in a manner that infringes upon the minimum clear zone.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-33
5. Any single tenant sign on a gateway sign shall not exceed 35 square feet per side and is in
addition to signs permitted for the tenant by 6.41.B.b.
6. Any single tenant sign on a secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 15 square feet per side and
is in addition to signs permitted for the tenant by 6.4.B.b.
7. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, subject to
6.41.J.b.2.
8. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
9. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
10. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building
wall to which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet from the curb; extend lower than
eight (8) feet above the grade of the sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign
area per face. Projecting signs may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the
street right of way and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
C. Directional signs are permitted on a lot as follows.
a. Directional signs shall only contain language and icons to guide pedestrians or motor vehicles into,
out of, or around a development.
b. Any single directional sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in area and 5 feet in height.
c. No more than 2 directional signs shall be used per curb cut onto a public street.
D. When considering a variance for an off-premise sign, the Board of Zoning Appeals may consider the
following guidelines:
a. The maximum area of display surface per off-premise sign shall not exceed 300 square feet per side.
b. Only one sign board per side is permitted.
c. The minimum separation between any two off-premises sign on· both side of all streets or highways
shall be 1000 feet.
d. Off-premise signs shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any existing or proposed right of way of
any street or highway.
e. All off-premise signs shall be at least 150 feet from any residential zone and from the nearest property
line of any school, church, or institution for human care. Existing signs erected before enactment of
this ordinance shall be exempt from this requirement.
f. Off-premises signs shall have a maximum height of 50 feet from the grade to the top edge of the sign.
Grade shall be defined as the level of the street or highway from which the sign is intended to be
viewed.
g. Off-premises signs shall have a 10 foot clearance from grade to the bottom edge of the sign,
including any embellishments.
h. Back-to-back off-premises signs may be separated in the shape of the letter "V" ifthe greatest point
of separation between the two sign faces does not exceed 15 feet.
i. Embellishments allowed shall not exceed 200 square feet in area. Maximum embellishment of cutouts
shall be: above the sign board, 6 feet; below the sign board, 1 foot; and any sides of the sign
board, 3 feet.
j. Any existing off-premises sign may be upgraded to a multi-display off-premises sign where the offpremise
sign complies with the standards of 6.41.D. of this ordinance (See 8.6. Nonconforming
Signs) Compliance may require removal of other nearby off-premise signs.
E. No two ground or pole signs may be within 75 feet of one another.
F. All permanent signs must be located on the lot for which they relate unless approved as a special
exception.
G. On lots without a structure a permanent noncommercial ground sign up to 24 square feet in area is
permitted.
H. All permanent ground signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the.property line.
I. A pole sign shall have a minimum clear zone of 10 feet between the bottom of the face of the sign and
ground level. If the pole sign is supported by more than one pole, the space between the poles shall not
be enclosed in a manner that infringes upon the minimum clear zone.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-33
J. The maximum cumulative square footage of signs and the maximum area of certain signs for single
tenant structures, tenant signs within multi-tenants structures, and multi-tenant structure(s) pennanent
signs are increased where the structures have facades facing higher speed public roadways or where the
facades have very large setbacks from the public roadways.
a. Higher Speed Roadways
1. The cumulative maximum sign area for facades, facing public roadways with posted speed
limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet to the maximum
size listed in A. b., B.a.2., or B. b. 2. Each fayade facing different public roadways is calculated
separately.
2. The maximum sign area for one pole sign or ground sign per single-tenant structure, along a
public roadway with posted speed lilnits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding
100 square feet to the maximum size listed in A. d. and A. e.
3. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) gateway sign, along a public roadway
with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet
·to the maximum size listed in B.b.3.
4. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) secondary gateway sign, along a public
roadway with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 50
square feet to the maximum size listed in B.b.4.
Facade (Averaj!;e) Setback Added Cumulative Maximum SilZD Area
0 ft. to 200 ft. + 0 sq. ft.
201 ft. to 400 ft. + 100 sq. ft.
Over 400 ft. + 200 sq. ft.
b. Very Large Setback Facades
1. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade with. a very large setback from a public
roadway is increased by adding the amount indicated in the table below to the maximum size
listed in A. b., B.a.3, or B.b.2 ..
Facade (Averaj!;e) Setback Add to Maximum Area for One Wall Silll1
0 ft. to 200 ft. +o sq. ft.
201 ft. to 401 ft. +100 sq. ft.
Over400 ft. +200 sq. ft.
Each fayade facing different public roadways is calculated separately. The fayade setback is
measured from and perpendicular to the centerline of the public roadway. Facades with changes
in wall plane such as projections· or recesses which have different setback distances or which are
not parallel to the public roadway centerline use the average of the setbacks measured at 100 foot intervals
along the public roadway centerline.
2. The maximum sign area for one wall sign on a facade with a very large setback from a public
roadway is increased by adding. the amount indicated in the table below to the maximum size listed
in A. c., B.a.3, or B.b.7.
c. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade facing a higher speed public roadway and having a
very large setback from the public roadway adds both J.a.1. and J.b.I. amounts.
Section 6.42 SI-09 [High Intensity Business Permanent Signs]
This~ermmt Si~Standards section applies to the following districts
A. A single-tenant structure on a lot shall be regulated as follows:
a. Any combination of wall, ground, pole, awning, projecting sign or permanent window signs are
allowed.
6-34 Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
b. The cumulative square footage of all pennanent signs shall not exceed 300 square feet or 2 square feet
times the length of the primary structure's facade(s) facing a public roadway, whichever is less, subject
to Section 6.42.J.a. l
c. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and 8 feet in height.
d. Any single ground sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per side in area and 8 feet in height.
e. Any single pole sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per side in area and 20 feet in height.
f. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
g. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
h. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building wall to
which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet of the curb; extend lower than eight (8) feet above
the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area per face. Projecting signs
may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of way and the sign is
approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
B. Multi-tenant structure(s) on a lot with 2 or more tenants shall be regulated as follows:
a. Tenant Signs:
1. Any combination of wall, projecting sign or awning signs is allowed per tenant space.
2. The cumulative square footage of all pennanent signs per tenant space shall not exceed three
hundred fifty (350) square feet or 2 square feet times the length of the tenants fa~de(s) facing a
public roadway, whichever is less, subject to Section 6.42.J.a.1
3. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, subject to
6.42.J.b.2.
4. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
5. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
6. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building
wall to which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet from the curb; extend lower than eight
(8) feet above the grade of sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area per face.
Projecting signs may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of
way and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
b. Multi-Tenant Structure(s) Signs:
1. A multi-tenant structure(s) is pennitted any combination of wall signs, projecting signs, awning
signs, one( 1) gateway sign at the primary entrance into the multi-tenant structure( s ), and a
secondary gateway sign(s) at any entrance into the multi-tenant structure(s) off a street not used by
the primary entrance, in addition to any tenant signs.
2. The cumulative square footage of all multi-tenant structure(s) pennanent signs shall not exceed one
( 1) square foot times the length of the fayade( s) facing public roadways up to a maximum of 250
square feet per fayade, subject to Section 6.42.J .a.1
3. Any single gateway sign shall not exceed 200 square feet in area per side and 20 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.42.J.a.4.
4. A secondary gateway .sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area per side and 15 feet in height,
subject to Section 6.42.J.a.4.
5. Any single tenant sign on a gateway sign shall not exceed 35 square feet per side_ and is in addition to
signs pennitted for the tenant by 6.42.B.b.
6. Any single tenant sign on a secondary gateway sign shall not exceed 15 square feet per side and is in
addition to signs pennitted for the tenant by 6.4.B.b.
7. Any single wall sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in area and 8 feet in height, subject to
6.42.J.b.2.
8. Any single awning sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
9. Any single window sign shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and 4 feet in height.
10. Any single projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the face of the building wall
to which it is attached; project nearer than five (5) feet from the curb; extend lower than eight (8)
feet above the grade of the sidewalk level; nor exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area per face.
Projecting signs may encroach on street right of way where the building adjoins the street right of
way and the sign is approved by the Kokomo Board of Public Works and Safety.
Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-35
C. Directional signs are permitted on a lot as follows.
a. Directional signs shall only contain language and icons to guide pedestrians or motor vehicles into,
out of, or around a development.
b. Any single directional sign shall not exceed 4 square feet in area and 5 feet in height.
c. No more than 2 directional signs shall be used per curb cut onto a public street.
D. When considering a variance for an off-premise sign, the Board of Zoning Appeals may consider the
following guidelines:
a. The maximum area of display surface per off-premise sign shall not exceed 300 square feet per side.
b. Only one sign board per side is permitted.
c. The minimum separation between any two off-premises sign on both side of all streets or highways
shall be. I 000 feet. .
d. Off-premise signs shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any existing or proposed right of way of
any street or highway.
e. All off-premise signs shall be at least 150 feet from any residential zone and from the nearest property
line of any school, church, or institution for human care. Existing signs erected before enactment of
this ordinance shall be exempt from this requirement.
f. Off-premises signs shall have a maximum height of 50 feet from the grade to the top edge of the sign.
Grade shall be defined as the level of the street or highway from which the sign is intended to be
viewed.
g. Off-premises signs shall have a 10 foot clearance from grade to the bottom edge of the sign,
including any embellishments. .
h. Back-to-back off-premises signs may be separated in the shape of the letter·~· ifthe greatest point
of separation between the two sign faces does not exceed 15 feet.
i. Embellishments allowed shall not exceed 200 square feet in area. Maximum embellishment of cutouts
shall be: above the sign board, 6 feet; below the sign board, 1 foot; and any sides of the sign
board, 3 feet.
j. Any existing off-premises sign may be upgraded to a multi-display off-premises sign where the offpremise
sign complies with the standards of 6.41 .D. of this ordinance (See 8.6. Nonconforming
Signs) Compliance may require removal of other nearby off-premise signs.
E. No two ground or pole signs may be within 75 feet of one another.
F. All permanent signs must be located on the lot for which they relate unless approved as a special
exception.
G. On lots without a structure a permanent noncommercial ground sign up to 24 square feet in area is
permitted.
H. All permanent ground signs shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the property line.
I. A pole sign shall have a minimum clear zone of 10 feet between the bottom of the face of the sign and
ground level. If the pole sign is supported by more than one pole, the space between the poles shall not
be enclosed in a manner that infringes upon the minimum clear zone.
J. The maximum cumulative square footage of signs and the maximum area of certain signs for single
tenant structure, tenant signs within multi-tenant structures and multi-tenant structure(s) permanent signs
are increased where the structures have facades facing higher speed public roadways or where the
facades have very large setbacks from the public roadways.
a. Higher Speed Roadways
I. The cumulative maximum sign area for facades, facing public roadways with posted speed
limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet to the maximum
size listed in A. b., B.a.2., or B. b. 2. Each fayade facing different public roadways
is calculated separately.
2. The maximum sign area for one pole sign or ground sign per single-tenant structure, along a
public roadway with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding
I 00 square feet to the maximum size listed in A. d. and A. e.
3. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) gateway sigii, along a public roadway
with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 100 square feet
to the maximum size listed in B.b.3.
6-36 Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards
... 4. The maximum sign area for a multi-tenant structure(s) secondary gateway sign, along a public
roadway with posted speed limits greater than 43 miles per hour, is increased by adding 50
square feet to the maximum size listed in B.b.4
Facade (Average) Setback Added Cumulative Maximum Sil?Il Area
0 ft. to 200 ft. + 0 SQ. ft.
20 l ft. to 400 ft. + 100 SQ . ft.
Over 400 ft. + 200 sa. ft.
b. Very Large Setback Facades
1. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade with a very large setback from a public
roadway is increased by adding the amount indicated in the table below to the maximum size
listed in A. b., B.a.3, or B.b.2.
Facade (Average) Setback Add to Maximum Area for One Wall Sign
0 ft. to 200 ft. +Q SQ. ft.
201 ft. to 401 ft. +100 SQ. ft.
Over400 ft. +200 SQ. ft.
Each fa~ade facing different public roadways is calculated separately. The fa~ade setback is measured from
and perpendicular to the centerline of the public roadway. Facades with changes in wall plane such
as projections or recesses which have different setback distances or which are not'parallel to the
public roadway centerline use the average of the setbacks measured at 100 foot intervals along the
public roadway centerline.
2. The maximum sign area for one wall sign on a facade with a very large setback from a public
roadway is increased by adding the amount indicated in the table below to the maximum size listed
in A. c., B.a.3, or B.b.7. above respectively.
c. The cumulative maximum sign area for a facade facing a higher speed public roadway and having a
very large setback from the public roadway adds both J.a.l. and _J.b.l. amounts.
Kokomo Zoning ~rdinance 6279, as amended, Sign Standards 6-36a
. (A) Two paved off-street parking spaces are required
per dwelling unit, except at assisted living homes,
assisted living facilities, and nursing homes where
only one off-street parking space per two (2) dwelling
uni ts is required. Ia multifamily fieusia§" aeveleflmeAts
at least eRe ( 1 l SJ'laee J'leF 2 uRite i e FeE!fl:l:if·ee feF
wieite= paclciRIJ aREl shall ee spreae er,•ealy tfiFeu§"heut
the eevelej3l'Re!lltc
•
Parking Standards (PK)
6.43 PK-01
This Parking Standards section applies to the following districts:
~m~~~~~mmm~~~~~-~~-
The following parking regulations apply: _
A. Each parking space must be at least 180 square feet with a minimum width of nine (9) feet. Any
handicap accessible parking spaces must have a width of a minimum of eight (8) feet and an adjacent
access aisle of at least five (5) feet wide. Spaces shall have handicap accessible parking space signs
that are not obscured when vehicles are parked in the spaces. One in every eight accessible parking
spaces shall have an access aisle of eight (8) feet instead of five feet and shall be signed ''van
accessible".
B. Off-street parking spaces may not fully or partially be in a public right-of-way or utility easement.
C. Vehicles or trailers of any type without current license plates or in an inoperable condition shall be
prohibited in residential zone districts other than in completely enclosed buildings and in rear yards.
D. Vehicles or trailers of any type without current license plates or in an inoperable condition shall be
prohibited in commercial zone districts unless fully screened, and shall not be parked or stored in any
zone unless specifically authorized under the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.
E. No vehicle or tractor/trailer of anv type may be used for the purpose of personal stora~e.
F. Guard rails, regardless of material or style, and concrete barricades are prohibited in parking Jots. Small parking bumpers,
6.44 PK-02 blocks or stops placed at one end of an individual parking space are permitted.
This single family detached parking standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~
The following parking regulations apply:
A. Two off-street parking spaces are required per dwelling unit. Neither of the off-street parking spaces
required may include spaces within car ports or garages.
6.45 PK-03
This urban residential parking standards section applies to the following districts:
~~
The following parking regulations apply:
A. Two off-street parking spaces are required per dwelling unit. Up to 50% of the off-street parking
spaces required may include spaces within car ports or garages.
6.46 PK-04
This multifamily residential parking standards section applies to the following districts:
11111
The following parking regulations apply:
A)
B. Visit~r parking space; cannot include spaces in car ports or garages. Further, any off-street parking
space may not fully or partially be in a public right-of-way or utility easement.
C. Parking lots shall have the same setbacks as the primary structure in the district which they are
located. Entrance and exit drives may be within the ·setback area.
Amending Ordinance 6719
5-13-13 Adopted City Council
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-37
Parking Standards (PK)
(Continued) ·
6.47 PK-05
This Parking Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following parking regulations apply:
A. Two off-street paved parking spaces are required per dwelling site.
B. In manufactured or mobile home parks one (I) additional space per 2 dwelling sites is required for
visitor parking and shall be spread evenly throughout the development.
C. Visitor parking spaces cannot include spaces in car ports or garages.
6.48 PK-06
6-38
This Parking Standards s e c tion applies to all off-site
parking lots and the follGWing diS~ricts: PR,~ rs , oc,
Cl , C2, LI , MI, HI .
The following parking regulations apply:
A. All parking lots for commercial, industrial, institutional, business, public and private employee parking,
offices, organizations, and places of assembly must be paved.
B. Expansion of an existing gravel, stone, rock, dirt, sand or grass lot is not permitted.
C. All ingress/egress into parking areas must be paved.
D. Parking lots may project into the front yard setback by 25% of the minimum front yard setback.
Parking lots may project into the side yard setback by 50% of the minimum front yard setback.
Entrance and exit drives may _be located withi!l the se!back area.
E. r No mor e t h an 251 of all parking shall be in f ront of t he p rimary structure .
F. Parking spaces shall be striped so as to show each parking space.
G Parking aisle widths shall be as follows:
a. 90 degree angle space - 24 feet wide parking aisle
b. · 60 degree angle space - 18 feet wide parking aisle
c. 45 degree angle space - 14 feet wide parking aisle
H. Parking areas shall be designed to prevent vehicles from maneuvering in the public right-of-way; such as
backing out into streets or alleys.
I. Parking areas must be constructed to allow proper drainage.
J. Parking spaces prescribed in this section must be located either on the premises or on. a lot approved
by the Plan Commission excluding public parking areas. All required off-street parking spaces,
however, must be located within 800 feet of the subject lot.
K. A single or group of adjacent properties may utilize a shared parking area if the number of spaces
required for each use is adeqtiate. The following requirements apply to shared parking:
a. Each lot must have at least 80% of the total spaces required for its use available at any given
time.
b. A written reciprocal parking agreement signed by all property owners shall be demonstrated.
c. The Planning Director must approve the shared parking area and written parking agreement.
L. To reduce traffic congestion and hazards along roadways, off-street parking shall be required for
business and industrial uses. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be determined by adding
up the spaces required for each applicable statement below. The numbers below do not guarantee the
quantity needed per use, only minimums are expressed. The petitioner must calculate additional
parking spaces that may be necessary.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Parking Standards (PK)
(Continued)
Employee parking for office, commercial, One (I) parking space per employee that
institutional, communication/utilities, and potentially can be working at any given time.
industrial uses. Businesses with multiple shifts must also provide
one (I) additional parking space per two (2)
employees on the largest abutting shift.
Subtract one (I) parking space per sixty (60)
employees and subtract one thirtieth (I/30th) of the
total employee spaces ifthe property is within five
t:#.: .. M:J:ll!IA.~• . . hundred (500) feet of a bus or mass transit stop.
Visitor parking for office, institutional and One (I) visitor parking space per twenty (20)
industrial uses. employees working at any given time up to three
hundred (300) total employees, plus one (I) visitor
space per fifty (50) employees for the amount over
three hundred (300) employees:
Visitor parking for nursing home, hospital, or One (I) visitor space per three (3) beds in a
simlar facilities. hospital or nursing home facility.
Visitor parking for hotel, motel and other One (I) visitor parlcing space per rental unit.
overnight stay facilities.
Automobile, tractor, boat, bus or similar sales Two (2) parking space plus one (I) per sales person
facility. working on any given shift.
Restaurants, food services, theater, community Parking spaces must equal one third (I/3rd) of the
center, auditorium, conference center, church allowable seating capacity.
racetrack, bars, nightclub or similar
facility that seats people.
Furniture, appliance, or similar large item One (1)-parking space per four hundred (400)
sales facility. sq. ft. ofGFA up to 30,000 sq. ft. and one {I) .
parking space per 600 sq. ft. above 30,000 sq. ft.
Hardware, home improvement, lumberyard One (I) parking space per three hundred (300) sq. ft.
auto parts stores or similar moderate size item ofGFA up to 30,000 sq. ft. and one (I) parlcing
sales facility. space per 400 sq. ft. above 30,000 sq. ft.
Fitness center, health spa, skating rink One (I) parking space per three hundred (300) sq. ft.
or similar facilities. / ofGFA.
Retail stores, grocery stores, gasoline stations, One (I) parking space per two hundred fifty
banks, liquor store, and similar high volume (250) sq. ft. ofGFA up to 40,000 sq. ft. and one (I)
facilities. per four h';'ndred (400) sq. ft. up to 80,000 sq. ft. and
one (I) per six hundred (600) sq. ft. above
80,000 sq. ft.
Day-care or similar facility. One (I) parking space per every ten (10) children
enrolled. This number of spaces may be reduced by
.. 114 in trade for passenger loading spaces .
Airport, heliport or similar facility. One (I) parking space per five (5) aircraft tie-downs
and hangar spaces, plus one (1) per .every three (3)
waiting room and classroom seats.
-~--- Self-storage, warehouse, or similar facility. One (I) parking space per 5000 sq. ft. for a single
tenant facility or one (I) space per six Ieasable
storage units. Loading areas may account for up to
114 of this requirement.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
~
6-39
Parking Standards (PK)
(Continued)
Body shop, vehicle repair, car wash or similar One (1) parking space per interior service bay and
facility. per car wash stall. ...,,. 11;1~.~
Medical facility, clinic, doctor's office or One (1) parking space per treatment or examination
similar facility. room/space.
~.. ........... .. - :sc; <..rrrr=r-t~'t':- •
Barber/beauty shop, fingernail salon, tanning One and one-half(l.5) parking space per operator
salon, or similar facility
r.a
station and tanning booth.
Governmental offices, service commercial, One (1) parking space per eight hundred (800) sq. ft.
libraries, organizational office, repair shop, ofGFA.
or similar facility.
Public or private school, trade or business One (1) parking space per two (2) elementary
school, or similar functioning facility. classrooms; and two (2) parking space per
Uunior high classroom; and one (1) parking space per
five (5) highschool students; and one (1) space per
two (2) students in a trade or business school.
Swimming pool, sport fields, recreational Twenty (20) spaces per sport field; and one (1) space
fields, or similar facility. per 100 sq. ft. of water surface.
Golf course, driving range, batting cages, Thirty (30) parking spaces per nine (9) holes; and
bowling alley, or similar facility. one (1) space per driving range or batting cage lane;
and two (2) spaces per alley.
M. If a use is not clearly noted above, the Planning Director shall determine into which category the uses
best fit, therefore determining the parking requirements. .
N. Parking lots shall be designed to not allow pooling water, be constructed on a stone sub-base, and
have at least 4 inches of finish paving surface (e.g. concrete, asphalt, and brick pavers).
6.49 PK-07
6-40
This Parking Standards section applies to off site parking lots and the following districts:
m11~~ ~E ~
When a parking lot is required in the above districts, the following parking regulations apply:
A. Parking lots shall be paved with a minimum of either:
a. Three (3) inches of hot asphalt concrete pavement on eight (8) inches of compacted aggregate
base on a compacted subgrade; or
b. Six ( 6) inches of concrete pavement on a compacted subgrade.
B. All paved parking lots shall have appropriate bumper guards where required for safety.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Parking Standards (PK)
(Continued)
C. Handicap Accessible Parking
Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Minimum Number of Handicap
Accessible Parking Spaces
1to25 1
26 to 50 2
51to75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151to200 6
201to300 7
301 to 400 8
401to500 9
501to1000 2 percent of total
100 I and greater 20 plus I per 100 over 1000
At medical outpatient units and facilities 10 percent of total spaces
serving outpatient unit
At units or facilities specializing in treatments or 20 percent of total
services for persons with mobility impairments
Any such handicap accessible spaces are counted towards the total number of parking spaces required
by the parking standards sections."
6.50 PK-08
This Parking Standards section appJies to the foHowing districts:
~
The following parking standards apply:
A. Off-street parking is not required.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
641
Loading Standards (LO)
6.51 LD-01
6-42
This Loading Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~ll~~ll(Y]llll
The following loading standards apply:
A. All off-street loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use to be served
B. No portion of a vehicle using a loading dock shall project into a street or alley right-of-way.
C. No loading dock shall it be located in front of the primary structure or on a side which faces a public
street unless fully screened.
D. A loading dock shall have an adequate accessibility from an appropriate roadway, maneuvering apron
and vertical clearance for truck deliveries. Truck maneuvering in the right-of-way shall not be permit-
~d. .
City of1<okomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Entrance and Driveway Standards (ED)
6.52 ED-01
This Entrance and Drive Standards section applies to the following districts:
~im~~~~~ .: llll~ffifil ~~ (Y]m!lll
The following entrance and drive standards apply:
A. All classification of roads shall be based on the Thoroughfare Plan as found and maintained in the
Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
B. Under no circumstances shall a lot have more than 2 driveways per street frontage.
C. No entrance or driveway shall be permitted to be installed:
a. Within I 00 feet of any intersecting road if along an arterial or collector road (see "C" below in the
illustration). If the property is not large enough to achieve a I 00 foot separation, then the driveway
shall be installed at a location farthest from the intersection.
b. Within 50 feet of any intersecting road if along a local road (see "C" below in the illustration). If
the property is not large enough to achieve a 50 foot separation, then the driveway shall be
installed at a location farthest from the intersection. ·
D. The distances for the above standards shall be determined by measuring from right of way line to the
curb or edge of pavement (whichever is less) of the entrance or drive.
E. No two entrances or drives shall be permitted to be installed:
a. Within I 00 feet of one another if along an arterial or collector road (see "D" below in the illustration).
b. Within 50 feet of one another if along a local street (see "D" below in the illustration).
F. The distances for the above standards shall be determined by measuring from the curb or edge of
pavement to the curb or edge of pavement (whichever is less) of each entrance, or drive.
G No entrance or driveway shall exceed the following pavement widths for two-way traffic (if one-way,
the measurements shall be lf2 of the below measurements):
a. 34 feet if from a commercial, industrial, or institutional zoning district onto an arterial or collector
road.
b. 30 feet if from a commercial, industrial, or institutional zoning district onto a local street.
c. 30 feet if from a multifamily residential zoning district onto an arterial or collector road.
· d. 28 feet if from a multifamily residential zoning district onto a local street.
e. 28 feet if from a single-family residential zoning district onto any type of street.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-43
Entrance and Driveway Standards (ED)
(Continued)
H. The distances for the above standards shall be detennined by measuring from the outside edges of the
curb or pavement, whichever is more, of the entrance, or driveway.
I. The City Engineer may determine if the following are necessary:
a. An acceleration or deceleration lane, or
b. A passing blister at a new entrance or drive.
c. Wider shoulders or approaches for accommodating vehicle turning radii.
J. The Plan Commission may require multi-lot residential developments to provide interior, local street
access instead of allowing multiple driveway access points to arterials or collectors.
K. The Plan Commission may require multi-lot commercial and industrial developments to provide
frontage roads, shared driveways, and other alternate access instead of allowing multiple driveway
access points to arterials or collectors.
6.53 ED-02
6-44
This Entrance/Drive Standards section applies to the follow~ng districts:
II
The following entrance and drive standards apply:
A. Manufactured or mobile home parks with 40 or more dwelling sites shall have:
a. At least 2 access points shall be required into and out of the manufactured or mobile home park.
b. Individual dwelling sites may only have driveways on interior roads.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Vision Clearance Standards (VC)
6.54 VC-01
This Vision Clearance Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~~--~~~~~-~~-
The following vision clearance standards apply:
A. A clear area must be maintained at every intersection. A vision clearance triangle (also called sight
triangle or intersection sight triangle) is used to describe and determine the area on a property to be
maintained free of visual obstruction.
B. The vision clearance triangle is illustrated below. Lengths "A" and "B" are the legs of the triangle along
the right-of-way of a public street.
I. The triangle leg length along the right of way of the local or minor road that has the stop shall be
20 feet, and
2. The triangle leg length along the arterial, collector or major road shall vary according to the
approach speed and in accordance to able of values included within the City of Kokomo Traffic
Standards.
C. No primary or accessory structure, landscaping, fence, wall, ground sign or other obstructions shall be
permitted within the visibility clearance triangle. However, the following exceptions may be permitted:
1. Landscaping shall not exceed 30 inches above the existing ground or pavement elevation.
2. Pole mounted signs shall have a vertical sight clearance under the sign of at least ten (10) feet
(vertical sight clearance equals the area clear from the ground to bottom of sign). Ground
mounted signs shall not exceed 30 inches in height.
3. Species of trees to be planted shall be those for which the maximum diameter of the tree trunk
(DBH) at full growth is 12 inches.
4. Existing trees shall be pruned such that the lowest limbs are no lower than 8 feet above the ground
level.
5. No fences shall be allowed within the vision clearance triangle along arterials and collectors, but
may be installed along local roads, not exceeding 30 inches in height and shall be installed outside
of the street right-of-way and no closer than 12 feet from the existing edge of the roadways.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-45
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
6.55 TC-01
6-46
This Telecommunication Facilities Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~@] ~~
The following telecommunication facility standards apply:
A. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the BZA that no existing tower
or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Supporting evidence may consist of
any of the following conditions:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the
applicant's engineering requirements.
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
c. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's
proposed antenna and related equipment.
d. The applicant's proposed system would cause electromagnetic interference with the system on the
existing tower or structure, or the system on the existing tower or structure would cause interfer-
. ence with the applicant's proposed system.
e. The fees, cost, or contractual provisions required by the owner to share an existing tower or
structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs are
considered reasonable if they conform to contractual terms standard in the industry or do not
exceed the cost of new tower development.
f. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers or
structures unsuitable.
B. New towers shall be designed structurally and electrically to accommodate the applicant's antennas
and comparable antennas for at least 2 additional users, and shall not exceed a maximum height of 199
feet or the FAA allowed maximum for the site if less than the maximum. Towers must also be
designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas on the tower and accept antennas mounted at
different heights.
C. The holder of a permit for a tower must allow collocation for at least 2 additional users and must not
make access to the tower and tower site for the additional users economically unfeasible. If additional
user(s) demonstrate (through an independent arbitrator or other pertinent means, with the cost to be
shared by the holder of the permit and the proposed additional user) that the holder of a tower permit
has made access to such tower and tower site economically unfeasible, then the permit shall become
null and void.
D. Towers shall not be located within a distance equal to the height of the tower of any dwelling or
residential district.
E. The setback requirements for the zoning district the telecommunication facility is placed apply to all
towers, guy wire anchors and tower accessory structures.
F. The tower location shall provide for the maximum amount of screening of the facilities. The site shall
be landscaped and maintained with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of all
tower accessory structures, equipment and improvements at ground level from adjacent properties.
The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least 4 feet wide outside the perimeter of the
area whe_re tower accessory structures and equipment are located at ground level. In locations where
the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Existing mature vegetation and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible or replaced with vegetative screening meeting the
intent of this section.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
(Continued)
G All towers shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized access. The bottom of the tower from
ground level to 12 foet above ground shall be designed to preclude unauthorized climbing and shall be
enclosed with a minimum of a 6 foot high chain link fence with locked gate. Other options may be
required by the Board such as an 8 foot tall wooden privacy fence and security fence, with vehicular
gate. Sheet metal or plastic slats are not pennitted. No part of any tower or antenna, except for guy
wires and anchors, shall extend beyond the fenced enclosure.
H. At least 2 signs shall be mounted on the fenced enclosure, on or adjacent to the gate prohibiting entry
without authorization, warning of the danger from electrical equipment and/or unauthorized climbing of
the tower, and identifying the owner of the tower and telephone number for contact in case of emergency.
Each sign shall be 3 square feet in size. Additionally one (1) no trespassing sign is permitted on
each fence side.
I. No commercial message or sign shall be affixed to any tower or antenna.
J. All towers, antennas and accessory structures shall use building materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that blend the facilities with the surrounding natural features and built environment to
the greatest extent possible. The tower shall be a color that minimizes visibility unless otherwise
required by FAA or FCC regulations.
K. All metal towers shall be constructed or treated with corrosion resistant material.
L. Adequate parking spaces shall be provided on each site so that parking on public road right-of-way
will not be necessary. Additional parking may be required by the Planning Director if the minimum
parking proves to be inadequate.
M. An access driveway must be installed and must be 12 feet wide unless an existing drive of equal width
is already in place. Any access driveway must be paved in public rights-of-way, but may be stone or
slag in other areas.
N. All towers and antennas shall comply with all FCC and FAA rules and regulations.
0. Design and installation of all towers and antennas shall comply with the manufacturer's specifications
and with ANSffIA/EIA standards. Plans shall be approved and stamped by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Indiana.
P. Installation of all towers and antennas shall comply with all applicable state and local building and
electrical codes.
Q. The monopole design is the preferred tower structure, but self-supporting is also allowed. Use of guy
or lattice towers must be justified on the basis of collocation opportunities or specific structural requirements.
Monopoles may be hidden in silos, church steeples, smokestacks etc.
R. Towers and antennas shall not be illuminated in any way unless required by FCC or FAA regulations.
FCC or FAA regulations must be demonstrated to the Planning Director prior to installation.
S. No temporary mobile communication sites are pennitted except in the case of equipment failure,
equipment testing, equipment replacement, or in the case of an emergency situation authorized by the
Planning Director. Use of temporary mobile communication sites for testing purposes shall be limited
to 7 working days, and the use of temporary mobile communication sites for equipment failure, equipment
replacement, or in case of emergency situations, shall be limited to 30 days, unless extended in
writing by the Planning Director.
T. A letter of credit or bond in the amount of $10,000 shall be filed with the City of Kokomo Board of
Public Works to provide for removal of a wireless communication facility and site restoration in the
event that removal should be required. The improvement location permit for a wireless communication
facility shall not be issued until the Board of Public Works has notified the Planning Director of
their acceptance of the letter of credit or bond.
U. All unused towers and antennas must be removed at the expense of the service provider and/or
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-47
Telecommunication Facility Standards (TC)
(Continued)
6-48
owner, within 6 months of cessation of operation or use, unless a written exemption is provided by
the Planning Director. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original
condition or as close as feasibly possible. Specifically, all structures and anchoring elements shall
be removed above grade and 4 feet below ground level, so that the site is suitable for redevelopment.
If removal and/or restoration is not completed within 90 days of the e?'piration of the 6
month period specified herein, the Planning Director is authorized to request the City of Kokomo
Board of Public Works to complete the removal and site restoration. The cost shall be assessed
against the letter of credit or bond described above.
Clty o'f Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Corridor Enhancement Standards (CE)
6.56 CE-01 ·
This Corridor Enhancement Standards section applies to the following districts:
~
The following corridor enhancement standards apply:
A. Traffic Management: The design and location of proposed street access points must minimize
congestion. The entrances, streets and internal traffic facilities must be compatible with existing and
planned streets in adjacent developments. Shared driveways and ·internal connections to adjacent sites
are required wherever feasible. .
B. Pedestrian Access: The design of the proposed development plan must provide adequate pedestrian
connections within the development and safe street crossings to adjacent land. This includes a
sidewalk along adjacent street(s). The Plan Commission may determine that an alternative to a
sidewalk along adjacent street(s) better serves the purpose of connecting commercial destinations.
C . . Facades greater than JOO feet in length: In order to add architectural interest and variety and
avoid the effect of a single, long or massive wall with no relation to human size, the following additional
standards apply for facades greater than I 00 feet in length. A standardized prototype design
must be modified if necessary to meet the provisions of this Article.
a. No wall that faces a street or connecting walkway may have an uninterrupted length exceeding
100 feet without including at least 2 of the following design elements:
• change in plane (recess or projection),
• distinguishable change in texture or masonry pattern,
• add windows which comprise at least 10% of the entire facade area, or
• an equivalent element that subdivides the wall into human scale proportions.
b. Any change in wall plane such as projections or recesses must have a depth of at least 3% of the
length of the facade.
c. Building facades must include a repeating pattern that includes color change and texture change.
At least one (I) element (texture or color change) must repeat horizontally. Both elements must
repeat at intervals ofno more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically.
D. Facades Generally: The building facade facing any adjacent street must have a finished facade. No
loading docks or trash collection bins may be placed on or along the facades that face any adjacent
street.
E. Entrances: Each establishment on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances
featuring at least 2 of the following:
canopies ·or porticos,
recesses/projections,
arcades,
peaked roof forms,
arches,
display windows, or
architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure
and design.
F. Central Features and Community Space: Proposed developments or projects that include over
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
·6-49
Corridor Enhancement Standards (CE)
(Continued)
6-50
150,000 square feet must comply with the following standards. This square footage requirement
applies to any combination of buildings or lots in a cohesive commercial project or development.
a. Each development or project must contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community
and public spaces by providing at least 2 of the following:
• patio/seating area,
pedestrian plaza with benches,
transportation center (bus station, etc.),
• window shopping walkway,
• outdoor playground area,
• water feature,
clock tower, or
• other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of
the Plan Commission, adequately enhances the development's community and public spaces.
b. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall
not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and
landscape.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX)
6.57 SX-01
This Sexually Oriented Business Standards section applies to the following districts:
~[@~
The following sexually oriented business standards apply:
A. Accessory Sexually Oriented Retail Business: Any business with at least 10% but less than 40% of its
stock in trade or of gross public floor area devoted to the sale, rental or display of sexually oriented
materials must abide by the following regulations.
a. The business must restrict access to any person under the age of 18 to either the entire business
or to a separate room or section containing all of the sexually oriented materials.
b. If restricting access to the entire business, then the business:
1. Shall not be open to any person under the age of 18.
2. Shall provide a sign at the entrance stipulating that persons under 18 are not permitted inside.
3. Shall have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance that persons
under age 18 will not easily gain admission or the general public will not accidentally enter
such business; or provide continuous video or window surveillance of the business entrance(s)
by store personnel.
4. Shall not display sexually oriented materials in windows. Any existing windows shall be
maintained as visually "neutral" in the store facade with non-explicit displays. Any sexually
oriented materials, on display within the store, shall be screened so they are not visible to
persons looking at window displays.
c. If restricting access to a separate room or section, then the room or section:
6.58 SX-02
I. Shall not be open to any person under the age of 18.
2. Shall have a sign at the entrance stipulating that persons under 18 are not permitted inside.
3. Shall be physically and visually separated from the remainder of the business by an opaque
wall of durable material, reaching at least eight feet high or to the ceiling, which ever is less.
4. Shall be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably practicable from media or
other inventory in the store likely to be of particular interest to children.
5. Shall have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance that persons
under age 18 will easily not gain admission or the general public will not accidentally enter
such room or section; or provide continuous video or window surveillance of the room by store
personnel.
6. Shall not display sexually oriented materials in any business windows. Any existing windows
shall be maintained as visually "neutral" in the store facade with non-explicit displays. Any
sexually oriented materials, on display within the room or section, shall be screened so they
are not visible to persons outside the room or section.
This Sexually Oriented Business Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following sexually oriented business standards apply:
A. Sexually Oriented Retail Business-Any business with at least 40% of stock in trade or ofgross public
floor area devoted to the sale, rental or display of sexually oriented materials must abide by the
following regulations.
a. The business shall not locate within 1,000 foot radius of a church or other religious institution,
residential use or zoning district, public, private or parochial schools (K-12), parks, playgrounds,
licensed child care centers, licensed child care homes, licensed child care institutions, registered
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-51
Sexually Oriented Business Standards (SX)
(Continued)
child care ministry, libraries, nature trails, public swimming pools, museums, reservoirs open to
public use, sexually oriented entertainment business, or other sexually oriented retail business.
The distance is measured from the nearest property line to the nearest property line in all directions.
b. The business shall not locate within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of any state or federal highway
or other designated community gateway streets as measured from the nearest prpperty line. The
following streets are designated community gateway streets:
I. Davis Road from the intersection with Washington Street to the north city limits;
2. Washington Street from north city limits to the intersection with South Lafountain Street;
3. South Lafountain Street from the intersection with Washington Street to the intersection with
U.S. 31.
4. Alto Road from the east city limits to the west city limits;
5. Dixon Road from the north city limits to the south city limits;
6. Sycamore Street from the east city limits to the west city limits; and
7. Markland Avenue from the east city limits to the west city limits.
c. The business shall not be open to any person under the age of 18.
d. The business shall not display sexu3.Ily oriented materials in windows. Any existing windows shall
be maintained as visually "neutral" in the store facade with non-explicit displays.
e. The business shall not offer on-site entertainment.
B. Sexually Oriented Entertainment Business: A Sexually oriented entertainment business shall abide by
the following regulations.
a. The business shall not locate within 1,000 foot radius of a church or other religious institution,
residential use or zoning district, public, private or parochial schools (K-12), parks, playgrounds,
licensed child care centers, licensed child care homes, licensed child care institutions, registered
child care ministry, libraries, nature trails, public swimming pools, musewns, reservoirs open to
public use, sexually oriented entertainment business, or other sexually oriented retail business.
The distance is measured from the nearest property line to the nearest property line in all
directions.
b. The business shall not locate within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of any state or federal highway
or other designated community gateway streets as measured from the nearest property line. The
following streets are designated community gateway streets:
I. Davis Road from the intersection with Washington Street to the north city limits;
2. Washington Street from north city limits to the intersection with South Lafountain Street;
3: S_g!Jth Lafount~in Street from the intersection with Washington Street to the intersection with
g,s. 31 S.R. 931 or Reed Road;
4. Alto Road from the east city 'Limi'ts to the west city limits;
5. Dixon Road from the north city limits to the south city limits
6. Sycamore Street from the east city limits to the west city limits; and
7. Markland Avenue from the east city limits to the west city limits.
The business shall not be open to any person under the age of 18.
The business shall not display sexually oriented materials in windows. Any existing windows shall
be maintained as visually "neutral" in the store facade with non-explicit displays. -
e. The business shall offer entertainment only in rooms or spaces which each have a gross public
floor area of at least 1,000 square feet, excluding restrooms, hallways and entryways. Such
rooms or spaces shall not be subdivided by temporary or permanent walls or dividers.
f. Shall not sell, rent or display sexually oriented materials.
a. s. R. 931-'o:r Reed Roac;!; and
-=1,.-9. Center Road from the east c ity l i mits to the
west c ity limits.
y of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Special Exception Standards (SE)
6.59 SE-01
This Special Exception Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ . ~~~~~ --~~ ~~-~~-
The following special exception standards apply:
A. The development standards assigned to each zoning district are considered appropriate for the permitted
uses within that district. However, the development standards are not considered appropriate for
all special exception uses within a zoning district. For instance, some business uses are allowed in
residential districts as special exceptions. Jn this case, residential development standards would not
necessarily be applicable.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine which development standard sections within Article Six
shall apply to all Special Exception Uses. The development standards determined to apply shall be
documented in the application and approval.
C. If the special exception use is a permitted use within another district, the development standards for
that district must be used as a guideline.
D. In situations where the special exception use is not a permitted use in any district, the most stringent
development standards may be assigned by the Board of Zoning Appeals as appropriate.
E. The approval process and criteria for Special Exceptions is in Article Twel¥e of this Zoning Ordinance.
. · fJ~M.
F. All special exceptions must meet the following requirements:
Special Exception
All Single Family Residential Uses
All Multifamily Residential Uses
All Other Residential Uses
Institutional/Public Facility Uses
Business: Auto Sales/Services Uses
Business: Food Sales/Service Uses
Business: General Business Uses
Business: Office/Professional Uses
Business: Retail Uses
Business: Personal Service Uses
Business: Recreation Uses
Communication/Utility Uses
Industrial Uses
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435~ June 27, 2006
Development Standard Requirements
Development standards from R1 District
Development standards from M1 District
Development standards from R1 District
Development standards from IS District
Development standards from C2 District
Development standards from C1 District
Development standards from C1 District
Development standards from OC District
Development standards from C2 District
Development standards from C1 District
Development standards from PR District
Development standards from 11 District
Development standards from 12 District -'-- -....
6-53
Miscellaneous Standards (MC)
6.60 MC-01
This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~ -- - ~~- ~ ~-~~-
The following miscellaneous standards apply:
A. Storage or parking of recreational vehicles is subject to the following conditions:
B. At no time may anyone occupy or use a parked or stored recreational vehicle for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes, except as outlined below.
C. A property owner may allow a recreational vehicle to park on the owner's property for up to 15
consecutive days: but not to exceed 30 total days in any one calendar year to allow a visit by the
recreational vehicle's occupant or maintenance of such a vehicle.
D. No more than one (l) recreational vehicle may be stored or parked outdoors on a residential parcel at
any one time.
E. A recreational vehicle shall not be parked on a parcel without a primary building.
F. The owner of a recreational vehicle may store or park the recreational vehicle behind or alongside the
primary building in such a manner that no part of the vehicle projects beyond the front of the primary
structure, side yard setback, or rear yard setback.
G A recreational vehicle shall not block a sidewalk.
H. A recreational vehicle shall not be used for personal storage.
6.61 MC-02
This Public Improvement Standards section applies to the following districts:
~ ~~~~~ m am~~ ~~-~~
The following public improvement standards apply:
A. Developments are permitted only if the public streets, drainage facilities, and utilities are adequate to
serve the proposed development.
B. If a public street, drainage facility, or public utility is deemed inadequate to handle the anticipated
impact of the development the development project shall not be permitted.
C. The petitioner may volunteer to overcome the inadequate public street, drainage facility, or public
utilities by negotiating or coordinating a remedy with the City Engineer, Board of Public Works, and/or
Common Council. Upon execution of a written contract the adequate public facility standard shall be
deemed to be met.
D. When public improvements are being completed by the petitioner, performance and maintenance
guarantees for such improvements shall be determined.
6.62 MC-03 .
6-54
This Miscellaneous Sta ndards section applies to the following districts:
~mE~r@~~~m11 11~~m~~
The following miscellaneous standard applies:
A. Street addresses must be posted on all primary structures and be visible from primary roadway and/or
be posted on mailbox or other suitable structures visible from primary roadway.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Miscellaneous Standards (MC)
(Continued)
6.63
If\
6.65
MC-04
This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the following districts:
~~~~~~~--~~ . ~~-~mm
The following miscellaneous standards apply:
A. Dumpsters, compactors and similar containers must be screened on all sides by a fence or wall.
However, glass or similar translucent and breakable materials shall not be used.
B. The height of the enclosure must be five (5) feet tall or higher if the height does not block the view of
the dumpster, compactor or similar container.
MC-05
This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the following districts:
(@J 111
The following miscellaneous standards apply:
A. Temporary outdoor storage of construction materials, palettes and like materials must be shielded from
view with a 6 foot privacy fence on all sides.
B.- Outdoor storage of products or materials for sale must be approved by the Planning Director.
MC-06
This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the following districts:
The following miscellaneous standard applies:
A. Manufactured or Mobile Home Parks must be in accordance with IC 16-11-27-l et. seq., Rule 410
IAC 6-6 and their subsequent amendments, the State Board of Health requirements, and the requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance.
B. Each manufactured or mobile home in a manufactured or mobile home park must be tied down and
have perimeter skirting.
Article Six: Developmen't Standards, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27, 2006
6-55
• 6.63: MC-04
o This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the
following districts: Ml, M2, MP, NC, IS, OC, DC, Cl,
C2, LI, MI, HI
o The following miscellaneous standards apply:
• A. Dumpsters, trash and q:cycle
containers/receptacles, compactors, anduasl.ll).ilar
containers must be screened on all sides by a
fence or wall. Glass or similar translucent and
breakable materials shall not be used.
• B. The height of the enclosure must be . at least
&fi¥e (§) feet so as to completely block the view
of the dumpsters, trash and recycle
containers/receptacles, compactors, and similar
containers.
• 6 . 64: MC- OS
o This Miscellaneous Standards section applies to the
following districts: LI, MI, HI
o The following miscellaneous standards apply:
• A. Temporary or long-termOttt:Eleer storage of
construction and recycling materials and
byproducts, palettes and like materials must be
completely shielded from vi~w with at least a 6
foot privacy fence on all sides. The stacked
materials may not exceed the fence line in
height .
• B. outdoor storage of products or materials for
sale must be approved by the Planning Director.
• 6.66 MC-06
6-56
o This Mi scell a neous Standards section applies to the
f ol lowing districts: AG, PR, Rl, R2, R3, R4, RS
o The following miscellaneous standards appl y:
A. Dumpsters, trash and recycle contai ners/receptacles,
compactors, and similar containers must not be
stored so as to be visible · from the roadway. · This
standard does not apely on days of regu l ar
t r ash/recycle pick-up.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6434 and 6435, June 27,
2006
Wind to Energy System (WE)
6.70 WE-01 [Wind to Energy System, Very Small]
This Wind Energy System Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
~m~~~~~mnm~~~~B~~m
. The following standards apply to Very Small Wind to Energy Systems
A. Supporting structure:
I . Any very small wind to energy system tower or supporting structure placed on the roof of a
primary or accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the structure's roof by fifteen (15)
feet.
2. Any very small wind to energy system supported primarily by a tower or pole shall comply with
the standards for small wind to energy systems ( 6. 71 ).
C. Rotor Diameter: The maximum rotor diameter shall be ten ( 10) feet.
D. Safety: The rotors (blades) shall not extend horizontally beyond the roof of the primary or accessory
structure.
E. Abandoned systems: A very small wind to energy system shall be considered abandoned if use as a
wind to .energy system is discontinued for one (I) year or more. The Plan Commission or the Planning
Director may require removal of it after a ninety-day (90) notice period.
H. Illumination: Very small wind to energy systems shall not be illuminated in any way unless required by
FCC or FAA regulations. FCC or FAA regulations shall be demonstrated to the Planning Director prior
to installation.
6.71 WE-02 [Wind to Energy System, Small]
This Wind Energy System Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
~-~~~B~mmm~~-~-~em
The following standards apply to Small Wind to Energy Systems:
A. Tower Types: Permitted small wind to energy system tower types include tilt-up monopole, guyed
monopole, guyed lattice and lattice.
B. Height: ,. ·"< ,., , ,
1. The maximum small wind to energy system tower height shall not exceed 189 feet or the product
of 0.455 times the lot width ~t ~r<J._po.s~ tower locati~n, ~hichever is less.
2. The maximum small wind tt> ·energy systein height shall not exceed 199 feet or sum of the maximum
small wind to energy system tower height plus ten (10) feet.
C. Rotor Diameter: The maximum rotor diameter shall be ten (10) feet.
D. Setbacks:
1. Small wind to energy system towers shall be located a minimum of 1.1 times the tower height
from all property lines and rights-of-way.
2. Small wind to energy system towers shall not be located in the front yard (i.e. forward of any part
of the building)s foundation).
E. Safety:
1. The rotors (blades) shall have 20 feet of ground clearance.
2. If guy wires are used, the wires must be sleeved in a bright colored material extending seven (7)
feet above the ground, or surrounded by fence at least four (4) foot tall from the guy wire anchor
to the point where the guy wires have at least seven (7) feet of clearance.
F. Signs: No signs shall be attached to small wind to energy system towers except safety notices and
information required by the manufacturer.
Article Six: Development Standards, as amended by Ordinances
No. 6564, 6565, 6566, 6571 and 6574, April 14, 2009
6-56
Wind to Energy System (WE)
(continued)
G Abandoned systems: A small wind to energy system shall be considered abandoned if use as a wind to
energy system is discontinued for one (1) year or more. The Plan Commission or the Planning
Director may require removal of it after a ninety-day (90) notice period.
H. Illumination: Small wind to energy systems shall not be illuminated in any way unless required by FCC
or FAA regulations. FCC or FAA regulations shall be demonstrated to the Planning Director prior to
installation.
6.72 WE-03 [Wind to Energy System, Large]
6-57
This Wind Energy System Standards section applies to the following zoning districts:
~~~~~Ii]
The following standards apply to Large Wind to Energy Systems:
A. Prerequisites:
1. A minimum twenty (20) acre lot shall be required for a single large wind to energy system. All
additional large wind to energy systems shall require two (2) additional acres in lot area per
system. For example, five (5) large wind-to-energy systems would require a minimum twentyeight
(28) acre lot
2. The Large Wind to Energy System towers are at least 1~000 ft. from the property line of any
residence other than a residence on the same lot as the tower.
3. The applicant shall obtain an advisory opinion from the Kokomo Board of Aviation Commissioners.
4. The applicant shall obtain a Special Exception from the Board of Zoning AppealS.
B. Tower Types: Large wind to energy systems must utilize tubular towers and shall be white, gray, earth
tones or similar colors. Lattice type towers are not permitted except when used for temporary meteorological
towers.
C. Setbacks:
1: Large wind to energy system towers shall be setback a minimum of 500 feet from all property
lines; or
2. Large wind to energy system towers may be placed closer to the property line if both of the
following requirements have been met:
a. The wind to energy system tower shall at a minimum be setback from the property line a
distance equal to the large wind to energy system height; and
b. A non-encroachment easement has been secured from the adjacent property owners to
prohibit inhabitable structures from being built within 500 feet of the large wind to energy
system. .
D. Safety: The rotors (blades) shall have a minimum of thirty (30) feet ground clearance.
E. Stgns: No signs shall be attached to large wind to energy system towers except safety notices or
information required by the manufacturer.
F. Abandoned systems: A large wind to energy system shall be considered abandoned if use as a wind to
energy system is discontinued for one ( 1) year or more. The Plan Commission or the Planning
Director may require removal of it after a ninety-day (90) notice period.
G Illumination: Large wind to energy systems shall not be illuminated in any way unless required by FCC
or FAA regulations. FCC or FAA regulations shall be demonstrated to the Planning Director prior to
installation.
Ci ty of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, a s amended by Ordinances
No. 6564, 6565, 6566, 6571 and 6574, April 14, 2009
Article Seven
Planned Developments
~:ii;-i'~roundlRules. website w w w . ground r u I es i n c . com
August 12, 2003
e 2003, Bradkly E. Johnson, AICP
•
PD District Intent and Permitted Uses
7.1 PD District Intent, Permitted Uses and Miscellaneous Standards
District Intent
The purposes of these regulations
are to provide greater design
flexibility in the development of land
when consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan and intent of the Zoning
Ordinance and Subdivision Control
Ordinance.
The use of planned development
zoning classifications shall be
encouraged when its use promotes
1) mixed use developments, and/or
2) provides for an economy of shared
services ~nd facilities, and/or ·
3) greater compatiblity with surrounding
areas and/or ·
4) the creation of attractive, healthful,
efficient and. stable environments for
living, shopping or working.
The planned developm~nt regulations
and procedures may apply to
the further development of existing
developed lands or to vacant lands.
Further, they generally only apply to
larger tracts o' land.
Planned development regulations
are intended to encourage innovations
in land development t.ech- ·· . ·
niques so that the growing demands
of the community may be met with
greater flexibility, variety in type, .
design and layout of sites and .
buildings.· Planned development
projects should also encourage a
more efficient 'use of land so that
resulting economies may accrue to
the benefit of the comm~nity at large.
ExampJes of this concept would
include the preservation of existing
trees or wetlands, and the inclusion
of recreation areas within new
subdivisions.
7-2
Permitted Uses
All uses are subjectto the discretion
and approval of the P~ Cbrnmis: ..
slon. No uses are gtah~d:·~Y. ffgl\t
-")• .,- - ~ . ..
!n general, the uses that will be
considered in a_planr:ieQ. development
are: Uses designated as
Permitted Uses or Special Excepfi6ns
il'{ the base zoning district.
[For example, if the previous zoning
was R2 and the proposed planned
development district is PD~R2, th9
Permitted Uses· and Spedal Eiceptions
allowed in the R2. district would
generally be appropriate.]
All other land uses will be reviewed
and conslclered at.the aiscretiori of
the Plan ConimissiO!l. Mixed .uses
will be considerecfand may be ., .·
encouraged when appropriate. All ..
lan.d uses proposed in ~ PO. must J;9,
cornplel)'lentary to 9he ·another; and '
be. In .the spirit of the C,orrrprehen$1ve
Plan, the previous zoning district; ·
surrounding _land uses arid. adjacent
Z0!1lng districts.
Miscellaneous Standards
Minimum Land Area:
• 5 acres to qualify for any PD
Minimum PD Property Frontage:
• 200 feet on a Public Street with
access from said Public Street
fi/laxl.mum Lot Coverage:
·Square footage of ail primary and
accessory structures, and impervious
surface, including roac;ls to be deeded
to the City, cannot exceed 65% of the
lot area
Minimum Open Space:
• 20% (gross area) for ~sidentially
dominant planned developments
• 10% (gross area) for commercially
dominant planned developments
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6375, May 9, 2005
7.2 General
Plaruied developments are a special district that can be pursued by an applicant in which a stand alone
ordinance regulating that development is drafted and which binds the development to its unique language.
7.3 Rezoning to a Planned Development District
A. Planned development districts can only be created from the RI, R2, R3, Ml, M2, NC, OC, CI, C2, LI,
MI, and HI zoning districts. From each of these zoning districts (called base zoning district) the
following planned development districts can be created once the detailed development plans are
approved by the Plan Commission. They are:
• RI Districts can only be rezoned to PD-RI
R2 Districts can only be rezoned to PD-R2
• . R3 Districts can only be rezoned to PD-R3
Ml Districts can only be rezoned to PD-Ml
• M2 Districts can only be rezoned to PD-M2...._
NC Districts can only be rezoned to PD-NC
• OC Districts can only be rezoned to PD-OC
CI Districts can only be rezoned to PD-CI
C2 Districts can only be rezoned to PD-C2
LI Districts can only be rezoned to PD-LI
MI Districts can only be rezoned to PD-Ml
HI Districts can only be rezoned to PD-HI
B. No other zoning district can be rezoned directly to a PD District. If an applicant wants a planned
development district based on a different base zoning district a successful rezoning request to change
the existing zoning district to the preferred base zoning district must first be accomplished.
7.4 Mixed Uses Within Planned Developments
Planned developments may contain mixed uses. Depending on the previous zoning the maximum overall
gross square footage allowed by type is as follows:
Base Zoning District PD District Residential
RI PD-RI
R2 PD-R2
R3 PD-R3
Ml PD-Ml
M2 PD-M2
NC PD-NC
oc PD-OC
Cl PD-Cl
C2 PD-C2
LI PD-LI
Ml PD-MI
HI PD-HI
Article Seven: Planned Developments, as amended
by Ordinance No. 6375, May 9, 2.005
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
40%
50%
40%
40%
0%
0%
0%
Commercial Industrial
15% 0%
20% 0%
30% 0%
40% 0%
50% 0%
100% 0%
100% 0%
100% 0%
100% 0%
40% 100%
30% 100%
20% 100%
7-3
•
7.5 Origination of Proposals
Any applicant may propose a planned development district in accordance with the procedures hereinafter
established. Further, the applicant making such a proposal must intend to act as developer or sponsor of
the development. A parcel or site proposed for a planned development need not be under single ownership.
Hpwever, if not under single ownership, the multiple owners must have a contractual agreement not
to develop the parcels separately, but in accordance with a single, unified plan, and in which the separate
owners have given their express intentions to enter into such private agreements and to assure its completion
as planned to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission.
7.6 Limitation of Rezoning
Any initiative of the Plan Commission to amend the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Control Ordinance
that would affect an approved planned development before its completion, shall not be enforced on the
planned development. Only in the case that the planned development is no longer in conformity with the
Approved Detailed Construction or Development Plans or is not proceeding in accordance with the time
requirements imposed herein or by agreement, will the new amendments of the Zoning Ordinance or
Subdivision Control Ordinance apply.
7.7 Drafting of a Planned Development Ordinance
The Planning Director shall be the author of a planned development ordinance. In the planned development
ordinance the general intent of the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Control Ordinance shall be
used as a foundation for regulations. Development standards and subdivision regulations that assure public
safety shall be included.
7-4 City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6375, May 9, 2005
'
Article Eight
Nonconforming Structures,
Lots, and Uses
~~~~roundlRules J
website w w w. ground r u I es in c.com
August 12, 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
- - - - - - - -
- ---- - -
Article Eight
Nonconforming Structures, Lots, and Uses
8.1 Intent
Upon adoption of this Zoning Ordinance and Official Zoning Map, some buildings, structures, lots, and uses
may no longer conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. For this reason,
Article Eight has been generated to provide the rules, policies and regulations that apply to these buildings,
structures, lots, and uses referred to as Legal-Nonconforming.
8.2 Distinction Between Nonconfonning and Legal-Nonconfonning
A building, structure, or lot which was constructed or is being used without an approved building permit,
improvement location permit or approval from the BZA or Plan Commission is considered no·nconforming.
A nonconforming property shall be subject to actions and penalties allowed by this Zoning Ordinance and all
other applicable municipal law and must be altered to conform with all applicable standards and regulations
of this Zoning Ordinance. Further, a nonconforming building, structure, lot or use is created at the fault of
the owner, tenant or property manager. ·
Legal-Nonconforming differs from nonconforming (illegal) in that the reason for the nonconformance is
caused by a change to the Zoning Ordinance. The building, structure, lot or use has not changed, but due
to the Zoning Ordinance change, the property no longer conforms to the policies and standards of the
zoning district in which the property resides. When this.situation occurs, the property is deemed LegalNonconforming
or anothei:._t~r:ro commonly used is "Grandfathered."
8.3 Nonconfonning Buildings and Structures
8-2
A. Any continuously occupied, lawfully established structure or building prior to the effective date of this
Zoning Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meets the design standards due to the
reasons listed below shall be deemed a Legal-Nonconforming Building or Structure.
B. Legal-Nonconforming Building(s) or Structure(s) no longer meet one (1) or more of the following
development standards of this Zoning Ordinance:
Front, Side and Rear Yard Setbacks,
Maximum Lot Coverage,
Minimum Main Floor Area,
Minimum Finished Floor Area,
Height,
Temporary Structures,
Landscaping,
Parking,
Accessory Structures, or
any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance that is applicable to the building or structure.
C. A Legal-Nonconforming building or structure may continue provided that it remains the same or fits
within the below described tolerances:
a. Any 'Legal-Nonconforming building or structure shall not be enlarged or altered in a manner that .
increases its nonconformity but any building or structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its nonconformity.
b. Any Legal-Nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or destroyed by more than 66%
of its fair market value shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
D. If a building or structure is moved for any reason, for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
8.4 Nonconfonning Lots of Record
A. All legally established and recorded lots prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or its
subsequent amendments, that no longer meet the lot standards listed below shall be deemed a LegalNonconforming
Lot of Record. A Legal-Nonconforming Lot of Record no longer meets one (l) or
more of the following lot standards of this Zoning Ordinance:
Lot Area,
Lot Width,
Lot Depth,
Lot Frontage, or
Any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance that is applicable to Lots.
B. Legal-Nonconforming Lots of Record may be built upon only ifthe proposed use is permitted and all
development standards of the applicable Zoning District of this Zoning Ordinance are met.
8.5 Nonconforming Uses of Structures, Land, or Structures and Land in Combination
Any continuous, lawful use of structures, land, or structures and land in combination established prior to
the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or its subsequent amendments that is no longer a permitted
use in the district where it is located shall be deemed a Legal-Nonconforming Use. A Legal-Nonconforming
use may continue provided that it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following conditions:
A. No existing structure devoted to a Legal-Nonconforming use shall be enlarged, expanded, increased,
extended. constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless it:
a. Complies with section 8.5 D for limited and small expansions, or
b. Changes the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, or
c. Changes the use to a less intensive Nonconforming Use and is approved by the Planning Director
or Plan Commission.
B. No building or structure shall be constructed in connection with an existing Legal-Nonconforming use
ofland.
C. Any Legal-Nonconforming use of a structure may be extended throughout any parts of a building
which were plainly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or
its subsequent amendments, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
D. In the case of a Legal-Nonconforming use of structure, the structure may be expanded two times
only. Each of the two expansions may not exceed 10% of the existing floor area. The expansion shall
conform to all applicable development standards except for landscaping, unless a variance of developmental
standards is received from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If the structure is a commercial or
industrial use in a residential district, the Planning Director shall assign appropriate parking, landscaping
and other common development standards for such uses.
E. Ifno structural alterations are made, a Legal-Nonconforming use of structure or structure and land in
combination may be changed to another Legal-Nonconforming use, provided that the Planning Director
shall make specific findings that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the
district than the existing Legal-Nonconforming use. The Planning Director may impose appropriate
development standards from Article Six common for such a use.
F. If a Legal-Nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, except when
government action impedes access to the premises, any subsequent use of such land, structure or land
and structure shall conform to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
G When a Legal-Nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, it shall thereafter conform to
regulations of the district. The Legal-Nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
H. Where a Legal-Nonconforming use applies to a structure, removal of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming structure of the land.
Artk:Je Eight: Nonconforming Structures, Lots, and Uses 8-3
I. Where a Legal-Nonconforming use applies to a structure that is damaged or destructed more than
66% of its fair market value at the time of destruction. The Legal-Nonconforming use may continue,
but the structure must be rebuilt to conform to the current zoning regulations. In this situation, the
Legal Nonconforming use must not be expanded such that the property becomes more nonconforming.
8.6 Nonconforming Signs
Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or amendment thereto, that does
not conform to all the standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance is considered a Legal-Nonconforming
sign.
A. Signs which existed prior to the time this Zoning Ordinance was passed and were in conformance with
previous ordinances will be legally nonconforming until such time a major change is made to the sign.
Major changes include changing the size, changing the height, adding lights, altering lighting, and/or
relocation.
B. All registered Legal-Nonconforming signs shall be kept in good repair, safe, neat, clean and attractive
condition. In the event nonconforming signs are not kept in said condition or are demolished by any
force whatsoever to the extent of 50% or more of the fair market value of the sign structure, said
signs shall then be made to conform to this Zoning Ordinance.
C. A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when
the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to
remove the sign, the Plan Commission or Planning Director shall give the owner 30 days written notice
to remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the Plan Commission or Planning Director may
remove the sign at cost to the property owner or lessee. -
D. Legal nonconforming signs which are structurally altered by a major change, relocated, or replaced
shall comply immediately with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.
8.7 Repairs and Maintenance
The following applies to Legal-Nonconforming structures or buildings, and Legal-Nonconforming uses of
structures. or structures and land in combination.
A. Work may be done for ordinary repairs or replacement of walls, heating, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing;
. under the condition that the square footage and volume of usable space existing when the structure
became nonconf onning shall not be increased ..
B. If a structure or portion of a structure were to become unsafe or condemned due to lack of repairs or
maintenance, and is declared by an authorized official to be unsafe or condemned due to physical
condition; the building or structure shall be restored, repaired or rebuilt within 6 months of the declaration.
If the improvements have not been made within the 6 months, all future improvements must
conform to all standards and regulations within this Zoning Ordinance.
C. If a building or structure becomes unsafe or unlawful due to physical condition and is razed, the
building or structure shall be rebuilt in conformity with the district in which it is located.
D. Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening, repairing, or restoring to a safe
condition of any ~uilding or structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting public safety upon order of such official.
8.8: Nonconforming Pole Signs in the State Road 931 overlay
District
• A. Pole signs are not a permitted use in the · SR 931
Overlay District. See Zoning Ordi n ance §§ 4. 2 4. 2 t o
4.24.8. Any lawfully nonconforming pole sign existing i n
the SR 931 Overlay District on o r after November 1 , 201 5
s hal 1 be disconti nued over a reasonabl e period of time,
~ nd by no late r than January ] , 2022, all lawfully
nonconf orming pole signs in t he SR 931 Overlay Distr ict
shall b e b r ought into compl iance with t he Kokomo Zoning
Ordinance . After January 1, 2 022, al l l awful ly
nonconformi ng pole signs i n the SR 931 Overlay Di s t r ict ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
shall l ose thei r lawful noncon f ormi n g s tatus . ti City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance
• This section does not apply to multi-tenant structure
signs or lawfully nonconf orming signs greater t han 100
e-,..,,~"""~ ,.:~-+-
I
Article Nine
P·rocesses, Permits and Fees
August 12, 2003
® 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
- ----- -
Article Nine
Processes, Permits, and Fees
9.1 Types of Petitions
9-2
The following section recognizes and outlines each of the pennit, fonnal approval and appeals.
A. The Plan Commission hereby requires that a complete application and filing fee be submitted for the
following fonnal petitions (pennits, fonnal approvals, and appeals):
Improvement Location Permit
Certificate of Occupancy
SignPennit
Development Plan Approval
Development Standard Variance
Special Exception
Zoning Amendments (rezoning)
• Planned Development
Administrative Appeal
Questionable Land Use Appeal
B. All application fonns may be obtained through the Planning Director's office. Fees shall be paid at the
Planning Director's office at the time of submission of the application.
C. A project shall not proceed without first successfully being granted the applicable permits, fonnal
approvals, and/or appeals. Any project that proceeds otherwise is subject to fines, penalties and court
action (see Article Ten).
D. The Planning Director shall have up to 5 days after filing of an application for determining the application
is complete and ready to be accepted. Incomplete applications may not be acted on.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Improvement Location Permit
9.2 Improvement Location Permit
The following procedure applies to an improvement location permit petition.
A. The City of Kokomo hereby requir~s that an improvement location permit be obtained for the:
a. Erection of a structure or building.
b. Relocation of a structure or building.
c. Addition to a structure or building.
d. Structural alteration of a structure or building.
e. Use of a lot.
f. Changes of use.
g. Expansion ofuse.
h. Fil ling ofland altering the existing natural drainage.
. .
B. No Improvement Location Permit shall be issued by the Planning Director unless the project is in
conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance . ..,..,-
C. The following information must be presented with the application for an improvement location permit:
a. The common address for the subject lot and parcel number,
b. A site location map showing the context around the subject lot,
c. Plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon or used,
d. The exact sizes and locations of all structures, buildings, wells, and septic systems already existing,
e. The location and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or alteration, or use, including changes to
all paved areas,
f. Setback distances from all property lines, and from existing and proposed road right of ways,
g. Width and length of all entrances and exits to and from the lot, and
h. Location of floodplain boundaries or wetlands.
D. The Plan Commission or Planning Director may require additional information to be submitted with the
application to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance
including but not limited to:
a. Elevations of the existing or proposed building or alteration,
b. Detailed description of the existing or proposed uses of the building and land,
c. The number dwelling units or rental units the building is designed to accommodate,
d. Utility locations and sizes,
e. Landscape plan,
f. Lighting Plan, and
g. Copy of drainage approval (if applicable).
E. The approved plans and application materials are retained by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission
or Planning Director may require site plans to be prepared by a land surveyor, architect or
engineer licensed in the State oflndiana.
F. Expiration of Permits:
a. If the work described in any improvement location permit has not begun within 12 months from
the date of issuance, said permit shall expire. No written notice shall be given to the persons
affected.
b. Completion of Work: If the work described in any Improvement Location Permit has not been
completed within 2 years of the date of issuance, said permit shall expire. No written notice of
expiration shall be given to the persons affected. Work shall not proceed unless and until a new
Improvement Location Permit has been obtained.
Artlde Nine: Processe5, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-3
Improvement Location Permit
(Continued)
9-4
c. The Planning Director may give 3 extensions for up to 3 months each for work completion.
Requests for extensions must be received within one (1) month of the expiration. A fee will be
charged.
d. Completion of Landscaping: If work described in any Improvement Location Permit is completed
and occupied within 2 years of the date of issuance, then any landscaping required by this ordinance
or proposed on the Improvement Location Permit shall be completed within 6 months of
occupying or starting use of the permitted improvement.
G Improvement location permits issued on the basis of plans and applications submitted only authorize
the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications. Any other
use, arrangement, or construction not authorized shall be deemed as a violation of this ordinance and
subject to a stop work order, an order of removal, mitigation, or fines and penalties.
H. Exempt: The following activities are permitted without an improvement location permit, provided all
other applicable standards are met.
a. Normal plowing and preparing the land for farming, gardens, and yards.
b. Trimming and/or removal of trees and shrubs for maintenance and/or site preparation.
c. Earth movement related to farming and other agricultural activity.
d. Drain tile laying and ditch maintenance.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Certificate of Occupancy
9.3 Certificate of occupancy
The following regulations and procedures apply to receive a Certificate of occupancy.
A. The City of Kokomo hereby requires that a certificate of occupancy be obtained prior to a building
being occupied or utilized for each of the following situations:
a. Erection of a new single family residence, multifamily building, business building, industrial facility,
or similar building that people will occupy pennanently or temporarily.
b. Build-out of a flex commercial, flex office, flex industrial space, or the like.
c. Relocation of a single family residence, multifamily building, business building, industrial facility, or
similar building that people will occupy pennanently or temporarily.
d. Addition to a single family residence, multifamily building, business building, industrial facility, or
similar building that people will occupy pennanently or temporarily. Parts of an existing building
that are not a part of the addition may continue to be occupied.
e. Change in the use ofan existing building.
f. Or similar situations in which the Plaiining Director requires a certificate of occupancy.
B. The City of Kokomo also requires that a certificate of occupancy be obtained prior to a temporary
building being occupied or utilized for each of the following types of building:
a. Temporary classrooms,
b. Sales trailers,
c. Model homes,
d. Or similar type of building in which the Planning Director requires a certificate of occupancy.
C. It is unlawful and a violation of this Zoning Ordinance for anyone to occupy or utilize a building until
the certificate of occupancy is issued by the Planning Director if required under Sections 9.3 A or B.
Anyone who is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy and fails to do so is subject to a stop
work order, mitigation and/or fines and penalties.
D For a certificate of occupancy to be issued each of the following must be successfully completed.
a. Legally obtain an improvement location pennit and building permit
b. Pass a final inspection by the Building Inspector.
c. Submit an application for the certificate of occupancy to be issued.
d. Receive approval from the Planning Director.
E. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued after all requirements of the improvement location permit
have been completed. However, due to weather or other circumstances, a temporary certificate of
occupancy, for a period not to exceed 12 months, may be issued without the required (a) landscaping,
(b) building finishes, ( c) parking lot finishes, or the I ike provided some sort of surety has been posted to
satisfy the Planning Director.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-5
Sign Permit
9.4 Sign Permit
9-6
The following procedure applies to sign permit petitions for permanent signs.
A. An application for a permit shall be filed with the Planning Director and shall be accompanied by
information as may be required by the Planning Director to assure compliance with the laws and
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to:
Name and address of the owner of the lot on which the sign is located or is to be located.
Name and address of the owner of the sign (if different).
Drawings of the sign with the dimensions drawn to scale.
Drawing of the lot showing the proposed location of the sign with lot and sign dimensions drawn to
scale.
Description of the sign, including the materials, lighting and structure to be used.
• The size and location of all signs on the same lot or owned or leased by the petitioner.
B. An application for a permit shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director.
C. If any sign is erected, placed, installed or otherwise established on any property before obtaining a
permit as required herein, the sign shall be in violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to a stop
work order, an order of removal, mitigation, and/or fines and penalties.
D. A sign permit issued under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall it be deemed as a defense in an
action to remove an unlawful sign.
E. A sign permit shall become null and void if work has not been started within 6 months of the date of
the permit or completed within 12 months of the date of the permit.
F. The following shall not be required to have a sign permit unless otherwise specified.
a. Changeable Copy - The changing of copy (text) on a sign or portion of a sign, unless said change
alters the size, height, or bulk of the sign.
b. Maintenance - Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or
sign structure, provided the sign area is not altered, the lighting is not made brighter, or the sign's
structure is not altered.
c. Exempt Signs - exempt signs as described in 6.34 (SI-01).
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
.· '•
Temporary Sign Permit
9.5 Temporary Sign Permit
The following procedure applies to sign pennit petitions for temporary signs.
A. An application for a permit shall be filed with the Planning Director and shall be accompanied by
information as may be required by the Planning Director to assure compliance with the laws and
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not limited to:
Name and address of the owner of the lot on which the sign is to be located.
Name and address of the owner of the sign.
Clear and legible drawings or photographs of the temporary sign with the dimensions.
• Clear and legible drawing of the lot showing the proposed location of the sign and .drawn to scale.
Description of the device to be used (structure, lighting, attachments, etc.).
• Period of time the device is intended to be used.
B. An application for a permit shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director.
C. If any sign is erected, placed, installed or otherwise established on any property before obtaining a
permit as required herein, the sign shall be in violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to a stop
work order, an order of removal, mitigation, and/or fines and penalties.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-7
Development Plan Approval
9.6 Development Plan Approval:
9-8
The following procedure applies to development plan petitions.
A. Development Plan Approval Authority
The Planning Director has been delegated the authority to approve certain development plan approvals.
All other development plan approvals must be approved by the Planning Commission. The types
of development plan approvals delegated to the Planning Director are outlined later in this section.
B. Development Plan Approval Process for Petitions Delegated to the Planning Director
a. Applicants are encouraged to submit a conceptual site plan to the Planning Director for an informal
conference to discuss the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development.
b. No later than 15 days after receiving a conceptual site plan and other data, Planning Director will
return a copy of said plan to the applicant with recommendations.
c. All development plan approval petitions shall:
I. Make known any requests for waiver of development requirements in connection with a
development plan approval on the application form and submit supporting infonnation with the
application or the waiver will not be considered.
2. Include all relevant plan and documentation as required below.
d. The Planning Director may refer any proposed development to the Plan Commission ifthe
Planning Director decides the full Commission review is warranted. Upon referral to the Plan
Commission, the petition will follow the process set forth in Section 9.6 C
e. Any development plan approval which has been delegated to the Planning Director may occur
without public notice and without a public hearing.
f. The Planning Director will have 45 days from the date of filing to approve or disapprove a development
plan petition in writing.
g. Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Planning Director to the Plan Commission
within 30 days of the written decision.
h. The Planning Director may impose conditions or require written commitment as a condition of
approval, if the conditions are reasonably necessary to satisfy the intent of the Kokomo Comprehensive
Plan or Zoning Ordinance.
i. The Planning Director may require the applicant to furnishing a surety that guarantees the timely
completion of a proposed public improvement in the development plan petition. The surety must
be satisfactory to the City of Kokomo.
j. The Planning Director shall make and sign written findings concerning each decision to approve or
disapprove a development plan. The findings of fact must support the following statements.
1. Is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan,
2. Is consistent with the intent of the zoning district, as described in Article Three, and
3. Satisfies the intent of this Zoning Ordinance.
C. Development Plan Approval Process for Petitions Going to the Planning Commission
a. The applicant is encouraged to submit a conceptual site plan to the Planning Director for an
informal conference to discuss the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development.
b. No later than 15 days after receiving a conceptual site plan and other data, Planning Director will
return a copy of said plan to the applicant with recommendations.
c. All development plan approval petitions shall:
I. Be filed at least eighteen ( 18) days prior to the initial date at which they are to be considered
by the Plan Commission or Technical Advisory Commission.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 2 7, 2006
Development Plan Approval
(Continued)
2. Make known any requests for waiver of development requirements in connection with a
development plan approval on the application fonn and submit supporting infonnation with the
application or the waiver will not be considered.
3. Include all relevant plan and documentation as required below.
4. Submit one copy of the Plan Commission Development Plan Approval checklist with items
checked off indicating their completion and that they are shown on the plans as applicable.
Failure to complete or show items checked off may result in continuance of the petition until
the following regularly scheduled Plan Commission meeting.
5. The Plan Commission shall detennine if the Development Plan site is in a flood plain. The
Plan Commission will follow the procedures of the Flood Hazard Areas Ordinance, No. 5959,
as amended, Section 6, for any site located in a flood plain before setting the date for hearing
the petition.
d. Any development plan approval the Plan Commission reviews shall have a public hearing. Notification
of public hearing will be as outlined in Section 9.20.
e. The Plan Commission shall either approve, disapprove or continue consideration of the proposed
development plan petition.
f. The Plan Commission may impose conditions or require written commitments as a condition of
approval if they are reasonably necessary to satisfy the development requirements specified in this
Article.
g. The Plan Commission may require the applicant to furnishing a surety that guarantees the timely
completion of a proposed public improvement in the development plan petition. The surety must
be satisfactory to the City of Kokomo.
h. The Plan Commission will make written findings concerning each decision to approve or disapprove
a development plan. The Planning Director is responsible for signing written findings of the
Plan Commission. The findings of fact must support the following statements.
1. The project is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan,
2. The project is consistent with the intent of the subject zoning district, as described inArtide
Three, and
3. The project satisfies the intent of this Zoning Ordinance.
D. Amendments and Minor Modifications
a. The applicant may amend the development plan prior to a vote by the Plan Commission. If the
Plan Commission feels that the proposed amendment needs additional time for review; the Plan
Commission may continue the consideration until the next Plan Commission Meeting.
b. The applicant may amend the development plan anytime prior to detennination by the Planning
Director. If the Planning Director feels that the proposed amendment needs additional time for
review; the amended development plan may be considered a new filing and reviewed within the
time frame set forth above for the review of development plans by the Planning Director.
c. Minor Modifications to an approved development plan may be approved by the Planning Director
if the modification is in the spirit and intent of the overall development and does not involve:
1. an increase in height, area, bulk or intensity of land uses,
2. the designation of additional land uses,
3. the reduction of buffer yards,
4. the addition of driveways or access points, or
5. the reduction of parking for any use.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-9
Development Plan Approval
(Continued)
9-10
d. The Planning Director shall report in writing to the Plan Commission the authorized minor modifications,
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Planning Director regarding the minor
modification of an approved development plan to the Plan Commission within 30 days of the
decision.
E. Multifamily Residential, Commercial, and Industrial Development Plans
Intent: To promote innovative and creative design in higher density residential districts in order to
further enhance the quality of life forthe citizens of Kokomo.
a. In proposed developments, the Plan Commission must review the development plan. These
development plan approval processes are required to submit:
I. Site Plan (see Section 9.6.F for more information)
2. Building elevations (see Section 9.6.G for more information)
3. Sign Plan (see Section 9.6.H for more information)
4. Lighting Plan (see Section 9.6.1 for more information)
5. Landscape Plan (see Section 9.6.J for more information)
b. In order to receive development plan approval, the applicant must satisfy all of the development
· standards of the proper district. In addition, the following development standards apply.
1. Signage: All signs must be designed to create a unified and consistent sign package for the
development.
2. Interior private roads: Interior private roads must meet construction criteria for public roads.
Road widths may vary from the City's standards, so long as emergency access is possible.
3. Traffic Management: The design and location of proposed street access points must minimize
congestion. The entrances, streets and internal traffic facilities must be compatible with
existing and planned streets in adjacent developments. Additional driveways may be required
to ensure safe emergency access based on fire department and City Engineer review.
4. Traffic circulation pattern: The design and layout of the development must have a clear
circulation pattern that is sensitive to topography and other natural features.
5. Lighting: All lighting must be designed to create a unified and consistent lighting package for
the development. Lighting standards in parking areas may not exceed 20 feet in height. All
lighting must have cutoff luminaires (shielded down lighting), and be consistent with the
architectural style of the primacy building. ·
6. Variation in housing design: In order to prevent monotony and improve orientation, at least
every third structure must vary in design and color.
7. Open Space: Developments that are 5 or more acres must have a minimum of 10% of the
total lot area developed as usable open space and be accessible to all residents within the
development and their guests by way of sidewalk or other finished footpath.
F. Site Plan Data
A site plan submitted in pursuit of development plan approval shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than 1 inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following information. The Planning Director at his/
her discretion may waive or relax any of the site plan requirements below, ·as circumstances dictate.
a. Description:
I. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Proof of ownership.
3. Proposed name of development (if applicable) .
. 4. Address of the site.
5. Legal description of the real estate.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Development Plan Approval
(Continued)
6. Name and address of land surveyor.
7. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, north point, and date.
b. Existing and Proposed conditions:
I. Boundary line of site indicated by a solid heavy line including all dimensions of the site.
2. Layout, number and dimensions oflots.
3. Building setback lines.
4. Location and dimensions of all existing structures including paved areas.
5. Location and dimensions of all proposed structures including paved areas indicated by crosshatching.
.
6. Layouts of existing and proposed streets, alleys and access easements; including their names,
within 200 feet of the development. The names of streets shall conform so far as practicable
to the names of streets on the same approximate alignment existing in the vicinity of the
development.
7. Location of any proposed and existing driveway and its width at the lot line.
8. All proposed improvements to the street system both on and off-site.
9. Measurement of curb radius and/or taper.
I 0. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or temporarily reserved for public use or set aside
for use in the development such as parks, recreation, conservation areas, wetlands, etc., which
shall be designated and labelled as such including dimensions.
11. Location of natural streams, regulated drains, I 00-year floodplains, floodway, water courses,
marshes, wooded areas, wetlands, historic features, existing structures, dry wells, utility lines,
fire hydrants and any other significant feature(s) that may influence the design of the development.
12. The species and caliper size at breast height of all trees over (6 inch caliper and all flowering
trees and shrubs over 6 feet in height.
13. All trees and/or shrubs to be preserved. These shall be marked "Do Not Remove". Care
should be taken to attempt to preserve all trees with a caliper size of 24 inches at breast height
· or greater.
14. Location of orange construction fencing that is required to be installed during construction
around the dripline of each tree to be preserved that is marked "DNR". ·
15. Location, width and purpose of existing and proposed easements.
16. Use of each structure including parking labelled with approximate density or size. For example,
number of parking spaces required and provided, gross floor area of office or retail
space (labelling whether office or retail).
17. Structures designated to be razed shall be indicated as such.
18. Distance of all structures· including parking from the front, rear and side lot lines. This distance
is measured from the point where the structure is closest to the lot lines.
19. Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission or the Planning Director.
20. Utility lines serving buildings.
21. Existing and proposed topography.
22. The outline of buildings and parking lots on adjoining properties within fifty (50) feet of the
mutual property line.
23. Outline of any driveways across the streets from the property and.within 100 feet of the side
property lines.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-1 t
Development Plan Approval
(Continued)
9-12
G Building Elevation Data
Building elevations submitted in pursuit of development plan approval shall include the following
information. The Planning Director may waive or relax any of the building elevation requirements
below, as circumstances dictate.
a. Description:
l. Proposed name of development (if applicable).
2. Address of the site.
3. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, and date.
b. Proposed conditions:
l. Elevations for each facade of the building.
2. Type of building materials to be used for all wall, window, roofand architectural features shall
be specified.
3. Proposed colors for all materials and features shall be specified.
4. Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission or the Planning Director.
H. Sign Plan Data
Sign Plans submitted in pursuit of deveiopment plan approval shall include the following information.
The Planning Director may waive or relax any of the Sign Plan requirements below, as circumstances
dictate.
a. Description:
1. Proposed name of development (if applicable).
2. Address of the site.
3. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, and date.
b. Existing and Proposed conditions:
1. A site plan indicating the location of any existing and proposed freestanding or ground signs.
2. Elevations of proposed signs including size, materials, color and illumination details.
3. Placement, size, color and illumination details for any existing or proposed wall, projecting or
window sign.
4. Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission or the Planning Director.
I. Lighting Plan Data
Lighting Plans submitted in pursuit of development plan approval shall include the following information.
The Planning Director may waive or relax any of the Lighting Plan requirement below, as
circumstances dictate.
a. Description:
1. Proposed name of development (if applicable).
2. Address of the site.
3. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, and date.
4. Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of the site.
b. Existing and Proposed conditions:
1. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, parking areas, etc.
2. Type and location of all exterior lighting fixtures, including wattage and type oflight.
3. Intensity of lighting 'at base of light structure and at the lot line measured in foot candles.
Measurements shall be given as if the light meter were facing the center of the property at a
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 2 7, 2006
I~
Development Plan Approval
(Continued)
height of 6 feet.
4. lfbuilding lighting is proposed, elevations for each facade of the building indicatingthe location,
type and intensity oflighting at the lot line measured in foot candles. Measurements shall
be given as if the light meter were facing the center of the property at a height of 6 feet.
5. Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission or the Planning Director.
J. Landscape Plan Data
Landscape Plans submitted in pursuit of development plan approval shall include the following information.
The Planning Director may waive or relax any of the Landscape Plan requirements below, as
circumstances dictate.
a. Description:
1. Proposed name of development (if applicable).
2. Address of the site.
3 .. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, and date.
4. Boundary Lines of the site.
b. Existing and Proposed conditions·:
1. Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, parking areas, etc.
2. Location of all floodway and floodway fringe areas within the site.
3. Existing elevations and proposed contour lines at 2 foot intervals
4. Proposed sidewalk or pedestrian ways
5. Size, species and spacing (on center) of all proposed landscaping material
6. Location of.any existing arid proposed :freestanding or ground signs.
7. Any other information requested in writing by the Plan Commission or the Planning Director.
c. Preparation of plans by a licensed landscape architect or landscape contractor with at least two
(2) years experience as a landscape contractor is required for any development plan with more
than 50 parking spaces. Preparation of other development plans by a landscape architect or
landscape contractor is encouraged.
K. Written Commitments
a. Any written commitments which are part-of a Development Plan approval by the Plan Commission
or Planning Director shall take effect upon approval of the Development Plan. Upon approval,
the applicant shall record the written commitments. A copy of the recorded written
commitment shall be submitted to the Planning Director before issuance of any Improvement
Location Permits for the Development Plan.
b. A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and is binding on the
Development Plan applicant, the owner of the property which is the site of the Development Plan,
any subsequent owners of the property, and any person who acquires an interest in the property.
c. Enforcement - Wri lten commitments inay be ·enforced in accordance with Article I 0, Enforcement
and Penalties.
d. Modification and Termination ·-A written commitment required for a Development Plan approval
may be modified or terminated by the Plan Commission at a public hearing. The owner of the
property, the Planning Director or the Plan Commission may initiate the request to modify or
terminate the written commitment.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375, 6435 and 6571, February 10, 2009
9-13
Development Standard Variance
9. 7 Development Standard Variance:
9-14
The following procedure applies to Development Standard Variance Petitions.
A. The applicant shall submit a variance application, required supportive information, and application fee.
B. The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) will then review:
• The variance application,
• Required supportive information,
• Testimony of the applicant, and
• Testimony of the public.
C. At the BZA hearing the Planning Director may submit a report containing factual information about
the petition.
D. The BZA may approve, deny or table the petition (the Board has discretionary powers). The BZA
may add conditions to an approval. Approvals shall only be granted upon findings of fact in compliance
with IC 36-7-4-900 et seq. and the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
E. The Planning Director shall refuse to accept a petition for a variance within 6 months of the date of
the first denial and 12 months from the date of any denial thereafter when said petition involves the
same subject matter. However, the Planning Director shall have the authority and discretion to
determine that a petition containing major changes may justify re-filing within said 6 and 12 month
periods. ·
F. The Board may grant a variance from the development standards of this Zoning Ordinance (such as
height, bulk, area) if, after a public hearing, it makes findings of facts in writing, that:
a. the approval 'will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
community; and
b. The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected
in a substantially adverse manner; and
c. The strict application of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance will result in a Practical Difficulty.
This situation shall not be self-imposed, nor be based on a perceived reduction of or restriction of
economic gain.
G The Board may permit or require the owner of a parcel of property to make written commitments and
record it in the County Recorder's Office concerning the use or development of that parcel or may
impose conditions upon that grant of variance.
H. A developmental standards variance· granted by the Board shall run with the parcel until such time as
the property_ conforms with this Zoning Ordinance as written.
I. The Board of Zoning Appeals may enforce any condition and/or commitment it has imposed as if it
were a standard of this Zoning Ordinance.
J. Written Commitments
a. Any written commitments which are part of a Development Standards Variance approval by the
BZA shall take effect upon approval of the Variance. Upon approval, the applicant shall record
the written commitments. A copy of the reeorded written commitment shall be submitted to the
Planning Director before issuance of any Improvement Location Permits for the variance.
b. A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and is binding on the
variance applicant, the owner of the property which is the site of the variance, any subsequent
owners of the property, and any person who acquires an interest in the property.
c. Enforcement - Written commitments may be enforced in accordance with Article l 0, Enforcement
and Penalties.
d. Modification and Termination - A written commitment required for a variance approval may be
modified or terminated by the BZAat a public hearing. The owner of the property, the Planning
Director or the BZA may initiate the request to modify or terminate the written commitment.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, a s amended by Ordinances
No. 6375, 6435 and 6571, February 10, 2009
,.t •.
/ Special Exception
9.8 Special Exception
The following procedure applies to Special Exception Petitions.
A. The applicant shall submit a Special Exception application, required supportive information, and
application fee prior to the regularly scheduled Board of Zoning Appeals meeting.
B. At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the BZA shall then review: ·
The special exception application,
Required supportive information,
Testimony of the applicant, and
Testimony of the public.
C. The BZA may approve, deny, or table the petition. The BZA may add conditions to an approval.
D. The Planning Director shall refuse to accept a petition for a Special Exception within 6 months of the
date of the first denial and 12 months from the date of any denial thereafter when said petition
involves the same subject matter. However, the Planning Director shall have the authority and
discretion to determine that a petition containing major changes may justify re-filing within said 6 and
12 month periods.
E. To be eligible for the granting of a special exception under this section, a person must first receive a
determination from the Planning Director that a special exception is required for the intended use,
change of use or for the expansion, extension, or enlargement of a use.
There shall be no cases or applications, nor any particular situation in which these rules authorize
special exceptions without the approval of the BZA. Further, no previous applications shall set a
precedence for any other application before the BZA.
F. The Board may grant a special exception for a use in a district if, after a hearing, it makes findings of
facts in writing, that:
a. the proposal will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
community;
b. the requirements and development standards for the requested use as prescribed by this Zoning
Ordinance will be met; ·
c. granting the exception will not subvert the general purposes served by this Zoning Ordinance and
will not permanently injure other property or uses in the same district and vicinity; and
d. the proposed use will be consistent with the character of the district therein, the spirit and intent
of this Zoning Ordinance, and the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
· G When considering a Special Exception the Board of Zoning Appeals may take into consideration the
following items as they relate to the proposed use:
a. topography and other natural site features;
b. zoning of the site and surrounding properties;
c. driveway locations, street access and vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
d. . parking amount, location, design;
e. landscaping, screening, buffering;
f. open space and other site amenities;
g. noise production and hours of operation;
h. design, placement, architecture, and building material of the structure;
i. placemeot, design, intensity, height, and shielding oflights;
j. traffic generation; and,
k. general site layout as it relates to its surroundings.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-15
Special Exception
(Continued)
9-16
H. The Board may impose such reasonable conditions upon its approval as it deems necessary to find that
the above criteria will be served.
I. The Board may permit or require the owner of the parcel of properl)' to IJlake ~- ~tten commitment
concerning the use or development of the parcel as specified unde~ IC 36-7-4-92f"'1Jd have such
commitment recorded in the County Recorder's Office. ' ----·----··· ···
J. The Board may limit special exceptions to a specific individual and/or a specific time period and for a
specific use.
K. A use authorized by special exception may not be changed, expanded, extended, or enlarged unless
reauthorized by the Board under the procedures set forth in these rules for granting a special exception.
L. If the Board grants the special exception, it shall direct the applicant to apply for a Building Permit
and/or an Improvement Location Permit within 4 months or the special exception will be void. If such
application complies with all Ordinances and rules, a Building Permit and/or an Improvement Location
Permit for the use authorized by special exception shall be issued.
M. A special exception granted for a specific use ceases to be authorized and is void if that use is not
50% established within a twelve-month period of the date the special exception was granted. A
special exception, granted for a specific use ceases to be authorized and is void if that use is discontinued
at that site for a consecutive 6 months.
N. A special exception may be terminated by the Board of Zoning Appeals as follows:
a. Upon the filing of an application by an interested person or a member of the staff, and after which
a public hearing is held with notice to the property owner; and,
b. At the public hearing a finding is made by the Board that one or more of the following has not
been complied with:
The terms of this Zoning Ordinance,
The conditions placed on approval, and
• The written commitments made in conjunction with the original special exception application.
0. Written Commitments
a. Any written commitments which are part of a Special Exception approval by the BZA shall take
effect upon approval of the Special Exception. Upon approval the applicant shall record the
written commitments. A copy of the recorded written commitment shall be submitted to the
Planning Director before issuance of any Improvement Location Permits for the Special Exception.
b. A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and is binding on the
Special Exception applicant, the owner of the property which is the site of the Special Exception,
any subsequent owners of the property, and any person who acquires an interest in the property.
c. Enforcement - Written commitments may be enforced in accordance with Article 10, Enforcement
and Penalties.
d. Modification and Termination - A written commitment required for a Special Exception approval
may be modified or terminated by the BZA at a public hearing. The owner of the property, the
Planning Director or the BZA may initiate the request to modify or terminate the written commitment.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
)
IC 36-7-4-921
Board of zoning appeals; commitments; ·rules; effect on exception, variance, or use; saving
clauses /
Section 921.
(a) In the case of a petition or an application for a: /
(1) special exception; /
(2) special use; /
(3) contingent use; ,/
(4) conditional use; ./'
(5) variance; /_
From the terms of the zoning ordinance, a board of zoning appeals ay permit or require the owner
of a parcel of property to make a written commitment concerning th use or development of that parcel.
(b) The board of zoning appeals may:
(1) adopt rules governing the creation, form, recording, odification, enforcement and
termination of commitments; and ·
(2) adopt rule designating which specially affected ersons and classes of specially affected
persons are entitled to enforce commitments
( c) Commitments shall be recorded in the office o e county recorder and take effect upon the
approval of the exception, use, or variance. Unless odified or terminated by the board of zoning
appeals, a commitment is binding on:
(1) the owner of the parcel;
(2) a subsequent owner of the parcel;
(3) a person who acquires an interes n the parcel.
A commitment is binding on the owner of e parcel even ifit is unrecorded. However, an unrecorded
commitment is binding on a subsequent er or other person acquiring an interest in the parcel only if
that subsequent owner or other person s actual notice of the commitment. A commitment may be
modified or terminated only by a deci on of the board made at a public hearing after notice as
provided by rule.
( d) By permitting or requiring c · tments, a board of zoning appeals does not obligate itself to
approve or deny any request.
(e) Conditions imposed on th granting of an exception, a use, or a variance are not subject to the
rules applicable to commitme
(:f) This section does not ect the validity of any covenant, easement, equitable servitude, or other
land use restriction create · n accordance with law ·
As added by Acts 1981, P.L.309, SEC.23. Amended by Acts 1981, P.L.310, SEC.51; P.L.357-1983,
SEC.18; P.L.320-1995, SEC.13.
)
Zoning Amendment
9.9 Zoning Amendment
The following procedure applies to Zoning Amendment Petitions (Zoning Map/rezoning).
A. The applicant shall submit an application, required supportive information, and application fee.
B. The Plan Commission will then review the application and required supportive information. The Plan
Commission may recommend approval, recommend denial or table the petition.
C. At the Planning Commission meeting the Planning Director may submit a report containing factual
information about the petition and a statement for support or denial of the petition.
D. If the petition has not been tabled, it will then be forwarded to Common Council for review. The
Common Council will review the application, required supportive material and Plan Commission
recommendation. The Council may approve, deny or table the petition after three readings.
E. Upon reviewing a zoning amendment petition the following should be considered:
The Comprehensive Plan.
Current conditions arid character of structures and uses in each district.
• The most desirable use for which the land in each district is adapted.
The conservation of property values throughout the jurisdiction.
• Responsible development and growth.
F. Written Commitments ·
a. The Plan Commission may permit or require written commitments concerning use or development
of the property which is the subject of a Zoning Amendment petition.
b. If the Common Council adopts (as certified) the petition, then the owner of the property shall have
the written commitment recorded and submit a copy of the recorded written commitnient to the
Planning Director before the Zoning Amendment can become effective.
c. A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and is binding on the
Zoning Amendment applicant, the owner of the property which is the site of the Zoning Amendment,
any subsequent owners of the property, and any person who acquires an interest in the
property.
d. Enforcement - Written commitments may be enforced in accordance with Article 10, Enforcement
and Penalties.
e. Modification and Termination -A written commitment required for a Zoning Ame11dment approval
may be modified or terminated by the Plan Commission at a public hearing. The owner of the
property, the Planning Director or the Plan Commission may initiate the request to modify or
terminate the written commitment. However, a written commitment terminates if the zoning for
the parcel changes in the future.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-17
Planned Development Approval
9.10 Planned Development Approval
9-f8
A. The general procedure for establishing a planned development (PD) is as follows:
a. Prior to filing for a rezone petition. the applicant must submit a conceptual sketch plan to the
Planning Director. The Planning Director will make a cursory review of the conceptual plan and
give the applicant comments within thirty (30) days of submission.
b. The applicant files a rezone petition to the PD classification and detailed development plan to the
Plan Commission. If a subdivision plat is necessary prior to an Improvement Location permit it
shall be filed at this time and shall follow those procedures set forth in the Kokomo Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
c. The Plan Commission will schedule a public hearing for the rezoning of the property and for
review of the detailed development plan.
d. The Plan Commission will give a favorable or unfavorable recommendation to the Common
Council to grant or deny the rezoning request.
e. The Common Council will, within 30 days, review the rezoning petition, the recommendation from
the Plan Commission and vote to approve or disapprove the request.
f. If the Common Council approves the rezoning, the land is officially rezoned and the applicant may
move forward with the detailed development plan approval process.
g. The Official Zoning Map must be amended to reflect the zoning change, date of approval by the
Common Council, and the docket number.
h. The Plan Commission must approve the detailed development plan prior to the issuance of an
improvement location permit. If a subdivision plat is required, the secondary plat must be approved
prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit pursuant to the Kokomo Subdivision
Control Ordinance. .
i. When approved, the detailed development plan shall be stamped and signed by the Plan Commission
president and secretary. The applicant may then begin procedures for obtaining Improvement
Location and Building Permits.
[Note: Detailed descriptions of each general step outlined above are discussed in the following
sections.]
B. Conceptual Site Plan Review
a. Prior to filing for a rezone petition. the applicant shall submit a conceptual site plan to the Planning
Director. The Planning Director shall review the conceptual site plan and give the applicant
comments within 30 days of submission.
b. In reviewing the conceptual site plan the extent to which the proposal fulfills the intent of Article
Seven and the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive Plan will be considered.
c. The applicant may, if desired, also submit the conceptual site plan for the Plan Commission to
review.
d. After the applieant has received conceptual. review, he/she may file a rezone petition to the PD
classification and detailed development plan to the Plan Commission.
C. Conceptual Site Plan Data
The scale of the plan shall not exceed I inch equals JOO feet. The conceptual site plan may include
any additional graphics which will explain the features of the development. The following shall be
included in the conceptual site development plan submission:
a. Description.
I. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Proof of ownership.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Planned Development Approval
(Continued)
3. Proposed name of development (ifapplicable).
4. Address of the site.
5. Legal description of the real estate.
6. Name and address of land surveyor.
7. Legend and notes, including a graphic scale, north point, and date.
8. A separate location map, to scale, showing the boundary lines of adjacent land and the existing
zoning of the area proposed to be developed as well as the adjacent land.
b. Existing and Proposed Conditions.
I. Existing and proposed layout of streets, open space and other basic elements of the plan.
2. Existing and proposed easements and their purpose.
3. . Location of natural streams, regulated drains, 100-year floodplains, flood way, water courses,
marshes, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees, wetlands, historic features, existing
structures, dry wells, utility lines, fire hydrants and any other significant feature(s) that may
influence the design of the development.
4. General description of, location of, and types of structures on the site.
5. Proposals and plans for handling traffic, parking, sewage disposal, tree preservation and
removal, lighting, signage, landscaping, and other pertinent development features.
6. A general statement of the covenants to be made a part of the planned development as well
as the order and estimated time of development.
7. A statement of the proposed order of development of the major elements of the project. This
includes phasing, if applicable, and the order and content of each phase.
8. The land use categories within the development, including proposed densities of said uses.
D. Filing Procedure
a. The applicant shall submit for review the rezoning request and detailed development plan 30 days
prior to a scheduled Plan Commission public hearing.
b. The petition shall be signed by the owner or owners of all real estate involved in the petition for
the planned development, or shall have attached thereto letters of consent to change to a PD
classification by all such owners prior to the filing.
c. If a subdivision plat is necessary in conjunction with the rezone petition, the primary (preliminary)
plat shall also be filed at this time for review by the Plat Review Committee and shall follow those
procedures set forth in the Kokomo Subdivision Control Ordinance. However, any such approval
shall be conditioned upon Common Council approving the rezone request to a PD district.
d. The Plan Commission will schedule a public hearing for the rezoning of the property and for
review of the detailed development plan.
E. Detailed Development Plan Data
The scale of the plan shall not exceed 1 inch equals 100 feet. The detailed development plan may
include any additional graphics which will explain the features of the development. The following shall
be included in the detailed development plan submission:
a. All documents and information included in the conceptual site plan, as updated and/or amended.
b. Improvement plans for all infrastructure improvements required or proposed in the PD.
c. Proposed covenants, conditions or restrictions.
d. Compilation ofinformation shall:
I. Include an index identifying all documents included in the detailed development plan.
2. Include a cover sheet indicating that it is the detailed development plan and indicating the date
and case number.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-19
Planned Development Approval
(Continued)
9-20
3. Be bound together and all documents submitted on paper 8-1/2 x 11 inches in dimension,
except for the maps, sketches, plans and conceptual layout(s) which must be folded to 8 1/2 x
11 inches.
F. Detailed DevelopmentPlanApproval
a. In their review of the detailed development plan the Plan Commission should consider the extent
to which the proposal fulfills the intent of Article Seven and the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive
Plan.
b. Upon review, the Plan Commission will give a favorable or unfavorable recommendation to the · .
Common Council to grant or deny the rezoning.
c. The Plan Commission may permit or require written commitments concerning the use or development
of the property in connection with a favorabie recommendation of the rezoning request or
detailed development plan approval of a PD.
d. If the Plan Commission gives an unfavorable recommendation, the applicant may revise the
proposed detailed development plan and resubmit the revised detailed development plan within 30
days to the Plan Commission.
e. The Common Council will, within 30 days, review the rezoning petition, the recommendation from
the Plan Commission and vote to approve or disapprove the request.
f. If the Common Council disapproves the rezoning, the applicant must wait one (1) year before
resubmitting another petition.
g. If the Common Council approves the rezoning, the land is officially rezoned:
h. The Official Zoning Map must be amended to reflect the Zoning Change, date of approval by the
Common Council, and the docket number.
i Prior to signing of the detailed development plan surety shall be posted (if applicable) in an amount
that is consistent with the cost of improvements outlined in the approved improvement plans.
j. Detailed development plan approval is required prior to the issuance of an improvement location
permit. If a subdivision plat is required, the secondary (final) plat must be approved prior to the
issuance of an improvement location permit pursuant to the Kokomo Subdivision Control Ordinance.
k. The Plan Commission may specify any additional plan documentation or supporting information not
already stated that is required prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit.
1. When approved, the detailed development plan shall be stamped and signed by the Plan Commission
President and Secretary.
m. All written commitments shall be recorded with the Howard County Recorder and must clearly
state that they are enforceable by, as a minimum, the Plan Commission.
n. Upon 100% completion of the development the public properties shall be dedicated to the City if
required or allowed by the detaiJed development plan. Also, the Plan Commission or
representative( s) will review the completed project for compliance to the detailed development
plan.
G Minor Modifications
a. The Planning Director may from time to time in its administration of the PD, approve minor
modifications of the Development Plan or Improvement (construction) Plans without a public
hearing in a manner consistent with the purpose or intent of the overall development. Such
modifications shall not include any increase in density, any reduction in aesthetic treatment, any
alteration of frontage, any change in type of use, or any change in access points.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
June 27, 2006
Planned Development Approval
(Continued)
b. An adversely affected party may appeal any decision by the Planning Director to the Plan Commission
within 30 days of the determination. The Plan Commission has the authority to establish
rules governing the nature of proceedings and notice required to make a modification under Article
Seven.
H. Covenants and Maintenance
a. Covenants, when required by the Plan Commission. shall be set forth in detail. Furthermore,
covenants shall provide for the release of restrictions upon execution of a docwnent so stating and
suitable for recording, bearing signatures of the Plan Commission President and Secretary, upon
authorization by the Plan Commission and signatures of all the owners of property in the area
involved in the petition for whose benefit the covenant was created. Covenants required by the
Plan Commission shall provide that their benefits be specifically enforceable by the Commission.
An executed recorded copy shall be provided to and maintained in the Plan Commission office.
b. Adequate provision shall be made for a private organization (i.e., Home Owner Association) with
direct responsibility to, and control of the property owners involved to provide for the operation
and maintenance of all common facilities if such facilities are a part of the planned development,
and, in such instance legal assurances shall be provided which show that the private organization is
self-perpetuating.
c. All common facilities not dedicated to the public shall be maintained by the aforementioned private
organization in such a manner that adequate access is provided at all times to vehicular traffic so
· that fire, police, health, sanitation. and public utility vehicles can serve the properties contiguous or
adjacent thereto, and so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area. All streets and roadways
not dedicated to the public shall be operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental
unit.
I. Recording
All approved covenants, commitments, and plats thereof shall be recorded in the office of the Howard
County Recorders Office within 10 days of approval. The developer shall provide 2 copies bearing
recording information to the Plan Commission for its records.
J Construction
a. No construction or installation work may commence on any public improvements until satisfactory
improvement plans and specifications have been submitted and approved by the Plan Commission
and until the applicant provides, at least 48 hours notice to the City Engineer or entity having
jurisdiction of the public facility, in order that inspections may be made as the work progresses.
b. All development shall be in conformity with the approved detailed development plan and improvement
plans. Any material deviation from the plans is subject to appropriate enforcement action.
K. Extension. Abandonment, Expiration
a. An extension, not to exceed 12 months, for accomplishing any matters set forth within Article
Seven may be granted by the Plan Commission for good cause shown.
b. Upon the abandonment of a development authorized under this section (abandonment shall be
deemed to have occurred when no (or minimal) improvements have been made pursuant to the
approved detailed development and improvement plans for 9 consecutive months), or upon the
expiration of 3 years from the approval of the detailed development and improvement plans for a
development which has not been completed, the land will revert to the base zoning district. The
Plan Commission may grant one ( 1) 12 month extension. If an extension for expiration is granted
such extension shall be recorded.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits. and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No .. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
'Planned Development Approval
(Continued)
9-22
L. Rules of Procedure
All proceedings brought under this section are subject to the Rules of Procedure of the Plan Comm is.
sion, where not described otherwise herein.
M. Written Commitments
a. The Plan Commission may permit or require written commitments concerning use or development
of the property which is the subject of a petition for rezoning to Planned Development.
b. If the Common Council adopts (as certified by the Plan Commission) the petition, then the owner
of the property shall have the written commitment recorded and submit a copy of the recorded
written commitment to the Planning Director before the Planned Development can become
effective.
c. A written commitment shall be considered a covenant running with the land and is binding on the
Planned Development applicant, the owner of the property which is the site of the Zoning Amendment,
any subsequent owners of the property, and any person who acquires an interest in the
property.
d. Enforcement - Written commitments may be enforced in accordance with Article l 0, Enforcement
and Penalties.
e. Modification and Tennination -A written commitment required for a Planned Development
approval may be modified or terminated by the Plan Commission at a public hearing. The owner
of the property, the Planning Director or the Plan Commission may initiate the request to modify or
terminate the written commitment. However, a written commitment terminates ifthe zoning for
the parcel changes in the future."
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435,
June 2.7, 2.006
)
Administrative Appeal
9.11 Administrative Appeal
The following procedure applies to Administrative Appeal Petitions:
A. The applicant shall submit a written statement specifying the grounds for the appeal and any applicable
supporting material within 30 days of the decision alleged to be in error.
B. The administrative official or body from the which appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of
Zoning Appeals all documents, plans and papers constituting the record of action from which the
appeal is taken.
C. Administrative appeals require public notice in the newspaper per LC. 5-3- 1-2 and 5-3-1-4.
D. At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the BZA shall then review: ·
The written statement and supportive material submitted by the applicant;
The record ofaction supplied by the administrative official or body from the which appeal is taken;
The testimony of the applicant; and
• The testimony of the administrative official or body from which the appeal is taken.
E. The BZA may grant, deny, or table the appeal. The BZA may add conditions to any application
which was approved at the appeal stage.
Article Nine: Processes, Permits, and Fees, as amended by
Ordinances No. 6375 and 6435, June 27, 2006
9-23
Questionable Land Use Appeal
9.12 Questionable Land Use Appeal
9-14
The following procedure applies to questionable land use appeal petitions:
A. The petitioner.shall submit a written statement specifying the grounds for the appeal and any applicable
supportive material to the Planning Director. This will also include:
a. The proposed land use,
b. The existing zoning district,
c. The lot's address,
d. The property owner's name, address, and contact information.
e. The property petitioner's name, address, and contact information (if different).
B. The Planning Director will review the petition for a Questionable Land Use and determine if the
proposed land use is significantly like a permitted or special exception land us.e or ifthe proposed land
use is not significantly like a permitted or special exception land use.
C. If the proposed land use is significantly like a permitted or special exception land use in the subject
zoning district, then the Planning Director may approve, deny or forward the decision to the BZA. If
the Planning Director approves the land use, the petitioner will receive written notice of said approval.
If the Planning Director deny's the land use, the petitioner may appeal the Planning Director's decision
to the BZA. And if the Planning Director forwards it to the BZA for a decision, the information shall
be forwarded to the BZA and will be scheduled for a hearing at the earliest BZA meeting with
sufficient space on the docket.
D. If the proposed land use is not significantly like a permitted or special exception land use in the subject
zoning district the Planning Director must forward the decision to the BZA.
E. If the decision is forwarded to the BZA, the decision will be made by majority vote once all the
information is presented to the BZA in a regularly schedule meeting. The BZA may approve or deny
the petition for a questionable land use.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinances No. 63 75 and 6435,
· June 17, 1006
Article Ten
Enforcement and Penalties
August 12, 2003 -ti,,_ •" "' ' ,,,: ? ':· :-.' ,"(,
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
---- - --- - ~
- -- -

Kokomo Zoning Ordinance 6279, as amended, .
Section 10 Enforcement. and Penalties
10.1 Authority
The Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, and/or the Planning Directer- and-their
delegates are designated to enforce the pr~visions, regulations, and intent of this Zoning
Ordinance.
10.2 Violations
Complaints made pertaining to the Zoning Ordinance may be investigated by the Planning
Director. Also, any violations suspected by the Plan Commission, Common Council or Planning
Director shall be investigated by the Planning Director. Action may or may not be taken
depending on the findings. The degree of action will be at the discretion of the investigating
person(s) and should reflect what is warranted by the violation.
10.3 Inspection of Property
Standard Inspections: Inspections of property may be conducted by the Planning Director or
City Engineer either from a right-of-way, property suspected of a violation, or adjacent property.
The inspector shall attempt to present sufficieni evidence of their authorization (identification,
badge, or paperwork) and described the purposed of the inspection to the owner, tenant, or
occupant at the time of inspection. In the event no one is present to demonstrate said
authorization, the inspector may conduct the inspection.
10.4 Responsibility of Violations
A. Except as provided in subsection 10.4(B), the owner, tenant, and/or occupant of any property
or building, or part thereof, shall be responsible for the violation. Architects, builders,
developers, or agents thereof may also be found responsible for the violation if evidence of
their involvement or negligence is found. Ultimately, if fault is not clearly found in whole or
in part in persons other than the Owner, the Owner shall be held responsible in whole or in
part as warranted by the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or Planning Director.
B. In the case of a temporary sign, as defined in Article 11 hereof, including any related
streamers, banners, or inflatable devices, the Owner of said temporary sign and/or other
related materials shall be presumed responsible for the violation unless it can be shown that
the Owner is not responsible for the violation. In such a case the person responsible for the
violation shall be held responsible in whole or in part as warranted by the Plan Commission,
Board of Zoning Appeals or Planning Director.
10.5 Liability
A structure that is erected or converted, or land use in violation of this Zoning Ordinance or its
subsequent amendments may be deeded a common nuisance and the owner or possessor of the
structure or land is liable for said nuisance.
Enforcement and Penalties -Article IO, KZO 6279, as amended
(most recent amendment Ordinance 6663, adopted by Council 2/27/12)
10.6 Violations During the Construction/Building Process .
The Plan Commission or Planning Director may place a stop-work-order or violation notice on
any lot improvement process. Stop-work-orders shall be issued by written notice which shall
state the violation and that the work or the illegal activity must stop immediately until the matter
is resolved. This letter shall be posed in a conspicuous place or be delivered/mailed to the
owner, developer, property manager, tenant, or occupant. The Plan Commission or Planning
Director must meet with the persons(s) served the stop-work-order notice within 7 days of such a
request. A memorandum of agreement shall be drafted stating the conditionsTn · - ·
which construction or action may be resumed. The memorandum of agreement must be signed
by the owner, developer, property manager, tenant, or occupant th~t has caused or is responsible
for the violating and the Planning Director or Plan Commission Presid~nt.
A. Reasons for a Stop-Work-Order include:
• Not complying with Development Standards and or any regulations of the Zoning or
Subdivision Control Ordinance.
• Not obtaining an Improvement Location Permit
• Not meeting the conditions or commitments of a special exception, variance, or Building
Permit. .
• Not meeting the conditions of Development Commitments, Development Plans, Detail ·
Plans, or covenants which are enforceable by the Plan Commission.
• Not obtaining any other permit necessary for site/property improvement as called out in
local Code, Zoning Ordinance, or Subdivision Control Ordinance.
• Illegal use or expansion of use of building/structures or building/structures and land in
combination.
10. 7 Types of Violations
The following items shall be deemed civil zoning violations, enforceable by the Plan
Commission, and/or Planning Director. Penalties may be imposed based on the provisions set
forth in this Article.
A. The placement of a primary structure, accessory structure, sign, structures or any other
element which does not conform with the provisions or explicit intent of the Zoning Ordinance
as determined by the Plan Commission or Planning Director.
B. The erection of a primary structure, accessory structure, sign, structures or any other element
which does not conform with the provisions or explicit intent of the Zoning Ordinance as
determined by the Plan Commission or Planning Director.
C. Failure to obtain an Improvement Location Permit or any other required permit under this
Zoning Ordinance when required prior to initiation of improvements, change of land use, or
other modifications regulated under this Zoning Ordinance.
D. Conducting a use or uses that do not comply with the provisions or explicit intent of the Zoning
Ordinance.
E. Any failure to comply with and/or any regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, including, but not
limited to the following: Development Standards, Improvement Location Permit,
Development Plan, Planned Development or Conditions imposed.
F. Proceeding with work under a stop-work-order or a violation of a memorandum of agreement.
G. Any failure to comply with commitments made in connection with a rezoning, approval of a
development plan, detailed plan, special exception, variance, or other similar o documentable
commitment, including verbal agreements during official Plan Commission, Common Council,
or BZA meetings.
H. Failure to obtain a Certification of Occupancy.
Enforcement and Penalties - Article 10, KZO 6279, as amended
(most recent amendment Ordinance 6663, adopted by Council 21p!l2)
10.8 Procedure for Violations
There shall be a three-step procedure for violations of this Zoning Ordinance. These steps are as
follows: ·
A. Notice of Violation
1. Except as provided in subparagraph (2) hereof, the Plan Commission or the Planning
Director shall issue a notice of violation by certified mail to the person(s) who have
committed a violation. The notice of violation will state that a violation ha5 occurred;
that it must be corrected within 15 days of the postmark on the notice of violation; and
that if the violation is not corrected, the fines listed in the notice of violation will be
imposed.
2. In the case of a violation of Section 9.5 of this Ordinance, Temporary
Sign Permit, no time is allowed for correction in paragraph A(l) of this section.
All other provisions of paragraph (A)(l) shall apply.
3. If the violation is corrected within the respective 15 day business day period provided
for herein, no further action shall be taken and no fines will be imposed ..
4. The Planning Director may grant an extension of the 15 day period provided for in
subsections (A)(l) and (A)(2) respectively if the person(2) in violation has made a
significant effort to correct the violation but cannot meet the deadline. The Planning
Director may require a memorandum of agreement in order to extend the deadline.
B. Fine Imposition ·
1. If the violation stated in the notice of violation is not corrected within the time allowed,
and no extension having been granted, the fine shall be imposed. Except as hereinafter
provided, the person (s) in violation shall pay the fine and correct the violation within
\()'!llaays of the violation or face additional fines. In the case of a violation of Section
9.5 of this ordinance, should the violation not be corrected within 5 business days of the
notice of violation, the person(s) in violation shall be subject to being cited for
additional violations and fines.
2. The Planning Director may extend the time period to correct the violation if, in the
judgment of the Planning Director, the violator has made substantial progress to correct
the violation.
C. Failure to pay fines or comply
If the person(s) in violation refuses to pay the fine and/or correct the violation, the Plan
. Commission or the Planning Director may impose additional fines and/or take legal action.
D. Additional Notice
It is not mandatory that a violator receives more than one notice of violation before legal
action is taken. The Plan Commission or the Planning Director shall determine the action
necessary to remedy a violation if a notice of violation is not effective.'
10.9 Fines and Penalties
In addition to any other rem~ies, including injunctive relief provided herein, any person, firm,
partnership, corporation or other entity who or which shall violate any provision of this Zoning
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00),
nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500), with each day constituting a separate
violation of this Zoning Ordinance.
Enforcement and Penalties - Article l 0, KZO 6279, as amended
(most recent amendment Ordinance 6663, adopted by Council 2n.7/12)
10.10 Appeals or Trials
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the violation to the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
A. A written statement from the person in violation shall be submitted to the Planning
Director via Certified Mail at least 3 days prior to the date the fine is due.
B. The Planning Director shall set the date for hearing the appeal before the Board of
Zoning Appeals and notify the person of the date of the certified mm1. ·collection on
the fines will be postponed until the BZA has made a ruling as to the violation.,, Fines
will not accumulate during the appeals process.
C. The person may appeal the ruling of the BZA to the court of jurisdiction as provided in .
IC36-7-4-1003. Collection of fines will be postponed until the court has made a ruling
as to the appeal. Fines will not accumulate during the court appeals process.
10.11. Enforcement, Remedies, and Injunctive Relief
All remedies and enforcement shall comply with the powers set forth in IC 36-7-4-1000 et seq.
and all other applicable state law.
A. The Plan Commission or any enforcement official designated by the Zoning Ordinance
may bring an action in the Circuit or Superior Court of the County to evoke any legal,
equitable, or special remedy, for the enforcement of any ordinance or regulation created
under IC 36-7-4, and its subsequent amendments this includes but is not limited to the
Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Control Ordinance.
B. The plan commission or any enforcement official designated by the Zoning Ordinance may
.also bring an action in the Circuit or Superior Court of the County to_~nforce:
a All agreements between plan commission or its designees which liilve been recorded as
covenan~ in connection with a subdivision plat, a development plan, or a planned
development.
b. All commitments made in accordance with IC 36-7-4 et seq.
c. All conditions imposed in accordance with IC 36-7-4 et seq.
C. The Board of Zoning Appeals, or any enforcement official designated by this Ordinance
may bring action in the Circuit or Superior Court of the County to restrain a person
violating IC 36-7-4 et seq. which includes but is not limited to the Zoning Ordinance and
Subdivision Control Ordinance.
D. The Board of Zoning Appeals or any enforcement official designated by this Ordinance
may also bring an action in the Circuit or Superior Court of the County for a mandatory
injunction, directing to remove a structure erected in violation of this Ordinance or
applicable state code.
E. If the Board of Zoning Appeals, or its designated enforcement official is successful in its
action, the respondent shall bear all cost of the action.
F. An action to enforce a commitment made in accordance with IC 36-7-4 et seq. may be
brought in the Circuit or Superior Court of the County by:
a. Any person who is entitled to enforce a cornnl.itment made in accordance with IC 36-7-4
et seq. under the rules of the Plan Commission or the board of Zoning Appeals in force
at the time the commitment was made; or,
b. Any other specifically affected person who was designated in the commitment.
Enforcement and Penalties -Article 10, KZO 6279, as amen~ed
(most recent amendment Ordinance 6663, adopted by Council 2fl7/12)
10.12 Alternate Violation Procedures
A. The Planning Director or his duly authorized designee(s), upon verification of a civil
zoning violation, will issue a civil violation to any responsible party(ies) who ·
commit(s) a civil zoning violation. The citation may be served by personal service or
by certified mail or by placement in a conspicuous place. ·
B. Schedule of Monetary Fines
1. The civil monetary fine for a First Civil Zoning Violation of the.Zoning.Ordinance
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
2. For a repeated civil zoning violation by the same violator, the following fines shall
apply:
a. Second Violation $200.00
b. Third Violation $300.00
c. Fourth Violation $400.00
d. Each violation after the fourth $500.00
C. Trial for Civil Zoning Violation
1. Upon issuance of the citation, the Planning Director shall forward a copy of the
citation to the designated enforcement entity and the Circuit or Superior Court of
Howard County, Indiana, shall schedule the case for trial.
The Plan Commission is responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance. All
procedures will be in compliance with the Indiana Rules for Civil Procedure, and
will adopt Court cost recovery for infractions according to the State of Indiana.
2. In proceedings before the Court for a Civil Zoning Violation:
a. The designated enforcement entity has the burden of proving the Civil Zoning
Violation and the violator committed the infraction, by a preponderance of the
evidence presented at trial;
b. The violator may question all witnesses who appear for the designated
enforcement entity and produce evidence or witnesses on the violator's behalf.
3. A person found guilty of a civil zoning violation is liable for the fine, Court costs
and fees.
4. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this Section, does not prevent the Plan
Commission from seeking alternative relief from the Court in the same action, or
from seeking injunctive relief available under the law of the State of Indiana, or any
other remedy in a separate action for the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance; and
5. When a violator has been guilty of a Civil Zoning Violation, the Court may impose
additional civil penalties and grant appropriate relief to abate or halt the violation,
and the Court may direct that payment of the civil monetary fine or additional civil
penalties be suspended or deferred under conditions established
by the Court. If a violator fails to pay the civil penalty or violates the terms of any
other order imposed by the Court, the failure is contempt.
Enforcement and Penalties -Article 10, KZO 6279, as amended
(most recent amendment Ordinance 6663, adopted by Council 2!27/12)

Article Eleven
Definitions
_:--~GroundlRules< Ji web~' tewww . groundr ucI sinc . com
August 12, 2003
© 2003, Bradley E. Johnson, AICP
Article Eleven
Definitions
11.1 General:
The definitions contained in this Article shall be observed and applied in the interpretation of all Articles in
this Zoning Ordinance, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular; words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine.
11.2 Defined Words:
11-2
The following tenns shall have the following meanings:
Abandonment: The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the use of the property for a continuous
period of one year by the owner with the intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another
owner nor of resuming the use of the property.
Abandoned Item: Any item which is no longer used for its designed and intended purpose. The factors
used in detennining whether or not an item has been abandoned, include but are not limited to the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Present operability and functional utility of the item;
The date of last effective use of the item;
The condition 9f disrepair or damage;
The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the item;
The status of registration or licensing of the item;
The age and degree of obsolescence;
The cost ofrehabilitation or repair of the item when compared to its market value; or
The nature of the area and location of the item.
Accessory Structure: A building or structure which:
ls subordinate to a primary building or structure in area, intent, and/or purpose,
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the primary building, structure,
or principal use,
Does not alter or change the character of the premises,
Is located on the same zoning lot as the primary building, structure,
or use,
Confonns to the setback, height, lot coverage, and other requirements
of this Zoning Ordinance,
• ·ls not designed for human occupancy as a dwelling or commercial
use, .
Accessory structures include, but are not limited to the following:
a. antennas or satellite dishes
b. bath houses or saunas
c. decks or gazebos
d. garages or car ports
e. greenhouses
f. hottubs R.O.W.
I
g. mini barns, storage building, and sheds / R.O.W. =As Defined on Thoroul#lfare Plan
h. swimming pools and sport courts
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Adjacent Property; Any property adjacent to or directly diagonal to the subject property. Properties
across a public right of way (ROW) are also considered adjacent. The illustration below notes the properties
that would be considered adjacent to two different subject properties.
Adyisory Plan Commission; A plan commission serving a single local government jurisdiction established
as defined under the Indiana Code, 36-7-1-2 (1983) as amended. The Kokomo Plan Commission is
an Advisory Plan Commission.
Agriculture; The use ofland for agriculture purposes, including farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, and animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses
for packing, treating, or storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
"Agriculture" does not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to
swine or other animals.
Agriculture District; Refers to the AG District.
~ A public right-of-way, other than a street, road, crosswalk, or easement. that provides secondary
access for the special accommodation of abutting property.
ANS.;. American National Standard
Antenna: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission
or reception of electromagnetic or radio waves.
Applicant: The owner, owners, or legal representative of real estate who makes application to the
Kokomo Plan Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals for action by said commission or board
affecting the real estate owned thereby.
Arterial Street; See Street, Arterial.
Assisted Living Facility; see Nursing Home.
Attached Building; A building that is structurally connected to another building by a foundation, wall, or
roof line. Carports, garages, porch awnings and the like are considered attached buildings and must abide
by all regulations pertaining to primary structures.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
11-3
11-4
Auto Oriented Facility; A facility where a service is rendered or a sales transaction is made while the
patron is typically not required to exit his/her vehicle, or a facility that includes services rendered directly
on, to, or for vehicles. Auto-oriented business facilities include, but are not limited to, drive-through
restaurants, drive-in restaurants, car washes (all types), gas stations, and other similar auto service
facilities. The sale of vehicles (new or used) is not included within this definition.
Auto Repair. Major: Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or
trailers; collision service, including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting of
vehicles.
Auto Repair. Minor; Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and motor service to automobiles but
excluding any operation specified under "Automobile Repair, Major".
Automobile Seryice Station: Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale
to the public, automobile fuels stored only in underground tanks and located wholly within the lot lines;
lubricating oil or grease for the operation ofautomobiles; and the sale and installation of tires, batteries,
other minor accessories, and minor auto repair, but not including a bulk plant, conducting of major auto
repairs, automobile wrecking, automobile sales, or car washes; provided, however, that the washing of
individual automobiles where no chain conveyor is employed may be included.
Base District Zone: A base district zone is the existing zoning district of the subject lot:
prior to the approval of a planned development, or
prior to the effects of an overlay district.
Bed and Breakfast Facility; An owner occupied or employee of the owner occupied residence containing
no more than 6 guest rooms for hire, for lodging by prearrangement for periods not to exceed 3
consecutive weeks and providing for occasional meals daily (usually breakfast) and not a hotel, boarding
house or motel.
Bum;_ A man-made, formed, earth mound of definite height and width used for landscaping and screening
purposes, the intent of which is to provide a transition between uses of differing intensity or to screen
uses from sight.
lll2.£k.L Property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the 2 nearest intersecting or intercepting
streets, intersecting railroad, intersecting waterway, ~r the end of a dead end street.
•••o••••••rOO•OOoOOOOOiOOHOOoOOo O
Comer! Interior l Comer
Loi j Lot j i.Dt
! !
" .;::;:;JmK::::::
Comer l Interior i Comer
Lot ! Lat l Lot ... ;;;.;;; .. r·;;,;;;;···
·----~ ...... L. ..... ~ .....
Through
Lot
(') •
Board; See Board of Zoning Appeals.
Board of Zonjng Apoeals; The Kokomo Board of Zoning Appeals or any division thereof.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance , as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,2010.
Boardipg House; A building or part of a building that contains accommodation facilities for lodging, and
typically with meals reserved solely for the occupants thereof for a fee. Boarding houses do not include
bed and breakfasts, multifamily dwellings, hotels or motels.
Bond; Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of
credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Plan Commission. All bonds shall be approved by the
Commission wherever a bond is required by these regulations.
Buffer Landscaping: Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms, space, or related landscaping features
required under this Zoning Ordinance for buffering lots from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way
for the purpose of increasing visual shielding or other aspects of privacy and/or aesthetics.
Buffer Yards; An area adjacent to front, side and rear property lines, measured perpendicularly from
adjacent property lines and/or right-of-way lines, intended to provide attractive spaces to reduce the
impacts of proposed uses on adjacent property or natural features and to screen incompatible uses from
each other and from the right-of-way. Buffers also help to maintain existing trees or natural vegetation, to
block or reduce noise, glare or other emissions and to maintain privacy. Buffer yards are in addition to
(separate from) front, rear, or side yard setbacks.
R.O.W. • M Defined an Thoroughf .. Ptlin
Building; A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, support, or enclosure
of persons, property, or animals; and when separated by division walls from the ground up and without
openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed as a separate building.
Buildjpg Area; The horizontal area of the buildings on a lot, measured from the outside exterior walls,
excluding open areas or terraces, unenclosed porches or decks, and architectural features that project no
more than two feet.
Building Code; The Indiana Building Code which establishes and controls the standards for constructing
all forms of permanent structures and related matters.
Building Height; see Structure Height.
Articl e Eleven: Definitions, a s amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,2010 .
11-5
11-6
Building Enye!ope: The setback lines that establishes an area on a lot in which building can occur.
/ •' '
RO.W. • N. Deftn«l oo 'lhoroughl&e l'lan
Side
Yard
Setback
--·a~itcij;;ij---·--r- Re;;-l
E~v-~,~~~-) __ ~-~;er .
R.O.W.
Business: The engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or
services, or the maintenance or operation of offices, recreational, or amusement enterprises.
Business Day: The days Monday through Friday excluding federal and state holidays.
Business Districts; Refers to the NC, IS, OC, DC, Cl _and C2 Districts.
BZA: See Board of Zoning Appeals.
Campground: Any site, lot, field, or tract ofland designed with facilities for short term occupancy by
recreational vehicles and other camping equipment but not including mobile homes.
Cemetery: Property used for interring of the dead. It includes any crematory, mausoleum, or mortuary
operated in conjunction with and on the same property.
Central Water System; A community water supply system including existing and new wells and/or
surface water sources and intakes, treatment facilities, and distribution lines and includes such of the above
facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision or commercial/ industrial development.
Central Sewer System: A community sewer system including collection and treatment facilities owned
and maintained by the City of Kokomo.
Certificate of Occupancy; A certificate stating that the occupancy and use of a building or structure
complies with the provisions of all applicable Zoning Ordinance provisions.
Child Care Home; An establishment providing non-overnight care, supervision, and protection of
children in private residences which is ancillary to the primary use as residential. A residential structure in
which at least (6) children (not including the children for whom the provider is parent, stepparent, guardian,
custodian, or other relative) at any time receive child care from a provider: (1) while unattended by a
parent, legal guardian or custodian; (2) for regular compensation; and (3) for more than 4 hours but less
than 24 hours in each of 10 consecutive days per year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays. The term includes class I child care home and class II child care home as defined in IC 12-7-2-
33.7 and IC 12-7-2-33.8
Child Care Center: Any institution operated for the care of children, licensed pursuant to I.C. 12-3-2-
3.1, et seq., and as defined by Indiana Code Section 12-3-2-3.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance , as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,2010 .
Child Care Institution; (A) a residential facility that provides child care on a twenty-four (24) hour
basis for more than 10 children; or (B) a residential facility with a capacity of not more than I 0 children
that does not meet the residential structure requirements 9f a group home; or
(C) operates under a license issued under IC I 2- I 7 .4; provides for delivery of mental health services that
are appropriate to the needs of the individual; and complies with the rules adopted under IC 4-22-2 by the
Division ofFamily and Children.
Children's Home; see Child Care Institution.
~The City of Kokomo .
.ciinki An establishment in which human patients are admitted for medical or dental study or treatment
and in which the services of at least two physicians or dentists are provided.
Collocation; The location of more than one antenna of more than one governmental or commercial
wireless communication service provider on the same tower structure.
Collocation Site; A site on an existing or proposed telecommunication tower that can be used for the
installation and/or mounting of antennas or radio or cellular communication equipment that operates on a
different frequency from the initial user.
Commission; See Advisory Plan Commission
Comprehensjve Plan; Refers to the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan. The plan includes goals, objectives
and strategies for land use, growth management, transportation/thoroughfares, community facilities and
services, environment concerns, infrastructure, aesthetics and identity, economic development, and parks
and recreation. The plan was developed and adopted by the Commission pursuant to the J.C. 36-7-4-500
series and includes any part and/or policies separately adopted and any amendment to such plan and/or
policies, or parts thereof.
Condition of Approyal; Stipulations or provisions set forth by the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan
Commission required as a prerequisite for approval ofa petition.
Condominium; Real estate lawfully subject to I.C. 32-1-6 (1-31), (the Horizontal Property Law), by the
recording of condominium instruments, in which undivided interests in the common areas and facilities are
vested in the condominium unit owners.
Construction Plan(s); The maps or drawings showing the specific location and design of improvements
to be installed in accordance with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance and the Indiana Building
Code as a condition of approval.Contractor: A person who offers undertaking for others the construction,
demolition, installation, or removal of structures and other physical improvements including making
changes to land surfaces.
Contractor; A person who offers undertaking for others the construction, demolition, installation, or
removal of structures and other physical improvements including making changes to land surfaces.
Contractor. Lapdscape; A contractor offering undertaking changes to land by planting or removing
vegetation and by reshaping, adding or removing land.
County; Howard County, Indiana.
Covenants: Private and legal restrictions of various kinds on the usage oflots, typically within a subdivision
and applied by the subdivider. In the case of public health, safety and welfare, covenants may be
applied by the Plan Commission, that are recorded with the plat and deed. Covenants can also be placed
on commercial and industrial developments. Unless specifically agreed to, covenants are not enforceable
by the Plan Commission or its designees. However, they are enforceable in civil court by interested or
affected parties.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
11-7
11-8
Cul-De-Sac: A street having one (I) end open to traffic and being pennanently tenninated by a vehicular
turnaround at the other end.
DBH: Diameter-at-breast-height is a tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of 4.5 feet above
the ground. If a tree spits into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow
point beneath the split.
Dance/Night Club: An establishment for entertainment with table seating, stage (or area) for musical
perfonnances, and floor area designated for dancing.
Day. Business: See Business Day.
Day Care Center; See Child Care Center.
Dedication: The setting apart ofland or interests in land for use by the municipality or public by ordinance,
resolution, or entry in the official minutes as by the recording of a plat.
Detached Building: A building that has no structural connection with the primary building or any other
building or structure.
R.O.W. ·1
~t>.w. · ·Al. Dollnod on lhoroughlare Plan
Develooer; The owner or legal representative of land proposed to be subdivided or residentially /commercially/
industrially utilized.
District: Areas within the City of Kokomo for which unifonn zoning regulations governing use, height,
area, size, intensity ofuse of buildings and land, and open spaces about buildings, are established by this
Zoning Ordinance. Districts are drawn on the Official Zoning Map.
Domestic Pets: Animals commonly used as household pets, protection, companions, and for assistance to
disabled persons. Domestic pets shall include animals that are cared for and treated in a manner acceptable
for pet dogs, cats, and birds. Domestic pets shall include, but not be limited to, dogs, cats, parakeets,
parrots, finches, lizards, spiders, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats, mice, rabbits, aquarium fish, ferrets,
and snakes if cared for in the manner described above.
Drives. Private: See Street, Private.
Duplex: See Dwelling, Two-Family.
Dwelling: A building or structure or portion thereof, confonning to all requirements applicable to the
District in which it is located, all Building Codes, and that is used exclusively for residential occupancy,
including single-.family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multifamily dwelling units, but excluding
hotels, motels, and boarding houses.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010 .
Dwemng. Manufactured Home; A single-family dwelling unit designed and built in a factory, installed
as a pennanent residence, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law (1974 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), and which
also complies with the following specifications:
Was constructed after January 1, 1981, and exceeds nine hundred fifty (950) square feet of occupiable
space per I.C. 36-7-4(d),
Is attached to a pennanent foundation of masonry construction and has a pennanent concrete or
concrete block perimeter enclosure constructed in accordance with the One and 1\vo Family Dwelling
Code,
Has wheels, axles, and towing chassis removed,
Has a pitched roof with a minimum rise of2/12, and
Consists of two (2) or more sections which, when joined, have a minimum dimension of 23' in width
for at least 60% of.its length.
Dwelling. Mobile Home: A transportable dwelling unit which is a minimum of 8' in width and which is
built on a permanent foundation or tied down with perimeter skirting when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained therein, and
which was manufactured either:
Prior to June 15, 1976 and bears a seal attached under Indiana Public Law 135, 1971, certifying that it
was built in compliance with the standards established by the Indiana Administrative Building Council,
or
Subsequent to or on June 15, 1976 and bears a seal, certifying that it was built in compliance with the
Federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards.
Dwemng. Multifamily: A residential building designed for or occupied by 3 or more families, with the
number offamilies in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Dwelling. Single-Family; A detached residential dwelling unit designed for and occupied by one (1)
family.
Dwelling Site: A site within a manufactured home park and/or mobile home park with required improvements
and utilities that is leased for the long term placement of a manufactured home and/or mobile
home.
Dwelling. Two-Family; A residential building containing 2 dwelling units designed for occupancy by not
more than 2 families.
Dwemng Unit: Any structure or portion thereof designed for or used for residential purposes as a selfsufficient
or individual unit by one (I) family or other social association of persons and having pennanently
installed sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities.
Easement: A grant by a property owner to specific persons, the general public, corporations, utilities, or
others, for the purpose of providing services or access to the property.
EIA.L Electronic Industrial Association.
Expressway: Any roadway that operates at a high service level, consists of limited access, is divided,
carries region-wide traffic and is generally classified as part of the interstate system.
fA4l Federal Aviation Administration.
Facjng: A building facade on the side of the building's lot with frontage on a roadway is facing the roadway.
A building may have multiple facades facing different roadways.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
11-9
11-10
Fair Housing Facility (large); To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons,
these facilities have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in certain districts, but still must
meet "nondiscriminatory" health, fire, safety and building regulations. These facilities include:
I) Group homes for children in need of service under IC 31-34-1 or children who have committed a
delinquent act under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3, or IC 31-37-2-5; and specifically a facility that
houses more than ten (10) children.
2) Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for more than
eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals as described in I.C. 12-28-4.
Fair Housjng Facility <smalD; To prevent the discrimination of mentally or physically disabled persons,
these facilities have been identified as types of housing that are permitted in any single-family or multifamily
residential zoning districts, but still must meet "nondiscriminatory" health, fire, safety and building
regulations. These facilities include:
1) Group homes for children in need of service under JC 31-34-1 or children who have committed
a delinquent act under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3, or IC 31-37-2-5; and specifically a facility that
houses not more than ten (10) children.
2) Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled which provides residential services for eight (8)
developmentally disabled individuals or less as described in J.C. 12-28-4.
3) Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill which provides residential services for mentally ill individuals as
described in J.C. 12-28-4. No two Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall be within 3,000 feet
of one another in the Kokomo planningjurisdiction as stated in Indiana Code.
Family; An individual, or 2 or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group of not
more than 3 persons, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping
unit in a dwelling unit.
FBFM; Flood Boundary and Flood way Map.
~ Federal Communications Commission.
FEMA; Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Fenestration; The arrangement of windows on a wall.
FHBM; .- Flood Hazard Boundary Map.
Finished Floor Area; See Floor Area, Finished.
FIRM; Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Floodplain; The relatively flat area or low land adjoining the channel of a river or stream which has been
or may be covered by flood water. The flood plain includes the channel, floodway, and floodway fringe.
Flood plain boundaries are to be determined by using the Floodway-Flood Boundary Maps of the Federal
Insurance Administration/Federal Emergency Management Administration.
I Policy of No Net I
loss of Water
Slora119 C&paclty
Floodplain (100yr)
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Flood Protection Grade (FPGl: The elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any given location
inthe SFHA.
Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of all roofed portions of a building
enclosed by and within the surrounding exterior walls or roofs, or to the center Jine(s) of party walls
separating such buildings or portions thereof. Floor area of a building shall exclude exterior open balconies
and open_porches.
Floor Area. Finished: That portion of floor area constructed, completed, and usable for living purposes
with normal living facilities which includes sleeping, dining, cooking, working, entertainment, common
space linking rooms, areas for personal hygiene, or combination thereof. Floor area or portion thereof
used only for storage purposes and not equipped for the facilities mentioned above shall not be considered
Finished Floor Area.
Floor Area. Majn: That portion of Finished Floor Area located on the first (or nearest ground level) floor
of the dwelling unit. The Main Floor Area of a primary structure does not include a garage, carport, deck,
unfinished storage, patio, or open porch.
Foundation: The supporting member of a wall or structure.
Freeway: See Expressway.
Front Line: With respect to a building, the foundation line that is nearest the front lot line.
Front Lot Line;
A. For an interior or through lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and the abutting street,
right-of-way or a Lake or watercourse; and
B. For a corner lot, the line marking the boundary between the lot and each of the abutting streets.
(SEE GRAPHICS FOR "FRONT YARD")
Front Yard; The horizontal space between the nearest foundation of a building or structural appurtenance,
or roof eaves (whichever is closer) to the Front Lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and
measured as the shortest distance from that foundation to the Front Lot line.
Rear Lot_Ll-ne'_ _
R.D.W. R.O.W.
r · . .I I
R.O.W. • As Dellned on ThoroughlBta Plan R.O.W. • Aa Defined on Thoroughfet9 Ple.n
FrontHe; See Lot Frontage.
Gar31e; An attached or detached structure whose principal use is to house motor vehicles or personal
property for the accommodation of related dwelling units or related business establishments.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, Jul y 27,2010 .
11-11
11-12
Gross Floor Area: The sum of all horizontal floor area of all floors within a building.
Group Home: A facility that houses not more than ten (10) children that are either (A) in need of service
under IC 31-34-1; or (B) children who have committed a delinquent act under IC 31-37-2-2, IC 31-37-2-3,
or IC 31-37-2-5. Group homes are not subject to covenants, deeds or other instruments pertaining to the
transfer, sale, lease, or use of property that would pennit the residential use of property but prohibit the use
of that property a5 a group home as a matter of State public policy reasons. Group homes cannot be
prohibited on the grounds that they are a business, the persons living in a group home are not related, or
any other reason. All group homes must abide by IC 12- 17.4-5 and must be a licensed facility with the
State, meeting fire codes, building codes, and specific group home regulations.
Hardship; A difficulty with regard to one's ability to improve land stemming from the application of the
development standards of this Zoning Ordinance, which may or may not be subject to relief by means of
variance. In and of themselves, self-imposed situations and claims based on a perceived reduction of or
restriction on economic gain shall not be considered hardships. Self-imposed situations include: the
purchase of land with actual or constructive knowledge that, for reasons other than physical characteristics
of the property, the development standards herein will inhibit the desired improvement; any improvement
initiated in violation of the standards of this Zoning Ordinance; any result ofland division requiring
variance from the development standards of this Zoning Ordinance in order to render that site buildable.
Heiaht; See Structure Height
Hi&h Intensity Retail; See Retail, High Intensity.
Hobby Farmina: The use ofland for purposes, including: dairying, pasturage, apiculture, agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, and animal and poultry husbandry. Processing and storage of harvested produce
or other end products shall not be allowed on site. The hobby farming use(s) shall not exceed 40% of the
land area of the lot and shall abide by all setback regulations. Hobby farming cannot be the principal
income source for the owner, operator or household on site.
Hobby farming shall not include feed lots, stock yards, or the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to
swine or other animals.
Home Occupation #1: Specified activities or business practices that may be carried on in a residence
that have little to no impact to structure or surroundings within residential Zoning Districts. These activities
or business practices do not allow the loss of the residential district's character or function as a
residential area or neighborhood. To regulate minimal business practices within residential districts,
development standards for home occupations have been established and can be found in Article Six
Section 6.21 Subsection H0-01.
Home Occupatjon #2: Reasonable business practices that may be carried on in a residence that have
minimal impact within residential Zoning Districts. These business practices do not allow the loss of the
residential district's character or function as a residential area or neighborhood. To regulate reasonable
business practices for home occupations, development standards have been established and can be found
in Article Six Section 6.22 Subsection H0-02.
li21di. A building in which temporary lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public
for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or
office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public. Compensation is
usually assessed on a day-to-day basis.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Hospital; An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons,
primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injW)', and other abnormal physical or mental conditions
and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities,
training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences.
Impervious Surface; Any material that prevents absorption ofstormwater into the ground such as
concrete or asphalt, including gravel, rock, and stone.
lmproyement Location Permit; A permit issued under the Zoning Ordinance prior to receiving a
building permit, permitting a person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
occupy, use, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure within its jurisdiction, or
permitting a person to change the condition of the land.
Improyement; Any permanent structure that becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate,
or any alteration to the land. In the case of the Park and Recreation District, this excludes paved walkways
and plantings.
Incidental; A minor occurrence or condition which is customarily associated with a permitted use and is
likely to ensue from normal operations.
Industry. Li&ht: See Manufacturing, Light
Industry. Heavy: See Manufacturing, Heavy.
Industrial District: Refers to the LI, MI and HI Districts.
Initial User; The applicant, person, organization or corporation that originally applies to the City of
Kokomo for approval for the installation of an antenna or other radio or cellular communication equipment
or for approval for the construction of a telecommunication tower or facility.
Interior Lot: See Lot, Interior.
Interstate: See Expressway.
Jurjsdictjon: See Planning Jurisdiction.
Ji!nki. An automobile, truck. other motor vehicle, watercraft, large appliances, furniture or like materials
which have been damaged to such an extent that they cannot be operated under their own power or used
and/or will require major repairs before being made usable. This also includes such a vehicle which does
not comply with State, County, or City vehicle licensing or other laws or ordinances.
Junk Yard: A place, usually outdoors, where waste or discarded used property, including but not limited to
automobiles, farm implements and trucks, is accumulated and is or may be salvaged for reuse or resale.
This does not include industrial scrap metal or accumulation of organic matter.
Kennel (Commercial): A place primarily for keeping more than 4 adult dogs, or other small animals that
are ordinarily bred for sale as pets, including temporary care facilities for animals for compensation.
Kennel CPrjyate>: A place for keeping up to 4 adult dogs, or other small animals for personal use and
enjoyment which is subordinate to the principal use. Private kennels are not regulated in this Zoning
Ordinance and are permitted in all districts.
Article Eleven: Definitions , as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27 , 2010 .
11- 13
11-14
Landscaoing: The improvements of a lot with grass, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation and/or ornamental
objects. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, benns, fountains and other similar
natural and man-made objects designed and arrang~ to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
Legal Nonconforming Building or Structure: Any continuously occupied, lawfully established
structure or building prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments,
that no longer meets the development standards.
Legal Nonconforming Lot of Record: Any legally established and recorded lot prior to the effective
date of this Zoning Ordinance, or its subsequent amendments, that no longer meet the lot-specific development
standards.
Legal Nonconforming Sign: Any sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance,
or amendment thereto, that does not confonn to all the standards and regulations of this Zoning Ordinance.
Legal Nonconforming Use: Any continuous, lawful use of structures, land, or structures and land in
combination established prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or its subsequent amendments
that is no longer a pennitted use in the district where it is located.
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMAl: An amendment to the currently effective FEMA map that
establishes that a property is not located in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). ALOMA is only issued
byFEMA. .
Letter of Map Reyjsion <LOMRl: An official revision to the currently effective FEMA map. It is
issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and elevations.
Loca I Street: See Street, Local.
Lot: A piece, parcel or tract of land designated by its owner or developer to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit under single or multiple ownership or control.
Lot Tvpes: There are generally three types of lots identified in this Zoning Ordinance: Interior Lots,
Comer Lots, and Through Lots. In all other Districts, a lot may only contain one primary structure. In MI
and M2 Districts, a lot may contain more than one primary structure.
Block
ThnlUgh
lot
=:r;~t::T::·
Lot ! Lot i Lot •
: : : :
0 • Comer i Interior i Comer
0•
Lot i Lot l Lot
·······--·":· -···1·-····-: -···----·-
lnterior l Interior
··---~~-----L ..... ~---··· .
Thmugh
lot
•-00HO-.. o00.0000000 .. oOOOOOooooo
Comer l 1nterior l Comer
Lot I Lot ! Lot
Lot. Buildable: See Lot, Improved.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Lot. Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets or which fronts a street on two (2) or
more sides fonning an interior angle of less than one-hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.
~
~·· ... . \ ..
' • ,: i '·· ..
r··<>\. 'l! : ,:%; ...
~'. ~ ! \~~ ..
S! i \. ·· ..
o.a. [i ... C \lffier ••. •• \. :.~~ ........ .-:~<:\ .. ff'onl Yard \
.... • ... p .· ~.w.
~~·.1 O_g> cY
....... 1. .--.-.,....,.. .......~ -ft.;;;....~- o. JVUYti.
Front Yard
:,i[~]~]
Front Yard j 0
.w.
Lot CoveraKe; The area of a lot occupied by the primary building, any accessory structures and impervious
surface.
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
1----Lot Width-----<
R.o.w. z A& Defined on Thon>ughfara Pion
Lot
Area
1--..---Lot Width------<
-----------i I
·•
Lot. Deyel2ped: A lot with buildings or structures situated thereo~.
Lot Fronta,e; The length of the front lot line bordering upon a public right of way. The lot frontage is
determined by measuring the total distance in which the front lot line touches a public right of way.
Lot. lmproyed: A lot upon which a structure or building can be constructed and occupied as a result of
the fact that it has frontage on and access to an improved street, meets minimum setback requirements,
and has all necessary utilities available to the lot such as sewer, water, electricity, etc.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,2010.
11-15
11-16
Lot. Interior; A lot other than a comer lot or a through lot.
Lot of Record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the County Recorder, or a
parcel or lot described by metes and bounds, a description of which has been so recorded.
Lot, Throueh; A lot fronting on 2 parallel or approximately parallel streets, or abutting 2 streets which do
· not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. Also includes lots fronting on both a street and a watercourse or
lake.
0• ~• 0•
I . ' : .;!: :·; fi;o.w.
~-··y·--... Fllllll Yanl !o. ~ l ·'·--···-····-r-.. 1 0
: iJ! Tmxigh !~!~ lil ld j[j
~ ... L._f;;y;~·-.J .... j o
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Lot Width: The distance between the side lot Jines as measured on the front Jot line. Cul-de-Sac and
irregular shaped Jots shall measure their front lot widths along the front setback line from one side lot line
to the other.
1----Lot Width----!
R.O.W. • h lletlned cn Thacughfare Plan
Lot
Area
r---Lot Frontage =---j RO.W.
R.O.W. .. /la Ddlned en ThorllUQhfww l'lon
Low Intensity Retail: See Retail, Low Intensity.
Lowest Floor; means the lowest elevation described among the following:
(I) The lowest floor ofa building.
(2) The basement floor.
(3) The garage floor, if the garage is connected to the building.
(4) The first floor ofa building elevated on pilings or constructed on a crawl space.
(5) The floor level of an enclosure below an elevated building where the walls of the following requirements
are satisfied:
(a) The walls are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood water.
(b) At least two (2) openings are designed and maintained for the entry and exit of flood water, and these
openings provide a total area of at least one (I) square inch for every one (I) square foot of enclosed floor
area subject to flooding. The bottom of an opening can be no more than one (I) foot above grade. Doorways
and windows do not qualify as openings under this clause.
Majn Floor Area; see Floor Area, Main.
Maneuyerjng Snace; An open space in a parking area which:
Is immediately adjacent to a parking space,
Is used for and/or is necessary for turning, backing or driving forward a motor vehicle into such
parking space, but
Is not used for the parking of or storage of motor vehicles.
Manufactured Home; See Dwelling, Manufactured Home.
Manufactured Home Park; A parcel ofland containing two or more dwelling sites, with required
improvements and utilities, that are leased forthe long term placement of Mobile Home Dwellings and/or
Manufactured Home Dwellings, and shall include any street used or intended for use as part of the
facilities of such Manufactured Home Park. A Manufactured Home Park does not involve the sales of
Mobile Home Dwellings or Manufactured Home Dwellings in which unoccupied units are parked for
inspection or sale.
Articl e Eleven: Definitions , as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
11-17
11-18
Manufacturing. Heavy: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes
that ordinarily have greater than minimal impacts on the environment, or that otherwise do not constitute
light manufacturing, and which may include open uses and outdoor storage. Heavy manufacturing generally
includes processing and fabrication of products made from extracted or raw materials. Heavy manufacturing
shall not include any use that is otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a permitted
use or special exception.
Manufacturing. Light; The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and materials using processes
that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fume, odors, glare or health or safety hazards outside of the
building or lot where such assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods are housed entirely within an
enclosed building. Light manufacturing generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products
predominantly from previously prepared materials. Light manufacturing shall not include any use that is
otherwise listed specifically in any zoning district as a permitted use or special exception.
Marker <survey): A stake, pipe, rod, nail, or any other object which is not intended to be a permanent
point for record purposes.
Master Plan: See Comprehensive Plan.
Medium Intensity Retail: See Retail, Medium Intensity.
Mobile Home: See Dwelling, Mobile Home.
Mobile Home Park; See Manufactured Home Park.
Monument <suryeyl: A permanent physical structure which marks the location of a comer or other
survey point.
Motel: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached living or sleeping accommodations
with bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot, and designed for use by transient automobile
travelers. A motel furnishes customary services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone,
secretarial, or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture.
Motor Home: See Recreational Vehicle.
Motor Vehicle: Any passenger vehicle, truck, tractor, tractor-trailer, truck-trailer, trailer, boat, recreational
vehicle, semitrailer, or any other vehicle propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
Mural: A painting on the side of a building, wall, or structure; or a painting on the ground or the ceiling of
a building or structure. A mural that does not function as a Sign is not regulated by this Zoning Ordinance.
Murals that function as a sign are regulated in this Zoning Ordinance as a Wall Sign.
Noise. Repetitjve: Any sound that is sustained for less than ten minutes at a time, and that also occurs
in a pattern. If the cumulative time of a repetitive noise is greater than I hour in any given day, then it
shall be regulated as a Sustained Noise.
Noise. Short Bursts. oI; Any sound that is sustained for less than ten minutes at a time, and that does
not occur in a pattern. If the cumulative time of a Short Burst of Noise is greater than I hour in any
given day, then it shall be regulated as a Sustained Noise.
Noise. Sustained; Any sound that is sustained for ten minutes or more during the course of one day.
Nonconforming Building; A building, structure, or portion thereof, which was designed, erected, or
structurally altered such that it does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Nonconforming Lot of Record: A lot which was created such that it does not conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Sjgn: A sign or portion thereof, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered
such that it does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use: A use which does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is
located.
Nursing Home; A private home for the care of the aged or infirm, or any other person in need of .
nursing care; and which does not contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of disease or injury,
and is not primarily designed for patients being treated for mental illness or alcohol or drug addiction.
Officjal Zopjng Map: A map of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, that legally denotes the boundaries of
zoning districts as they apply to the properties within the planning jurisdiction. There is only one Official
Zoning Map, and it is kept up to date by the Plan Commission and the Planning Director.
Official Zonjpg Map Copjes; A map of the City of Kokomo, Indiana, that legally denotes the boundaries
of zoning districts as they apply to the properties within the planning jurisdiction. These maps may be
out of date.
Off-site lmnroyemepts: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided,
used, or built upon whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval.
Open Space; An area of land not covered by buildings, parking structures, or accessory uses except for
recreational structures. Open space may include nature areas; streams and flood plains; meadows or
open fields containing baseball, football, and soccer fields, golf courses, swimming pools, bicycle paths, etc.
Open Space does not include street rights-of-way, platted lot area, private yard, patio areas, or land
scheduled for future development.
Outdoor Storage: See Storage, Outdoor.
Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity
having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations,
or their legal representative.
Pa reel; See Lot.
Parent Tract: A lot of record as recorded on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance. Multiple
pieces (lots) owned by one person, persons in partnership, or a company and that are contiguous shall
together be considered one ( 1) parent tract. Roads, rivers, easements, and other built or natural features
shall not constitute a separation of two or more pieces of land owned by one person, persons in partnership,
or a business.
Parking Space. Automobile: Space within a public or private parking area for the storage of one (1)
passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under a 1-112 ton capacity.
Paved: A durable surface for parking, driving, riding or similar activities that utilizes asphalt, concrete,
brick, paving blocks or similar material. Crushed gravel, stone, rock, or dirt, sand or grass are not permitted
as a paved surface.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 2 7,2010 .
11-19
11-20
Performance Bond: An amount of money or other negotiable security paid by the subdivider, developer,
or property owner or his/her surety to the City which guarantees that the subdivider will perform all
actions required by the City regarding an approved plat or in other situations as stated forth in this Zoning
Ordinance and/or as deemed by the Planning Director that provides that ifthe subdivider, developer, or
property owner defaults and fails to comply with the provisions of his/her approval, the subdivider, developer,
or property owner or his/her surety will pay damages up to the limit of the bond, or the surety will
itself complete the requirements of the approval.
Permanent Foundation: A structural system for transposing loads from a structure to the earth at a
depth below the established frost line without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.
Permanent Perimeter Enclosure: A permanent perimeter structural system completely enclosing the
space between the floor joists of the home and the ground, except for the necessary openings, constructed
in accordance with the One and Two Family Dwelling Code.
Person: A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, unit of government, or any other group
that acts as a unit, as well as a natural person.
Plan Commission: See Advisory Plan Commission.
Planned Development: A large-scale unified development meeting the requirements for zoning approval
under the provisions of Article Five of this Zoning Ordinance. Generally a planned development consists
of a parcel or parcels of land, controlled by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity which
does not correspond in size oflots, bulk or type of buildings, density, lot coverage, and required open space
to the regulations established in any district of this Zoning Ordinance. This may result in more attractive
and affordable development than conventional developments would allow. Clustered housing (dwellings
built in innovative lot arrangements around common open space) and zero lot line housing (dwellings built
immediately adjacent to lot lines) are possible as part of planned developments. A planned development
requires approval through a zoning map amendment.
Plannini: Director: The officer appointed by and/or delegated the responsibility for the administration of
this Zoning Ordinance's regulations by the Plan Commission.
Plannini: Jurisdiction: All land within the corporate limits of Kokomo, Indiana as set out on the Official
Zoning Map.
Plat: A map or chart that shows a division ofland and/or the layout for subdivisions that is intended to be
filed for record.
Plat. Primarv: The primary plat, pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the plat and plans upon which the
approval of a proposed subdivision· are based. The primary plat and plans shall be subject to public notice
and public hearing according to law and according to Plan Commission rules. (Under former state statutes,
the primary plat was referred to as a "preliminary" plat.)
Plat. Secondary: The secondary plat, pursuant to l.C. 36-7-4-700 series, is the final plat document in
recordable form. A secondary plat shall substantially conform with the preceding primary plat, or section
thereof. The secondary plat and plans are not subject to public notices and public hearings.
f2r£b.;, A roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure and commonly
open to the weather in part.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July·27,2010.
Practical Difficulty; A difficulty with regard to on._e's ability to improve land stemming from regulations
of this Zoning Ordinance. A practical difficulty is not a "hardship," rather it is a situation where the owner
could comply with the regulations within this Zoning Ordinance, but would like a variance from the Development
Standards to improve his site in a practical manner. For instance, a person may request a variance
from a side yard setback due to a large tree which is blocking the only location that would meet the
Development Standards for a new garage location. ·
Primary Arterial: See Street, Primary Arterial.
Primary Plat: See Plat, Primary.
Prjmary Structure/Bui!dina=: The building or structure in which the principal use of the lot or premises is
located or conducted, with respect to residential uses, the principal building or structure shall be the main
dwelling. Only one primary structure shall be allowed on any one lot at any time, with the exception of
any recorded secondary plats involving multiple family residential development with more than one residential
structure.
Principal Use: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from an accessory use. A principal use
· may be either a permitted use or a special exception.
Private Street; See Street, Private
Professional Office: An office used by members of a recognized profession such as architects, artists,
dentists, engineers, lawyers, musicians, planners, physicians, surgeons, pharmacists, and realtors or insurance
agents and brokers.
Public Improvements: Any storm drainage facility, street, highway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way,
tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, utility, or other facility for which the local government
may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement
for which local government responsibility is established.
Public/Private Parkim: Area: A group of parking spaces in an open area not including any part of a
street or alley, designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
Public Street: See Street, Public.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, or corporation duly authorized to furnish under public regulation to the
public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone, fiber optics, transportation, water, or sewage systems.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line that is opposite the front lot line and farthest from it, except that for a
triangular or other irregularly-shaped lot, the line ten feet long, parallel to the front lot line, and wholly
within the lot, that is farthest from the lot line. (See Graphic for Rear Yard)
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613 , July 27,2010.
11-21
11-22
Rear Yard: The horizontal space between the nearest foundation or structural appurtenance of a building
to a rear Jot line and that rear lot line, extending to the side lines of the lot, and measured as the shortest
distance from the foundation to the rear Jot line.
RO.W.
I
~~ --· "'''"·""--·.
11 ..J I
.9 J
~r .... ~ .... ;:;;f"j~ .........
r~·-· . -· -·
Fri;lnlYl!fd
___ __ FrontlotUne
r
5..-
RO.W.
/' R.O.W. • 114 Odned m Thoroughfare l'len R.O.W. •M llelned an ThorauglAro Aon
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation that can be
towed, hauled, or driven and primarily designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational,
camping, and travel use and including but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers,
boats, and self-propelled motor homes.
Recreational Vehicle Park: Any commercially zoned site, lot, field, or tract ofland under single ownership,
or ownership of two or more people, designed with facilities for short term occupancy for recreational
vehicles only.
Registered Land Surveyor; A land surveyor properly licensed and registered ·or through reciprocity
permitted to practice in the State oflndiana.
Registered Professjonal Engineer: An engineer properly licensed and registered or through reciprocity
permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.
Regulatory Flood; A flood having a peak discharge which can be equalled or exceeded on the average
of once in a I 00 year period, as calculated by a method and procedure which is acceptable to and approved
by the Indiana Natural Resources Commission; Further, this flood is equivalent to a flood having a
I% probability of occurrence in any given year.
Regulatory Floodway; The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood plains adjoining
the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge peak flow of the regulatory
flood of any river or stream and, is that area covered by floodwaters in significant downstream motion or
covered by significant volumes of stored water during the occurrence of the regulatory flood.
Residential District; Refers to the Rl, R2, R3, R4, RS, Ml, M2 and MP Districts.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled flarge): A residential facility which provides
residential services for more than eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals as described in I.C. 12-28-4.
Residential Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (small>: A residential facility which provides
residential services for eight (8) developmentally disabled individuals or Jess as described in J.C. 12-28-4.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010 .
Residential Facility for the Mentally Ill: A residential facility which provides residential services for
mentally ill individuals as described in LC. 12-28-4. No two Residential Facilities for the Mentally Ill shall
be within 3,000 feet of one another in the Kokomo planning jurisdiction as stated in Indiana Code.
Re-subdivision: A change in a recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout or area
reserved thereon for public use or any lot line or easement; or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded.
Retail. Hi2h Intensity: Retail businesses that have a high impact on neighboring properties, traffic
generation, and public safety. Example businesses include a: boat sales, building finishes store, building
supply store, department store, furniture store, grocery/supermarket, home electronics/appliance store,
office supplies, sporting goods, superstore, variety store, and vehicle sales.
High intensity retail establishments draw in a high volumn of vehicle trips and necessitates more than 50
parking spaces (using minimum parking standadards in this ordinance). Very high intensity retail establishments
also include vehicle and equipment sales that have less than 150 vehichles or pieces of equipment
displayed outdoors at any given time.
Retail. Low Intensity: Retail businesses that have a low impact on neighboring properties, traffic
generation, and public safety. Example businesses include a bakery, book store, convenience store, craft
gallery, drug store, gift shop, and meat market.
Low intensity retail establishments do not necessitate more than 40 parking spaces (using minimum
parking standadards in this ordinance) or outdoor sales of merchandise.
Retail. Medium Intensity: Retail businesses that have a moderate impact on neighboring properties,
traffic generation, and public safety. Example businesses include an antique shop, apparel shop, art and
craft supplies, auto part sales, auto part sales, book store, boutique, building finishes store, building supply
store, computer sales, convenience store, craft gallery, department store, drug store, fabric shop, furniture
store, garden shop, gift shop, golf/tennis pro shop, grocery/supermarket, home electronics/appliance store,
liquor sales, music/media shop, musical instruments store, office supplies, pawn shop, pet store, plant/tree
shop, shoe sales, sporting goods, and variety store.
Medium intensity retail establishments do not necessitate more than l 00 parking spaces (using minimum
parking standadards in this ordinance).
Retail. Snecial Handli02: Retail businesses that sell products that require special handling due to risks
to public safety. Example businesses include: fireworks sales, gun sales, and hunting stores.
Retail. very Hi2h Intensity; Retail businesses that have a very high impact on neighboring properties,
traffic generation, and public safety. Example businesses include a: boat sales, construction vehicle sales,
farm equipment sales, heavy equipment sales, manufactured home sales, semi tractor-trailer sales, and
vehicle sales.
Very high intensity retail establishments draw in a high volumn of vehicle trips and necessitates more than
50 parking spaces (using minimum parking standadards in this ordinance). Very high intensity retail
establishments also include vehicle and equipment sales that have any number of vehichles or pieces of
equipment displayed outdoors at any given time.
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613 , July 27,2010.
11-23
11-24
Retail. Very Low Intensjty: Retail businesses that have very little impact on neighboring properties,
traffic generation, and public safety. Example businesses include an: art gallery, flower shop, gift shop,
jewelry store, and news dealer.
Low intensity retail establishments do not necessitate more than 25 parking spaces (using minimum
parking standadards in this ordinance) or outdoor sales of merchandise.
Right-of-Way: A strip ofland occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public
utilities, or other special public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public
agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.
Retirement Community: An age-restricted development, which may include detached and attached
dwelling units, apartments, and may also have a nursing home component .
.&:m'.'.:, See Right-of-Way.
B2ilil..;, See Street.
Satellite Dish/Antenna: An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay
located in a planetary orbit, or broadcasted signals from transmitting towers.
School; A public or private institution which offers instruction in any of the branches oflearning and study
comparable to that taught in the public schools under the Indiana School Laws, including pre-kindergarten,
kindergarten, elementary school, and junior and senior high schools, but excluding trade, business, or
commercial schools.
School. Trade. Busjness. or Commercial; An educational facility which offers instruction specific to a
trade, business, or commercial.
Scrap Metal Yard: A general industrial use established independent or ancillary to and connected with
another general industrial use, which is concerned exclusively in new and salvaged metal pipes, wire,
beams, angles, rods, machinery, parts, filings, clippings, and/or all other metal items of every type, and
which acquires such items incidental to its connection with the other general industrial use or by purchase,
consignment or bailment which stores, grades, processes, melts, cuts, dismantles, compresses, cleans, or in
any way prepares said items for reuse by the connected other general industrial use or for storage, sale or
shipment and/or use in other industries or businesses including open hearth, electric furnaces and foundry
operations. Such an establishment shall not include junk yards, dumps, or automobile or other vehicle
graveyards.
The storage, dealing in or the permitting of the accumulation of significant quantities of combustible,
organic or nonmetal scrap materials such as wood, paper, rags, garbage, bones and shattered glass on the
premises of such an establishment will disqualify it from being classified as a scrap metal yard, and the
same will be classified as a junk yard.
Secondaa Plat; See Plat, Secondary.
Sexually Oriented Materials; Materials including still or motion pictures, books, magazines, other
periodicals, or other depiction recorded on paper, electronic, digital, video, magnetic or other media, which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating Specified
Sexual Activities" or "Specific Anatomical Areas"; or, instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed
as a representation of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily
for use to stimulate human genital organs.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,2010 .
•
Sexually Orjented Retail Business; An establishment which advertises or holds itself in any forum as
"XXX", "adult" or "sex", or which has stock in trade or floor area devoted to the sale, rental, or display of
sexually oriented materials.
Sexually Orjented Retail Business. Accessory; An establishment with at least ten percent (10%) but
less than forty percent (40%) of its stock in trade or gross floor area devoted to the sale, rental, or display
of sexually oriented materials.
Sexually Oriented Entertainment Busjness; An establishment which regularly offers live entertainment,
lingerie or nude modeling, or presentation of motion pictures or publications by any photographic,
electronic, digital, magnetic or other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specific Anatomical Areas"; or,
offers massage therapy or body work except when performed by a massage therapist licensed by the
State of Indiana, certified by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or
the American Massage Therapy Association, or under the direct supervision of a licensed physician; or,
advertises or holds itselfin any forum as "XXX", "adult", or "sex".
Setback; The minimum horizontal distance between the building line and a lot line or right-of-way.
SFHA; See Special Flood Hazard Area.
Shrub; A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small
branches near the ground; may be deciduous or evergreen.
Side Lot Line; A lot boundary line other than a front or rear lot line.
(SEE GRAPHIC UNDER "SIDE YARD")
Side Yard; The horizontal space between the nearest foundation or structural appurtenance of a building
to the side lot line and measured as the shortest distance from the foundation to the lot line.
/' . . .
R.O.W.= /\&Ollllnec!oil ~,..,,,
fil&n.L Any name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, painted on, or is
represented directly or indirectly upon a buiJding, structure, or piece ofland, and which directs attention to
an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organiz.ation, or business. Religious symbols on places
of worship or structures owned and operated by religious organiz.ations shall not be considered a sign
unless accompanied with text.
Sign. Ground; A sign in which the bottom edge of the sign is pennanently affixed to the ground. A
monument sign is another name for a Ground Sign.
·Sim Construction: Any sign announcing the names of architects, engineers, contractors, or other individuals or firms involved with the construction,
___ alteration, or repair ofa building project or announcing the character of the building enterprise of the purpose for which the project is intended.
Sign, Directional or Warning: An on-premise sign in front of a building containing information relative to expediting pedestrian or vehicular traffic tlow
and perking.
Sign. Gateway: A sign which identifies a planned district or plat, including office parks, industrial parks, or subdivisions with the intention of providing
knowledge about the complete project and not a single entity or unit.
Sign. Identification: Any on-premise wall, projecting or free-standing sign identifying or advertising a business, product, service, use activity, or any
;ombination thereof, conducted upon the premise where the sign is located.
~ign. Institutional: An on-premise sign identifying a society, corporation, or group facility of a public character.
11-26
Sign. Mural: A sign painted onto the side of a building, wall, ground, or structure. A mural sign is regulated
as a wall sign in this Zoning Ordinances. Mural's without a commercial message are not regulated
by this Zoning Ordinance.
Sign. Non-Commercial: Any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, does
not name, advertise, or call attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial ·activity.
Sign. Off Premjse Si2ns; A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is located or to which
it is affixed.
Sjgn. Pole; A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in the ground with all of the sign
surface attached to or supported by any such upright or brace and with the entire apparatus independent
of any building or other structure.
Sjgn. Portable: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign
designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A or T-frames; menu or sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; umbrellas
used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public
right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Sien. Prnjectioe; An on-premise sign attached to a building and extending beyond the surface of the
building to which it is attached. It may extend beyond the building line or into right of ways.
Sien. Temporary: An on-premise advertising device not fixed to a permanent foundation, for the purpose
of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject related to the activities on the
premises upon which it is located.
Sjgns, Types of; The graphic below depicts the primary types of signs. Regulations for the type of signs
permitted will vary by zoning district.
Sign, Wall: An onpremise
sign attached to
the wall of a building or
structure also referred to
as a fascia sign.
Specja! Exceptjon; The authoriz.ation of a use that is designated as such by this Zoning Ordinance as
being permitted in the district concerned if it meets special conditions, is found to be appropriate and upon
application, is specifically authorized by the BZA.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as a mended by
Ord inance No. 6613, July 27,201 0 .
Special Flood Hazard Area CSFHA: Those lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are subject to
inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the City are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the City prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
August 3, 1981. The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Howard County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the City are generally identified as such on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Howard County by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated July 16, 1981 .
Special Handling Retail: See Retail, Special Handling.
Specified Anatomical Area: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities; Human genitals which are in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or,
acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or, fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
Storage. Outdoor: The outdoor accumulation of goods, motor vehicles, equipment, products, or materials
for permanent or temporary holding.
~That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Any portion of a story exceeding 14 feet in height shall be considered as an additional story for each
fourteen 14 feet or fraction thereof.
fill:ttt. Any vehicular right-of-way that:
ls an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
• is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law,
• is approved by other official action, or
is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board to review plats; includes the land between
the street lines, whether improved or unimproved.
Street. Local: A street designed primarily to provide access to abutting properties and discourage
through traffic, as depicted by the Thoroughfare Plan within the Comprehensive Plan.
Street. Prjmary Arterjal: A street with access control, restricted parking, and that coHects and distributes
traffic to and from secondary arterials, as depicted by the Thoroughfare Plan within the Comprehensive
Plan.
Street, Priyate; Vehicular streets and driveways, paved or unpaved, which are wholly within private
property except where they intersect with other streets within public rights-of-way and that are maintained
by the owner(s).
Street. Public: All property dedicated or intended for public highway, freeway, or roadway purpose or
subject to public easements therefore.
Street Wall: A vertical plane at the right-of-way line created by the facades of structures.
Streetscape; The entire system of streets, sidewalks and landscaping by which people circulate through
and experience a neighborhood.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing
walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the footprint or increase in the size ofliving
space. Also, substantial roofing and siding work when repairs are made to the structure beneath.
Article Eleven: De f i niti ons , as amended by
Ordinance No . 6613, July 27,201 0 .
11-27
11-28
Structure; Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds, detached garages,
mobile homes, manufactured homes, above-ground storage tanks, freestanding signs and other similar
items.
Structure Height: The vertical distance measured from the lot ground level to the highest point of the
roof.
Building
Height
Aal Roal Slrudllres Gable Roal s.uctures
(from '11111-1 (from higl-1 ~ roof)
sec:licn of lat roof)
Subdivision; The division of a parent tract or other piece of land into at least 2 smaller lots or the
combination of two or more smaller Jots into one lot so that, either now or in the future, the subdivider can,
transfer ownership, construct buildings or establish a use other than vacant, or create new building sites
for leasehold, and as further defined in the Kokomo Subdivision Control Ordinance.
Swimmine Pool; A self-contained body of water at least 18 inches deep and 8 feet in diameter or width
and used for recreational purposes. It may be above or below ground level, and shall be considered an
accessory structure/use.
Telecommunication Facility: See Wireless Telecommunication Facility.
Temporary Improvement Location Permit: A permit issued under the Zoning Ordinance permitting a
temporary use or structure not to exceed 2 months. One (1) extension of2 months may be authorized by the
Planning Director for reason/cause.
Temporary Use/Structure; A land use or structure established for a limited and fixed period of no more than
4 months with the intent to discontinue such use or structure upon the e:Xpiration of the time period.
Theater; A facility for audio and visual productions and performing arts, excluding adult motion picture
theaters and adult entertainment businesses.
Thoroughfare Plan; The official plan, now and hereafter adopted, which includes a street plan, sets
forth the location, alignment, dimensions, identification, and classification of existing and proposed streets,
and other thoroughfares, as found in the Kokomo Comprehensive Plan.
DAL Telecommunication Industry Association.
Tower; See Wireless Telecommunications Tower.
Tower Accessory Structure; Any structure located at the base of a tower for housing base receiving or
transmitting equipment.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010.
Two-Page Layouti Two-Page Layout refers to the two-page layout accompanying each zoning district in
articles 3 of this Zoning Ordinance. The two-page layout includes permitted uses, special exception uses,
and basic zone district information. Below is an example from Article Three.
u .-.--.-i.-.-..... ..._.~ t;:le!!!§l!E!!;Cj
====--:L..- ,....~--:...
.......~. .
.. a;.,www-.rm ............ .. ..
.lltti The purposes for which land, building, or structure thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for
which it is occupied, maintained, let, or leased.
Variance. Development 8tandardsi A specific approval granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the
manner prescribed by this Zoning Ordinance, to deviate from the development standards (such as height,
bulk, area) that the Ordinance otherwise prescribes.
Varjety Store; A retail establishment that sells a multitude of consumer goods.
Vehicle; See Motor Vehicle.
Very High Intensity Retail; See Retail, Very High Intensity.
Very Low Intensity Retail; See Retail, Very Low Intensity.
Wjnd to Energy System Height: The overall height above grade of the wind energy tower plus the
rotor.
Wind t0 Energy Tower Height: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower, excluding the
rotor.
Wireless Communicatjons; Any personal wireless services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996, as amended, including FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services
such as cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobile radio (ESMR), global system of mobile communication (GSM), paging and similar
services that currently exist or may be developed.
Wireless Telecommunicatjons Facility; A site that houses a telecommunications tower, support
structure, antennas, accessory structures and/or associated radio or cellular communications equipment.
Wireless Telecommunjcations Tower; A monopole or lattice structure situated on a site used to
support antennas and radio or cellular communications equipment.
Yard; A space on the same lot with a principal building that is open and unobstructed except as otherwise
authorized by this Zoning Ordinance. All required yards shall be kept free of all material including but not
limited to, buildings, structures, material for sale, storage, advertising or display to attract attention and
Article Eleven: Definitions, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27, 2010.
11- 29
11- 30
parking lots.
Zoning Administrator; see Planning Director.
Zonjng District: See District.
Zoning Man: See Official Zoning Map.
City of Kokomo Zoning Ordinance, as amended by
Ordinance No. 6613, July 27,2010. 
 
 
 
 




 



 


