MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF MISHAWAKA, INDIANA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the Common Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MISHAWAKA, INDIANA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jeffrey L. Rea 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dale "Woody" Emmons (First District) 
David A. Wood (Second District) 
Ross J. Deal (Third District) 
Marsha G. McClure (Fourth District) 
S. Michael Compton (Fifth District) 
Ronald S. Banicki (Sixth District) 
John P. Gleissner (At-Large) 
Gregg A. Hixenbaugh (At-Large) 
John J. Roggeman (At-Large) 
Common Council 
____________ 
John P. Gourley, City Attorney 
Cory Hammel, Staff Attorney 
Attorneys 
____________ 
Deborah S. Ladyga-Block, IAMC, CMC 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MISHAWAKA, INDIANA 
____________ 
David A. Wood 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dale "Woody" Emmons (First District) 
Mike Bellovich (Second District) 
Stacy Petko Reisdorf (Third District) 
Kate Voelker (Fourth District) 
S. Michael Compton (Fifth District) 
Ronald S. Banicki (Sixth District) 
Gregg A. Hixenbaugh (At-Large) 
Matt Mamolenti (At-Large) 
Bryan J. Tanner (At-Large) 
Common Council 
____________ 
Geoffrey Spiess 
Corporate Counsel 
____________ 
Deborah S. Ladyga-Block, IAMC, MMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1985 Code, as supplemented through December 15, 2003, and ordinances adopted by the common council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, David D. Beach, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Debbie Block, City Clerk, and Jenny Zimmerman, former Staff Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 2008. 
PROPOSED ORDINANCE NO. 2008-42 
ORDINANCE NO. 5181 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MISHAWAKA, INDIANA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MISHAWAKA INDIANA, THAT: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Municipal Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 137, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 16, 2008, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 for a first offense and a fine not to exceed $7,500.00 for a second or subsequent offense, unless the violation is of an ordinance that regulates traffic or parking. In such cases, the fine may not exceed the sum of $2,500.00. Except as otherwise provided, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense and with respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 16, 2008, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, attestation, and legal publication. 
PASSED BY THE COMMON COUNCIL of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, on this 6th day of October, 2008 at 9:21 o'clock, P.M. 
/s/ John J. Roggeman 
             John J. Roggeman   Presiding Officer 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Deborah S. Block 
      Deborah S. Block, CMC   City Clerk 
PRESENTED BY ME to the Mayor this 7th day of October, 2008 at 3:03 o'clock, A.M. 
/s/ Deborah S. Block 
           Deborah S. Block, CMC   City Clerk 
APPROVED BY ME this 7th day of October, 2008 at 4:00 o'clock, P.M. 
/s/ Jeffrey L. Rea 
               Jeffrey L. Rea   Mayor 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 5283 11- 3-2010 Included 4 5289 12- 6-2010 Included 4 5298  1- 3-2011 Included 4 5300  3-21-2011 Included 4 5332 12- 5-2011 Included 5 5366 12- 3-2012 Included 6 5378  2- 4-2013 Omitted 6 5381  3- 4-2013 Included 6 5395  7-15-2013 Included 6 5412  8-19-2013 Included 6 5426 11-18-2013 Included 7 5439  5- 7-2014 Included 7 5440  6- 2-2014 Included 7 5485  6- 1-2015 Included 8 5503 11- 4-2015 Included 9 5532  6-20-2016 Included 9 5551 11-21-2016 Omitted 10 5552 11-21-2016 Included 10 5553 12- 5-2016 Included 10 5568  3- 6-2017 Included 10 5569  3- 6-2017 Included 10 5570  4- 3-2017 Included 10 5571  4- 3-2017 Included 10 5635 12- 3-2018 Included 11 5636 12-17-2018 Omitted 11 5639 12-17-2018 Included 11 5640 12-17-2018 Omitted 11 5641 12-17-2018 Omitted 11 5649  3- 4-2019 Included 11  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Municipal Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1985, § 10.01) 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances required, IC 36-1-5-3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the common council may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. This Code shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 
    City utilities. The term "city utilities" means the Mishawaka Public Utility Company, now known as the Mishawaka Utilities. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Municipal Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Common council. The terms "common council" and "council" mean the common council of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or a day on which the city office in which the act is to be done is closed during regular business hours. In any event, the period runs until the end of the next day that is neither a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday nor a day on which the city office in which the act is to be done is closed. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays and days on which the city office is closed shall be excluded from the computation. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the terms "and" and "or" may be interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means St. Joseph County, Indiana. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    IC, state acts. The abbreviation "IC" refers to the Indiana Code, as amended. References to a state act by title is to such act, as amended. 
    Includes. The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition and has a prohibitory effect. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Words in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, schoolyard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any place for the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write. In such situations, such person's name shall be written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near such person's name. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Indiana. 
    Street. The term "street" includes any alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, road, highway, viaduct or other public thoroughfare. 
    Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to premises, include any person holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; the future tense includes the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.04, 10.05, 10.08, 10.11, 91.35; Ord. No. 4152, 4-7-1997; Ord. No. 4969, § 1(exh. A), 9-6-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar rules of statutory construction, IC 1-1-4-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  A history note appearing in parentheses after a section in this Code indicates the legislative history and is a declaration by the common council that the section to which the history note applies is a restatement or reenactment of an original ordinance or amendment thereof. Cross references, editor's notes and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1985, §§ 10.01-10.03) 
State Law reference- Effect of declaration of restatement or reenactment, IC 35-1-5-6. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to the adoption of this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section _____ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Municipal Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section _____ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Municipal Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 for a first offense and a fine not to exceed $7,500.00 for a second or subsequent offense, unless the violation is of an ordinance that regulates traffic or parking. In such cases, the fine may not exceed the sum of $2,500.00. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each violation is a separate offense. 
(4)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent the suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(5)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
(Code 1985, § 10.99; Ord. No. 1420, 12-4-1967; Ord. No. 4182, 7-7-1997) 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, IC 36-1-3-8(9), 36-1-3-8(10); enforcement of ordinances, IC 36-1-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that, if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. 
(Code 1985, § 10.06) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Providing for salaries or other officer or employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(10)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)  Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property. 
(15)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal adopted. 
    The city seal shall consist of a circular disk, including an inner and outer margin, in the center of which shall be imprinted a likeness of Princess Mishawaka standing before the St. Joseph River with a tree line and sun on the horizon; inscribed in said outer margin shall be the words "CITY OF MISHAWAKA, INDIANA-The Princess City-1833." 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. III, § 1; Code 1985, § 10.14; Ord. No. 1226, 4-17-1961; Ord. No. 3927, 4-3-1995) 
Sec. 2-2. - Ordinance violations and ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Creation; clerk appointed. 
(1)  There shall be created for the city an ordinance violations bureau (hereinafter referred to as the "bureau") pursuant to state law. 
(2)  The city clerk is appointed and shall serve as the clerk of the bureau and shall be responsible for administering the bureau. 
(3)  The clerk of the bureau may establish a branch office of the bureau and designate in writing an individual to administer the branch office. A copy of the written designation shall be maintained by the clerk. 
(4)  The clerk, or designee, shall accept written appearances, waivers of trial, admissions of violations and payment of civil penalties as prescribed by state law in ordinance violations cases. 
(b)  Schedule of ordinance violations and penalties. 
(1)  The following ordinances shall be subject to admission of violation before the clerk of the bureau, or designee: 
Chapter 6, advertising. 
Chapter 10, amusements and entertainment. 
Chapter 14, animals. 
Chapter 18, article II, fumigators. 
Chapter 18, article III, pawnbrokers. 
Chapter 18, article IV, peddlers and canvassers. 
Chapter 18, article V, precious metals. 
Chapter 18, article VI, taxicabs. 
Chapter 18, article VII, weights and measures. 
Chapter 18, article VIII, transient merchants. 
Chapter 18, article IX, shooting galleries. 
Chapter 18, article X, tattoo and body piercing establishments. 
Chapter 30, article II, domestic refuse, recyclable materials and yard waste. 
Chapter 30, article III, nuisances. 
Chapter 30, article IV, abandoned vehicles. 
Chapter 30, article V, noise control. 
Chapter 34, fire prevention and protection. 
Chapter 38, article II, restaurants; food. 
Section 46-2, accosting persons. 
Section 46-3, loitering; loafing. 
Section 46-4, spitting on sidewalks. 
Section 46-5, shooting within city limits. 
Section 46-6, enticement to commit unlawful acts. 
Chapter 46, article II, curfew. 
Chapter 46, article III, abandoned refrigerators or similar containers. 
Chapter 46, article IV, fireworks. 
Chapter 46, article V, open alcoholic beverages in vehicles. 
Chapter 46, article VI, ultimate fighting. 
Chapter 50, parks and recreation. 
Chapter 54, article II, private drives or entrances. 
Chapter 54, article III, street barricades. 
Chapter 54, article IV, street improvements 
Chapter 54, article V, sidewalk and curb improvement. 
Chapter 54, article VI, public utilities. 
Chapter 58, article II, traffic rules. 
Chapter 58, article III, stopping, standing and parking. 
Chapter 58, article IV, bicycles; motorcycles. 
Chapter 58, article V, trucks. 
Chapter 58, article VI, railroads. 
Chapter 58, article VII, snow emergencies. 
Chapter 58, article VIII, traffic schedules. 
Chapter 58, article IX, parking schedules. 
Chapter 66, article III, trees and shrubs. 
Chapter 101, article II, building code. 
Chapter 101, article III, electric code. 
Chapter 101, article IV, plumbing code. 
Chapter 101, article V, property maintenance code. 
Chapter 105, design review and development plan. 
Chapter 117, erosion control. 
Chapter 121, flood control. 
Chapter 125, historic preservation. 
Chapter 129, on-premises sign standards. 
Chapter 133, subdivision regulations. 
Chapter 137, zoning. 
(2)  The penalties for violations of any ordinances within the chapters indicated above shall be according to a schedule of fines, subject to the limits prescribed by state law, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  Penalties; offenses filed with bureau. 
(1)  The penalties prescribed in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall apply only when an alleged violator elects to admit an ordinance violation and pays the prescribed fine. Subsection (b)(2) of this section shall not amend or supersede any other penalty sections of the Code. 
(2)  If an alleged violator elects not to admit an ordinance violation, the city shall have the right to bring suit against the alleged violator seeking fines greater than those permitted under subsection (b)(2) of this section, which are otherwise authorized by this Code. 
(Code 1985, §§ 11.01-11.03; Ord. No. 4182, 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 4277, 5-18-1998; Ord. No. 4323, 9-21-1998) 
State Law reference- Establishment of bureau; appointment of clerk, IC 33-36-2-1 et seq.; schedule of ordinance and code provisions; violations, IC 33-36-3-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMON COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 2-48. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  The presiding officer of the common council, which is the president, or the vice-president or other designated councilmember, when the president is not available, shall take the chair precisely at the hour fixed for the opening of the meeting and shall call the council to order if a quorum is present. 
(b)  The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum. He may speak on points of order in preference to councilmembers, and shall decide questions of order according to the rules adopted by the common council. If an appeal should be requested on his ruling, the question on appeal should be put: "Shall the decision of the chair stand as the decision of the council?" An appeal from the presiding officer's decision shall be heard by and on the request of any two members of the common council. A simple majority vote shall prevail. 
(c)  The presiding officer shall ask for a voice vote of the common council on any motion before it. If a vote is necessary, his question shall be: "All in favor of the question, say 'aye' or 'yes'; those opposed to the question say 'nay' or 'no.' " If the presiding officer cannot determine the vote, or if a division of the council is called for, the council shall be individually polled by the clerk and the votes recorded. 
(d)  The presiding officer shall prohibit loud talking or any other disturbance within the council chamber. 
(e)  The presiding officer shall sign all ordinances passed by the council before their presentation to the mayor. He shall sign all ordinances after enrollment as well as the journal of the proceedings. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 8; Code 1985, § 30.01; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981) 
State Law reference- President; vice-president, IC 36-4-6-8; requirements for adoption, IC 36-4-6-14. 
Sec. 2-49. - City clerk as clerk of council. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be the clerk of the common council. It shall be his duty to keep an accurate journal of the proceedings thereof. He shall keep a proper file of all papers and documents of every kind and character concerning or pertaining to the proceedings of the common council. He shall be the custodian of all ordinances, resolutions, petitions, memorials, and all other papers pertaining to the business of the common council, except when such ordinances, resolutions, petitions, memorials, or other papers are necessarily in the hands of any committee for the consideration of the committee. 
(b)  When directed by the presiding officer, the clerk shall read the titles of ordinances and resolutions before the council. If requested by any member of the council, the clerk shall read the entire text of such ordinance or resolution. The clerk shall poll the members of the council and shall enter the "yes" and "no" votes on the action of every ordinance and resolution and on all other votes whenever requested by two members. 
(c)  The clerk shall perform all other duties as required by law. 
(d)  Order of voting. When polling the members of the council for their vote on any ordinance or resolution, the clerk shall begin by first polling the councilperson in the seat farthest to the right of the presiding officer, and then moving to the next succeeding councilperson, except for the presiding officer who shall vote last. The same order of voting shall be used for each ordinance and resolution. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 7; Code 1985, § 30.02; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3260, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3563, 1-6-1992) 
State Law reference- Duties of clerk, IC 36-4-6-9. 
Sec. 2-50. - Sergeant-at-arms. 
(a)  The sergeant-at-arms of the common council shall be the chief of police or shall be a member of the police department designated by the chief of police. 
(b)  The sergeant-at-arms shall be responsible to the presiding officer of the common council, and shall follow the instructions of the presiding officer in maintaining order and carrying out the rules of the common council. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 8a; Code 1985, § 30.03; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969) 
Sec. 2-51. - Committees. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specially ordered by the council, the presiding officer of the common council shall appoint, subject to the approval of the council, at the second regular meeting of each year, the following standing committees, each to consist of not less than three members: 
(1)  Budget and finance. 
(2)  Land use planning. 
(3)  Public health and safety. 
(4)  Public improvements. 
(5)  Personnel. 
(6)  Substandard housing. 
(b)  Select committees, when deemed advisable, shall be appointed by the presiding officer of the common council, subject to the approval of the council. 
(c)  Each committee shall organize itself by majority vote. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the chairman of each committee to call committee meetings, but in the event the chairman is absent or declines to call the meetings, the committee shall meet on the call of any two of its members. 
(e)  A select committee, when its report is made and disposed of, shall be deemed to have no other business and to stand dissolved without motion; an affirmative vote on recommitment by a majority of the common council has the effect of reviving the committee. 
(f)  All actions of any committee shall require a concurring vote of the majority of the members of the committee. Minority reports, when filed, shall be noted by the clerk in the minutes of the meeting at which the report is made. If any committee declines or fails to take action on any matter referred to it by the presiding officer or a majority of the council, the council may by majority vote withdraw the matter for consideration from the committee and may act as a committee of the whole, in considering the withdrawn matter. 
(g)  When any matter has been referred to a committee, the councilmember introducing the matter shall have the right to meet with and act as a member of the committee during its deliberation thereon, but he shall not vote. 
(h)  A committee may not erase, interline, or blot any ordinance, resolution, or any other paper referred to it, but must enter upon separate paper any amendments it may propose stating the words which it is proposing to insert or omit by reference to page, line, and words of the original paper. 
(i)  The presiding officer shall serve as an ex-officio member of each committee of the council and shall refer ordinances to committees for recommendation after first reading. The presiding officer shall call for the committee report from the committee so assigned after second reading of the title of each ordinance and prior to its public hearing. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 5; Code 1985, § 30.04; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3809, 2-7-1994) 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MEETINGS 

Sec. 2-76. - Organization meeting. 
    The members of the common council shall choose from the members of the council a presiding officer who shall be called the president, and a vice-president who shall preside in the absence of the president, which officers shall serve until the first meeting in January of the next succeeding year, when their successors shall be chosen to serve for one year in like manner. In the event that neither the president nor the vice-president are present at a council meeting, the president may, prior to the meeting, appoint any member of the council to preside at the meeting. In the event of the failure of said appointment by the president, the chairman of the budget and finance committee shall preside at the meeting. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 1; Code 1985, § 30.10; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3260, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3667, 3-15-1993) 
State Law reference- Meetings of common council, IC 36-4-6-7; appointment of president and vice-president of council, IC 36-4-6-8. 
Sec. 2-77. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the common council shall be held in the council chamber at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Mondays of every month, unless any such regular meeting date falls on a day on which the city hall is closed. In such an event the regular meeting for that date shall be held at 7:00 p.m., on the next day that the city hall is open to the public for business. The president of the council shall have the right, in his discretion, to call a pre-meeting prior to any special or regular scheduled council meeting. In the event that said pre-meeting is called by the president, notice of the same shall be given by noting it on the council agenda, which shall be circulated to the councilmembers prior to the meeting date. 
(b)  Any regular meeting may be adjourned to a specified day or hour, at which it shall be lawful to transact any business which might have been transacted at the regular meeting of which the adjourned meeting is a continuation. At the adjourned meeting, the council will not be limited to completing particular items of business which had actually been entered on and left unfinished at the regular meeting, unless the order of adjournment of the regular meeting so limits the work of the adjourned meeting. 
(c)  Any regularly scheduled meeting of the common council may be cancelled or rescheduled by majority vote of its elected members at the next-preceding regular meeting. 
(d)  Public notice of the date, time, and place of any meetings, executive sessions, or of any rescheduled or reconvened meeting, shall be given at least 48 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) before the meeting. 
(e)  Public notice shall be given by the common council by: 
(1)  Posting a copy of the notice at the principal office of the common council or, if no such office exists, at the building where the meeting is to be held; and 
(2)  Delivering notice to all news media which delivered by January 1 an annual written request for such notices for the next succeeding calendar year to the common council. The common council shall give notice by one of the following methods: 
a.  Depositing the notice in the United States mail with postage prepaid. 
b.  Transmitting the notice by electronic mail. 
c.  Transmitting the notice by facsimile (fax). 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 2; Code 1985, § 30.11; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3310, 9-5-1989; Ord. No. 3563, 1-6-1992; Ord. No. 3805, 1-3-1994) 
State Law reference- Meetings of common council, IC 36-4-6-7; public meetings (Open Door Law), IC 5-14-1.5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-78. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings of the common council shall be held on the call of the mayor or of any five members of the common council. The call shall be in writing, and shall specify therein the particular purposes for which the meeting is called. If a meeting is called to deal with an emergency involving actual or threatened injury to person or property, or actual or threatened disruption of the governmental activity under the jurisdiction of the public agency by any event, then the time requirements of notice under state statute shall not apply, but: 
(1)  News media which have requested notice of meetings must be given the same notice as is given to the members of the common council; and 
(2)  The public must be notified by posting a copy of the notice according to state statute. 
(b)  The call shall be signed by the mayor, or, when made by members of the council, by them, and sealed with the seal of the city and countersigned by the city clerk. 
(c)  The mayor and each member of the council shall be notified of the holding of the special meeting by the chief of police or his designee, who shall leave a copy thereof at the last and usual place of residence of any member whom the officer is not able to find. 
(d)  Only such business shall be transacted at the special meeting as is specifically stated in the call for the special meeting. The minute record shall show the issuance of the call, and the notice of service thereof, for which purpose the officer serving the notice shall return to the clerk, the presiding officer of the council, and the mayor. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 3; Code 1985, § 30.12; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981) 
State Law reference- Authority to call special meetings, IC 36-4-6-7(b); public notice of meetings, IC 5-14-1.5-5. 
Secs. 2-79-2-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-100. - Quorum. 
    The majority of all the councilmembers elected shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 4; Code 1985, § 30.20; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981) 
State Law reference- Quorum, IC 36-4-6-10. 
Sec. 2-101. - Order of business. 
    The business of the common council shall be taken up in the following order, unless by a two-thirds vote the council shall suspend this rule: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Pledge of allegiance to flag. 
(3)  Roll call. 
(4)  Approval of minutes. 
(5)  Petitions, communications, remonstrances, and memorials. 
(6)  Report from special committees. 
(7)  Ordinances on first reading. 
(8)  Resolutions. 
(9)  Ordinances on second reading and public hearing. 
(10)  Privilege of the floor (members of the public to speak only on nonagenda items for such period of time as is allowed by the presiding officer). 
(11)  Unfinished business. 
(12)  New business. 
(13)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 6; Code 1985, § 30.21; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2214, 10-2-1978; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3563, 1-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-102. - Rules of council. 
    The following rules shall constitute the rules of council: 
(1)  Rule 1. When any member of the council or the public is about to speak on or deliver any matter to the council, he shall respectfully address himself to the chair, and on being recognized shall confine himself to the question before the council, avoiding personalities. 
(2)  Rule 2. When two or more persons arise at once, the chair shall name the member entitled to speak. 
(3)  Rule 3. If any councilmember, in speaking or otherwise, transgresses the rules of the council, the presiding officer shall, or any member may, call him to order. The member so called to order, or another councilmember, may appeal, and the council shall, if appealed to, decide the case without debate. If the decision is in favor of the member called to order, he may proceed, but not otherwise. If the case requires it, a member so called to order may, after an appeal that fails, be liable to censure or other such punishment as the council may impose. 
(4)  Rule 4. If a member is called to order for words spoken in debate, the member calling him to order shall indicate the words excepted to, and they shall be taken down in writing at the clerk's desk and read aloud to the council. 
(5)  Rule 5. A member may speak as often on the same question as necessary, but the mover of a proposition shall in any case be entitled to close the debate. 
(6)  Rule 6. While the chair is putting the question or addressing the council, no member shall walk out of the chamber. When a member is speaking, no member shall walk between such member and the chair. 
(7)  Rule 7. No member shall be recognized to speak unless in his seat, nor permitted to speak until recognized by the chair. 
(8)  Rule 8. Every motion made by the council and entertained by the chair shall be reduced to writing on the demand of the chair or any member, and shall be entered on the minutes with the name of the member making it, unless withdrawn at the same meeting. 
(9)  Rule 9. When a motion has been made, the chair shall state it, or, if in writing, cause it to be read aloud by the clerk before debate of the motion; it shall then be in possession of the council, but may be withdrawn at any time before a decision or amendment. 
(10)  Rule 10. When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received but to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous question (which motions shall be decided without debate), to postpone to a day certain, to refer or to amend, or to postpone indefinitely; which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are here listed. 
(11)  Rule 11. The motion to adjourn and the motion to fix a time to which the council shall adjourn shall always be in order, the latter motion taking precedence over the former. 
(12)  Rule 12. The motion to lay an amendment on the table shall not affect the subject which it is proposed to amend. 
(13)  Rule 13. The previous question shall be put in this form: "Are you ready for the question?" It shall be admitted when demanded by a majority of the members present, and its effect shall be to put an end to all debate and to bring the council to a direct vote on the motion to commit, if such motion has been made; if this motion does not prevail, then on pending amendments, and then on the main question. 
(14)  Rule 14. The motion to postpone to a day certain can be amended by altering the time or day. 
(15)  Rule 15. The motion to refer may be amended by altering the committee or by giving instructions. 
(16)  Rule 16. A motion to amend and motions to amend amendments shall be in order, and it shall also be in order to offer a further amendment by way of a substitute, to which one amendment or more may be offered, but either may be withdrawn before amendment or decision is reached thereon. 
(17)  Rule 17. No motion or proposition postponed indefinitely shall be taken up again at the same or next succeeding regular meeting. 
(18)  Rule 18. A question shall be divided on the demand of any member, without requiring an amendment, if it includes two or more distinct propositions. 
(19)  Rule 19. When a motion has been made and carried or lost, it shall be in order for any member of the majority at the same meeting or the succeeding regular meeting to move for the reconsideration thereof, and such motion shall take precedence over all other motions except a motion to adjourn, and debate thereon shall be in order where the main question is debatable, but not otherwise. 
(20)  Rule 20. Where a motion to reconsider has been passed in the affirmative, the question immediately becomes the business of the council. 
(21)  Rule 21. A motion to reconsider a vote may be tabled, but a motion to reconsider a vote laying a motion to reconsider on the table shall not be in order. 
(22)  Rule 22. When a resolution is offered or a report or other matter presented, the presiding officer may take the reception thereof for granted unless objection is made, in which instance a formal motion shall be required. 
(23)  Rule 23. Appeals, questions of order, objection to the consideration of a question, the reading of papers, leave to withdraw a motion, and suspension of the rules are questions which shall take precedence over and be decided before the questions giving rise to them, which several questions cannot be amended; all questions of order that may arise pending a question that is not debatable must be decided without debate. 
(24)  Rule 24. Ordinances and resolutions shall be numbered in the order as they are passed, but dispatched in order as they are introduced, unless the council shall direct otherwise. 
(25)  Rule 25. Every ordinance shall be read two times before its passage. 
(26)  Rule 26. The first reading of an ordinance shall be by title only, unless any member of the council requests that the ordinance be read in full. 
(27)  Rule 27. No ordinance shall be passed on the same day, or at the same meeting that it is introduced, except by unanimous consent, and then only in case there are present and voting at least two-thirds of all the members of the council, as is set forth in IC 36-4-6-13. 
(28)  Rule 28. The second reading of the ordinance and reading of resolutions shall be by title only. After the completion of the reading of the title, the reader shall briefly state the subject matter or contents of the ordinance or resolution unless the subject matter or contents is evident from the reading of the title itself. 
(29)  Rule 29. Following the second reading, the ordinance shall be ready for the committee report, public hearing, and action by the council. Following the reading of resolutions, they shall be ready for public hearing and action by the council. Prior to taking a vote on the proposed ordinance or resolution, the presiding officer shall request that anyone who wishes to speak in favor of or against the proposed ordinance or resolution shall state his name and address for the record. 
(30)  Rule 30. No proposition to rescind or change any standing rule or order of the council shall be passed at the same meeting it is submitted; nor shall any proposition having the force and effect of a bylaw or a standing rule or order relating to the governing of the council or the duties of any of the city officers be passed except in the form of an ordinance, and according to the forms prescribed for the passage of ordinances. 
(31)  Rule 31. The rules and practices of Roberts Rules of Order Revised, 1915 (Fourth) Edition, shall govern the council in all cases to which they are applicable and not inconsistent with the standing rules and orders of the council. 
(32)  Rule 32. All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be filed with the clerk, and must be submitted to each and every councilmember at least 72 hours prior to the next regular meeting of the common council if they are to be considered at that meeting. An exception to this rule can be made by a majority of the members present at the meeting. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 9; Code 1985, § 30.22; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2214, 10-2-1978; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981; Ord. No. 3260, 4-17-1989) 
State Law reference- Council's authority to adopt rules of governance, IC 36-4-6-6(3); passage of ordinance on day of introduction, IC 36-4-6-13. 
Sec. 2-103. - Passage of ordinances, resolutions, and orders. 
(a)  Every ordinance, order, or resolution of the common council shall immediately upon its passage, enrollment, attestation, and signature by the clerk be presented by the clerk to the mayor, and a record of the time of such presentation made by the clerk. 
(b)  If the mayor approves the ordinance, order, or resolution, he shall enter his approval thereon and sign the same; the ordinance, order, or resolution shall then become a law unless the council exercises its right to reconsider under rule 19, as stated in section 2-103. If the mayor does not approve the ordinance, order, or resolution, he shall return it to the clerk, with his objections in writing, within ten days after receiving it, and the clerk shall present it to the common council at its next meeting. 
(c)  If the mayor fails to discharge his duty by approving or disapproving the ordinance, order, or resolution within the time allowed, such failure shall be deemed a veto of the council's action; in a written case of disapproval by the mayor, the ordinance, order, or resolution shall not become a law unless at its next regular or special meeting, after the time allowed for the mayor's action, the council shall again pass the same by a two-thirds vote of all the members. 
(d)  All ordinances shall within a reasonable time after their approval by the mayor, or their passage over his veto, be recorded in a book kept by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. I, § 10; Code 1985, § 30.23; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 1534, 11-3-1969; Ord. No. 2493, 12-21-1981) 
State Law reference- Approval, veto by city executive, IC 36-4-6-16; presentment of ordinances to city executive, IC 36-4-6-15. 
Sec. 2-104. - Seating of councilmembers. 
    The presiding officer shall, within 60 days from the date of his election as presiding officer, assign each councilperson to a specific seat beginning with the seat farthest to the right of the presiding officer. The seating assignment shall remain in effect for the year in which the assignment is made. 
(Code 1985, § 30.24; Ord. No. 3260, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3563, 1-6-1992) 
Sec. 2-105. - Mayor's annual address to common council. 
    The mayor shall annually address the common council at its second regularly scheduled meeting each February. The mayor shall provide a statement of finances and the general condition of the city in said annual address. 
(Code 1985, § 30.25; Ord. No. 3260, 4-17-1989) 
Secs. 2-106-2-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-124. - District boundaries. 
    The councilmanic districts are set by the common council as prescribed by state law following each decennial census. Current maps are on file and available for public viewing in the office of the city clerk and the county voter's registration office. 
(Code 1968, tit. 20, art. II; Code 1985, § 30.30; Ord. No. 751, 12-18-1933; Ord. No. 1882, 12-19-1974; Ord. No. 2581, 12-20-1982; Ord. No. 90-86, 10-15-1990; Ord. No. 3427, 10-15-1990; Ord. No. 3655, 12-21-1992; Ord. No. 3880, 10-3-1994; Ord. No. 4720, 10-22-2002; Ord. No. 4745, 2-18-2003; Ord. No. 5010, §§ 1, 2, 1-3-2006; Ord. No. 5366, § 1, 12-3-2012) 
State Law reference- Councilmanic districts in second class cities, IC 36-4-6-3. 
Secs. 2-125-2-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY OFFICIALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Compensation of city officers, IC 36-4-7-2, 36-4-7-3. 

Sec. 2-147. - Bonds. 
    In accordance with state law, all employees, commission members, board members, and persons acting on behalf of the city who handle, have custody or maintain records of money, securities or other property; department and division heads; assistant department and division heads; and peace officers except the city controller, city clerk, weights and measures inspector and utility manager shall be covered by a blanket bond in the amount of $25,000.00 for faithful performance of duty. The official bonds of the following officials shall be fixed at the following amounts: 
(1)  Controller ..... $300,000.00 
(2)  City clerk ..... 15,000.00 
(3)  City utility manager ..... 300,000.00 
(4)  Weights and measures inspector ..... 300,000.00 
(Code 1968, tit. 90, § 1; Code 1985, § 31.01; Ord. No. 903, 1-4-1932; Ord. No. 3765, 10-18-1993) 
State Law reference- Bond requirements for local government officials, IC 5-4-1-18. 
Sec. 2-148. - Deputy mayor. 
(a)  Pursuant to state law, there is hereby established the position of deputy mayor. The mayor may appoint any city official or city employee to this position unless prohibited by law. Such appointment should be in writing and notice of the appointment shall be given to the common council. Any person serving as deputy mayor shall do so at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  The deputy mayor shall hold no powers except those that person holds through regular city employment or other official capacity with the city, unless: 
(1)  The mayor designates the deputy mayor as acting executive under the authority of state law; 
(2)  Under the procedures of state law, the circuit court of the county in which the city is located decides the mayor is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, thereby making the deputy mayor acting city executive; or 
(3)  The office of the mayor becomes vacant under the provisions of state law. 
If any of these events occur, the deputy mayor shall have all powers of the office of the mayor for such period of time provided for by statute. 
(Code 1985, § 31.10; Ord. No. 2690, 6-6-1984) 
State Law reference- Position of deputy mayor established, IC 36-4-9-7; absence or inability of mayor, IC 36-4-5-8; vacancy in office of mayor, IC 36-4-5-9. 
Secs. 2-149-2-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-180. - Executive departments of city. 
    The executive departments of the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Building department. 
(2)  Central motor pool. 
(3)  Central services. 
(4)  Code enforcement department. 
(5)  Department of community development. 
(6)  Engineering department. 
(7)  Finance department. 
(8)  Fire and emergency medical service department. 
(9)  Human resources department. 
(10)  Information technology department. 
(11)  Law department. 
(12)  Parks and recreation department. 
(13)  Planning department. 
(14)  Police department. 
(15)  Sewer maintenance department. 
(16)  Street department. 
(Code 1985, § 32.001; Ord. No. 2635, 8-16-1983; Ord. No. 2681, 5-9-1984; Ord. No. 2682, 5-7-1984; Ord. No. 3879, 10-3-1994; Ord. No. 4482, 5-1-2000; Ord. No. 4656, 12-18-2001; Ord. No. 5298, § 1, 1-3-2011) 
Secs. 2-181-2-198. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY 

Sec. 2-199. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety shall perform all the powers and duties as prescribed by the statutes of this state. 
(b)  The control and operation of all municipally owned and leased utilities shall be vested in the board of public works and safety, as provided by statute. 
(Code 1968, tit. 80, § 1; Code 1985, § 32.010; Ord. No. 761, 4-2-1934; Ord. No. 2580, 11-20-1982) 
State Law reference- Establishment of board, IC 36-4-9-5; mayor's appointment of board members, IC 36-4-9-6(c). 
Secs. 2-200-2-221. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5201, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, repealed div. 3, §§ 2-222 and 2-223, which pertained to establishing the "Mishawaka Commission on the Status of Women" and powers and duties, and derived from Code 1985; § 32.015; Ord. No. 1957, adopted April 19, 1976; and Ord. No. 4575, adopted April 2, 2001. 

Secs. 2-222-2-254. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- General park and recreation law, IC 36-10-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-255. - Establishment. 
    There is established a board of parks and recreation which has authority over the department of parks and recreation; which board is composed of a superintendent, and such other personnel as the board shall determine. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, § 1; Code 1985, § 32.040; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
Sec. 2-256. - Members; terms. 
(a)  The board of parks and recreation shall be composed of four regular members and a member appointed by the Board of School Trustees, School City of Mishawaka, and a member appointed by the Library Board, Penn Harris Public Library, both ex officio. The mayor shall select the regular members on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and recreation, but not more than two members shall be of the same political party. The ex officio members shall be selected by their respective boards and shall have full member privileges. 
(b)  Each appointment shall be for a four-year term. All terms shall expire on the first Monday of January, but an appointee shall continue in office until his successor is appointed. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, §§ 2, 3; Code 1985, § 32.041; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
State Law reference- Composition of board, IC 36-10-3-4; terms, IC 36-10-3-5. 
Sec. 2-257. - Officers. 
    At its first regular meeting in each year, the board of parks and recreation shall elect a president and a vice-president. The vice-president shall have authority to act as the president of the board during the absence or disability of the president. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, § 4; Code 1985, § 32.042; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
State Law reference- Election of officers, IC 36-10-3-8. 
Sec. 2-258. - Advisory council; special committees. 
    The board of parks and recreation may create an advisory council and special committees composed of citizens interested in the problem of parks and recreation in accordance with IC 36-10-3-17. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, § 6; Code 1985, § 32.043; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
Sec. 2-259. - Budget. 
(a)  The board of parks and recreation shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner as other departments of the city government. 
(b)  The board may accept gifts, donations, and subsidies for park and recreation purposes. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, § 7; Code 1985, § 32.044; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
State Law reference- Budget; similar provisions, IC 36-10-3-31; gifts, donations, and subsidies, IC 36-10-3-18. 
Sec. 2-260. - Powers and duties. 
    The board of parks and recreation shall have the general power to perform all acts necessary to acquire and develop sites and facilities to conduct such programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation functions, including the powers and duties listed in IC 36-10-3-10 and IC 36-10-3-11. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. I, § 5; Code 1985, § 32.045; Ord. No. 1406, 7-17-1967) 
Sec. 2-261. - Special operating and capital fund within park and recreation department budget. 
(a)  Two funds are established pursuant to IC 36-10-3-22 to be called the following: 
(1)  The Mishawaka Park and Recreation Department Special Nonreverting Operating Fund; and 
(2)  The Mishawaka Park and Recreation Department Special Nonreverting Capital Fund. 
The funds are to be used as herein specified. 
(b)  Reasonable fees as may be charged by the park and recreation department for the purpose of providing particular activities may be deposited in either of the funds, as directed by the board. 
(c)  Expenditures may be made from the parks and recreation special nonreverting operating fund and the special nonreverting capital fund with appropriation from the common council for the purpose of paying some operating and capital expenses at the city pools and golf course. 
(d)  The improvement fees, as set forth from time to time by the common council, now in use by the department of parks and recreation are to be deposited into either the parks and recreation special nonreverting operating fund or the park and recreation special nonreverting capital fund, as directed by the board. 
(Code 1985, § 32.046; Ord. No. 3592, 5-4-1992; Ord. No. 3653, 12-21-1992; Ord. No. 3682, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3914, 1995; Ord. No. 4037, 4-15-1996; Ord. No. 4125, 12-2-1996; Ord. No. 4251, 2-17-1998; Ord. No. 4473, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 5147, § 1, 3-6-2008) 
Secs. 2-262-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-286. - Created. 
    There is created a department of economic development for the city. The department shall be under the control of a board of five members to be known as "The Mishawaka Economic Development Commission," whom shall be appointed pursuant to the provisions of the IC 36-7-12-4. In accordance with the Act, the members shall be appointed as follows: three shall be appointed by the mayor of the city, one shall be appointed by the county council of St. Joseph County, Indiana, and one shall be appointed by the common council. 
(Code 1968, tit. 300, § 1; Code 1985, § 32.055; Ord. No. 1334, 7-20-1965; Ord. No. 5570 , § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Secs. 2-287-2-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-306. - Board of public works and safety to have jurisdiction and control. 
    The board of public works and safety shall have jurisdiction and control over all matters and property relating to or connected with the fire department. 
(Code 1985, § 32.065) 
Sec. 2-307. - Departmental organization. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department and other offices, positions, ranks, and bureaus hereafter enumerated or which may be authorized from time to time by the board of public works and safety or the common council. 
(Code 1985, § 32.066) 
Sec. 2-308. - Firefighter's pension fund. 
(a)  1937 Fund. There is created and established for the city a firefighter's pension fund and a board of trustees of the firefighter's pension fund by the common council pursuant to IC 36-8-7-1 et seq. 
(1)  All of the provisions, conditions, and terms of IC 36-8-7-1 et seq., are adopted as part of this section, the same as if they were fully set forth herein, and the board of trustees elected pursuant thereto shall have and retain all of the rights and powers in the legislative act defined. 
(2)  It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of this section to adopt in full all of the provisions of IC 36-8-7-1 et seq., for the establishment, control, and management of the firefighter's pension fund of the city, and to provide funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions and purposes of IC 36-8-7-1 et seq. 
(3)  Upon the death of a disabled, retired, or discharged member of the fire department who was receiving or entitled to receive a pension at the time of his death, or upon the death of a member in active service at the time of his death, the board of trustees shall authorize and pay out of the fund at least $9,000.00 as death benefits. The money shall be paid to the legal representative of the deceased member and is in addition to other benefits paid to a member or survivor under this section. 
(b)  1977 Fund. There is created and established for the city, by the common council pursuant to IC 36-8-8-1 et seq., a police officers' and firefighters' disability fund. 
(1)  All of the provisions, conditions, and terms of IC 36-8-8-1 et seq., are adopted as part of this section, the same as if it were fully set forth herein. 
(2)  It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of this section to adopt in full all of the provisions of IC 36-8-8-1 et seq., for the establishment, control, and management of the police officers' and firefighters' disability fund of the city, and to provide funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions and purposes of IC 36-8-8-1 et seq. 
(3)  Effective January 1, 1990, the heirs or estate of a fund member is entitled to receive at least $9,000.00 upon the fund member's death. 
(Code 1968, tit. 160, art. III; Code 1985, § 32.067; Ord. No. 926, 5-7-1945; Ord. No. 2139, 5-1-1978; Ord. No. 3180, 7-19-1988; Ord. No. 3875, 9-19-1994) 
State Law reference- 1937 Firefights' Pension Fund, IC 36-8-7-1 et seq.; 1977 Police Officers' and Firefighters' Pension and Disability Fund, IC 36-8-8-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-309-2-334. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PLAN COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-335. - Created. 
    There is created a city plan commission. 
(Code 1968, tit. 360, § 1; Code 1985, § 32.075; Ord. No. 546, 1-21-1924) 
State Law reference- Establishment of commission, IC 36-7-4-200 et seq. 
Sec. 2-336. - Members. 
(a)  The city plan commission shall consist of nine members, five of whom shall be citizens of the city who shall be qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development of a city plan and who shall hold no other office in the city government. One member shall be a member of the common council; one member shall be a member of the board of parks and recreation; one member shall be appointed by the board of public works and safety; and one member shall be the city engineer or a qualified assistant. 
(b)  The five citizen members of the commission mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall be appointed by the mayor, of whom no more than three may be of the same political party. Each commissioner so appointed shall hold office for a term of four years from and after January 1 of the year of his appointment. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy existing on the commission caused by resignation, death, or otherwise of a citizen member thereof, the mayor shall appoint a commissioner for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  The members of the commission from the common council shall be selected by the common council. The member of the commission from the board of parks and recreation shall be selected by the board. 
(Code 1968, tit. 360, §§ 2, 3; Code 1985, § 32.076; Ord. No. 546, 1-22-1924) 
State Law reference- Membership of plan commission, IC 36-7-4-207(a); qualifications of citizen members, IC 36-7-4-216; terms, IC 36-7-4-217, 36-7-4-218; vacancies, IC 36-7-4-220. 
Secs. 2-337-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-361. - Board of public works and safety to have jurisdiction and control. 
    The board of public works and safety shall have jurisdiction and control over all matters and property relating to or connected with the police department. 
(Code 1985, § 32.085) 
Sec. 2-362. - Departmental organization. 
    The police department shall consist of a chief of the police department and other offices, positions, ranks, and bureaus hereafter enumerated or which may be authorized from time to time by the board of public works and safety or the common council. 
(Code 1985, § 32.086) 
Sec. 2-363. - Police pension fund. 
(a)  1925 Fund. The police pension fund and its board of trustees duly elected to serve as such for the fund, as created and established pursuant to IC 36-8-6-1 et seq., on January 27, 1928, March 14, 1928, and March 21, 1928, together with all rules, regulations, and bylaws, is hereby adopted and affirmed. 
(1)  This fund shall be used to pay funeral benefits to the heirs or estate of an active or a retired member of the police department who has died from any cause, in an amount fixed by ordinance, but at least $9,000.00 for a member who dies after December 31, 1998. 
(2)  This section applies to a member who dies in the line of duty after August 31, 1982. 
(3)  The surviving spouse is entitled to a monthly benefit during the spouse's lifetime, equal to the benefit to which the member would have been entitled on the date of the member's death, but no less than 50 percent of the monthly wage received by a first-class patrol officer. 
(4)  A payment shall also be made to each child of a deceased member less than 18 years of age, in an amount fixed by ordinance, but at least an amount equal to 20 percent of the monthly pay of a first-class patrolman per amount to each child, whichever period is longer: 
a.  Until the child becomes 18 years of age; 
b.  Until the child becomes 23 years of age if the child is enrolled in and regularly attending a secondary school or is a fulltime student at an accredited college or university; or 
c.  During the entire period of the child's physical or mental disability. 
(5)  If a deceased member leaves no surviving spouse and no child who qualifies for benefits under subsection (a)(4) of this section but does leave a dependent parent, an amount equal to 20 percent of the monthly pay of a first-class patrolman per month from the time of the member's death shall be paid to the dependent parent during his dependency. When both parents survive, the total amount is still 20 percent, to be paid to them jointly. In all cases of payment to a dependent relative of a deceased member, the board is the final judge of the question of necessity and dependency and of the amount to be paid. The board may also reduce or terminate temporarily or permanently a payment to a dependent relative of a deceased member when it determines that the condition of the fund or other circumstances make this action necessary. 
(6)  If the salary of a first-class patrolman is increased or decreased, the pension payable under this section shall be proportionately increased or decreased; however, the monthly pension payable to a member or survivor may not be reduced below the amount of the first full monthly pension received by that person. 
(7)  For purposes of this subsection (a), the term "dies in the line of duty" means death that occurs as a direct result of personal injury or illness resulting from any action that the member in the member's capacity as a police officer: 
a.  Is obligated or authorized by rule, regulation, condition of employment or service, or law to perform; or 
b.  Performs in the course of controlling or reducing crime or enforcing the criminal law. 
(b)  1977 Fund. There is hereby created and established for the city a police officers' and firefighters' disability fund pursuant to IC 36-8-8-1 et seq. All disability, survivor, and death benefits shall be as set forth in IC 36-8-8-1 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 32.087) 
State Law reference- 1925 Police Pension Fund, IC 36-8-6-1 et seq.; 1977 Police Officers' and Firefighters' Pension and Disability Fund, IC 36-8-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-364. - Police reserve officers. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety may appoint police reserve officers to be employed at the police department and who shall report to the police chief and appropriate assistant chief. 
(b)  The board of public works and safety shall, with assistance of the police chief and mayor, develop the rules and authority for police reserve officers, subject to the provisions of IC 36-8-3-20. 
(Code 1985, § 32.088; Ord. No. 4786, 9-2-2003) 
State Law reference- Police reserve officers, IC 36-8-3-20. 
Secs. 2-365-2-386. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REDEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-387. - Created. 
    The department of redevelopment is created and established with full power and authority to act as provided by law. 
(Code 1968, tit. 540, § 1; Code 1985, § 32.095; Ord. No. 1166, 2-3-1958) 
State Law reference- Redevelopment department, IC 36-7-14-3. 
Secs. 2-388-2-417. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - OTHER DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-418. - Board of zoning appeals. 
    For provisions concerning the board of zoning appeals, see section 137-42; see also IC 36-7-4-900 et seq. 
(Code 1985, § 32.100) 
Sec. 2-419. - Traffic commission. 
(a)  There is established a traffic commission to serve without compensation. The commission shall consist of the city traffic engineer, the chief of police, and not less than two nor more than four other members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and may be removed by him. A member of the common council shall be appointed by the president of the common council to serve as a member of the traffic commission and may be removed by the president of the common council. The chairman of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and may be removed by him. The city attorney or his representative and the city planner shall serve as advisors to the commission but shall not be members of the commission. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic commission and to this end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to coordinate traffic activities, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and to recommend to the common council and to the city traffic engineer, the chief of the traffic division, and other city officials, ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. II, § 12; Code 1985, § 32.109, § 70.12; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2575, 12-6-1982) 
Sec. 2-420. - Animal control commission. 
(a)  Authority. The animal control commission is established and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To report to or be responsible to the mayor and the common council. 
(2)  To recommend proposed policies, principles, standards, and regulations for the control and humane treatment of all animals in the city. 
(3)  To review and to make recommendations to the mayor and common council on improving the enforcement of the terms of chapter 14, animals and as to other ordinances necessary for the care and treatment of all animals under chapter 14, animals. 
(4)  To review the performance of any city agencies or agency hired by the city in matters related to the enforcement of chapter 14, animals. 
(5)  To receive reports involving animal control from the police department, code enforcement department, street department, or other agency authorized to carry out the provisions of chapter 14, animals. 
(6)  To submit to the mayor and the common council periodic written reports of its activities and recommendations. 
(7)  To receive complaints regarding alleged animal control violations. 
(8)  To hear appeals within ten working days after an appeal has been filed on: 
a.  Whether an animal is a dangerous animal, as defined in this chapter; or 
b.  Whether a person has provoked an animal which has resulted in a violation of chapter 14, animals. 
Such determination shall be in writing with the original copy being maintained by the animal control agency, and copies being sent to the animal's owner and the department of code enforcement of the city. 
(9)  To call hearings to discuss any animal issue within the city. 
(10)  To make determinations, following any hearings, that it feels are in the best interests of the animals and citizens of the city. 
(b)  Membership and quorum of commission. 
(1)  Composition and quorum. The animal control commission shall be composed of three voting members and one alternate member who shall be appointed. Two members shall be appointed by the common council, one member shall be appointed by the mayor, and the alternate shall be appointed by the mayor. The presence of three members or two members and one alternate shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. The chief of police, or his designee and the city attorney or his designee shall also be nonvoting advisory members of the commission. 
(2)  Qualifications. 
a.  One member shall be a licensed veterinarian appointed by the council; 
b.  One member shall be an owner, operator, or employee of a kennel, cattery, zoological park, or commercial animal establishment, appointed by the council; 
c.  One member shall be an employee from the department of code enforcement appointed by the mayor; and 
d.  One alternate member shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be an active member of an animal welfare organization, including, but not limited to, the humane society or pet refuge, or shall have the qualifications set forth in subsection (b)(2)a or b of this section. 
(c)  Terms of members. The members of the commission shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority, and each member shall serve until a qualified successor is duly appointed. All appointments shall be made for three-year terms; however, the initial appointments shall serve as follows: the member appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(2)a of this section shall serve for one year; the member appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(2)b of this section shall serve for two years; and the member and alternate member appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(2)c and d of this section shall serve for three years. 
(d)  Meetings, agenda, and minutes of the commission. 
(1)  The commission shall meet on a yearly basis each calendar year. At the first meeting of each year, it shall elect a chairperson and other officers deemed necessary. Emergency meetings may also be called by the chairperson or vice-chairperson at any time, with notice being provided as required by applicable state law. 
(2)  Copies of all commission agendas shall be sent to the president of the board of public works and safety, the common council, the department of code enforcement, and the mayor's office upon the call of a commission meeting. 
(3)  Minutes of all commission meetings shall be maintained and copies of minutes shall be sent, within ten days following such meeting, to the president of the board of public works and safety, the common council, the department of code enforcement, and the mayor's office upon the call of a commission meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 91.02; Ord. No. 4152, 4-7-1997; Ord. No. 4969, § 1(exh. A), 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 2-421. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Established; members; vacancies. There is hereby established the city historic preservation commission. The commission shall consist of nine voting members. One voting member shall be appointed from the membership of the common council. The other eight voting members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the common council. A vacancy shall be filled within 90 days for the duration of the term of the member who is being replaced. 
(b)  Qualifications for membership. All members shall be residents of the city who are interested in the preservation and development of historic and conservation areas. The members of the commission should include, to the extent that those professionals are available to the community, professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, preservation planning, archaeology or other disciplines related to historic preservation, such as urban planning, American studies, art history, American civilization, cultural geography, cultural anthropology or other city residents who have an interest, experience or background in historic preservation. 
(c)  Appointment of members. The mayor may, with the approval of the common council, appoint nonvoting advisory members as the common council considers appropriate. 
(d)  Administrative staff. The staff of the department of city planning shall serve as the administrative staff for the commission. The staff shall provide assistance to the commission, act as the commission secretary, and issue certificates of appropriateness after approval has been made by the commission. 
(e)  Compensation. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be paid for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of its duty, if funds are available within the civil city budget. 
(f)  Election of chairman and vice-chairman; rules and bylaws; meetings open to the public. The commission shall elect from its voting membership a chairperson and vice chairperson, who shall serve for one year and who may be reelected. The commission shall adopt bylaws and rules for the transaction of its business which are consistent with the provisions of this section and chapter 125 pertaining to historic preservation. The bylaws and rules shall include the time and place of regular meetings and a procedure for the calling of special meetings. Meetings of the commission must be open to the public, in accordance with the Open Door Law, and a public record shall be kept of resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the commission. 
(g)  Meetings. The commission shall hold meetings, at least once per month, unless there is no business pending. 
(h)  Technical, administrative and clerical assistance; legal council. Each official of the city who has responsibility for building inspection, building permits, planning or zoning shall provide such technical, administrative and clerical assistance as may be required by the commission. The attorney for the city is the attorney for the commission; however, the commission may employ other legal counsel authorized to practice law in the state if it considers it to be necessary or desirable. 
(i)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The commission shall be concerned with those elements of development, redevelopment, rehabilitation and preservation that affect visual quality in an historic or conservation district. The commission may not consider details of design, interior arrangements, or building features, if those details, arrangements, or features are not subject to public view, and may not make any requirement except for the purpose of preventing development, alteration or demolition in the historic district or conservation district obviously incongruous with the historic district and conservation district. 
(2)  The commission shall conduct an historic survey to identify historic buildings, structures and sites located within the city; however, neither the survey nor any other action of the commission shall affect any property which is located outside the corporate limits of the city. The commission shall update the historic survey as needed. 
(3)  Based on its survey, the commission shall submit to the common council a map describing the boundaries of historic districts or conservation districts. A district shall contain one or more buildings, structures, or sites. The map may be divided by district into primary and secondary areas. 
(4)  Owners of property, in fee simple, wishing to establish an historic district or conservation district which includes their property, may petition the commission to consider drawing and submitting a map of said property to the common council for approval. The commission may establish in its rules criteria to be met before it considers a petition. 
(5)  The commission shall also classify and designate on the map all buildings, structures and sites within each historic district described on the map. Buildings, structures and sites shall be classified as historic or nonhistoric in the manner set forth in subsections (j) and (k) of this section. 
(6)  The commission shall promote a public interest in historic preservation by initiating and carrying on a public relations and community education program. 
(7)  The historic preservation commission may: 
a.  Acquire by purchase, gift, grant, bequest, devise, or lease any real or personal property, including easements, that is appropriate for carrying out the purposes of the commission; 
b.  Hold title to real and personal property; and 
c.  Sell, lease, rent, or otherwise dispose of real and personal property, in accordance with state law, at a public or private sale on the terms and conditions that the commission considers best. 
(8)  Any money received by the commission shall be deposited in a special historic preservation commission fund. Before the commission expends any money, it shall follow all cash handling, purchasing and appropriation procedures of the city. 
(j)  Buildings classified as historic; further classification. Buildings, structures and sites classified as "historic" under this section must possess identified historic or architectural merit of a degree warranting their preservation. They may be further classified as: 
(1)  Outstanding; 
(2)  Notable; or 
(3)  Contributing. 
(k)  Nonhistoric buildings and structures. Nonhistoric buildings and structures are those not classified on the map as historic under subsection (i)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1985, §§ 160.04, 160.05; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Secs. 2-422-2-442. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CITY POLICIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-443. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates sections 2-468 and 2-469 upon conviction, shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-7, or elect to admit to an ordinance violation and pay the prescribed fine to the ordinance violations bureau clerk as provided in section 2-2(b). 
(b)  Any person who violates section 2-572 or any person who removes or defaces any sign posted as required herein, shall be fined subject to the provisions of section 1-7. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any person who violates section 2-572 will be asked to comply with the no-smoking policy and if such person fails to do so, he will be asked to leave the building, and if he fails to do so his status shall be that of a trespasser. Each day a violation shall continue constitutes a separate violation. 
(Code 1968, tit. 270, § 1; Code 1985, § 33.99; Ord. No. 3795, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-2006) 
Sec. 2-444. - [Internal control policy established.] 
(a)  The City of Mishawaka, Indiana hereby adopts the internal control policy attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A. 
(b)  The controller is directed to ensure that all personnel receive training concerning the internal control procedures adopted and approved herein prior to December 31, 2016. 
(c)  The City of Mishawaka, Indiana hereby adopts a materiality threshold of $2,500.00 for purposes of the internal control procedures adopted and approved herein. 
( Ord. No. 5532 , §§ 1-3, 6-20-2016; Ord. No. 5639 , §§ 1-3, 12-17-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5532 , §§ 1-3, adopted June 20, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-444 was at the discretion of the editor. Exhibit A as referenced above has not been set out, but may be inspected at the city office. 
Secs. 2-445-2-467. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 2-468. - Exhibition to police officer. 
    Every person who shall be licensed under any of the provisions of any ordinance of the city shall, when so requested, exhibit his license to any police officer or other officer of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 270, § 1; Code 1985, § 33.01; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-2006) 
Sec. 2-469. - License not transferable. 
    No license issued under any ordinance of this city shall be transferable, nor shall any person other than the person named in the license be permitted to use the license. In addition, the license shall not protect any person from incurring the penalties prescribed by ordinance of the city, except the licensee named in the license. 
(Code 1968, tit. 270, § 2; Code 1985, § 33.02; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-2006) 
Secs. 2-470-2-491. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISPOSITION OF CITY-OWNED PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-492. - Authorization to sell unwanted property. 
    Whenever the mayor or any department head determines that any personal property or real estate belonging to the city is no longer needed, a written request shall be presented to the common council for the passage of a resolution authorizing the sale of the property. 
(Code 1985, § 33.10; Ord. No. 1933, 11-17-1975) 
Sec. 2-493. - Sale procedure. 
    The procedure for sale of city property shall conform to current state law. 
(Code 1985, § 33.11) 
State Law reference- Sale, exchange, transfer, or lease of property, IC 36-1-11-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-494-2-524. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAX ABATEMENT; LEGAL ADVERTISEMENTS 

Sec. 2-525. - Petitioners seeking tax abatement. 
    All petitioners seeking tax abatement shall remit the sum of $150.00 at the time of applying for the abatement. Said sum shall be payable to the "City of Mishawaka, Indiana," is nonrefundable, and shall be used to fulfill all legal advertisement requirements of such proceedings. 
(Code 1985, § 33.20; Ord. No. 3626, 10-5-1992) 
Secs. 2-526-2-543. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT 

Sec. 2-544. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to not exclude qualified individuals with disabilities from participation in or benefiting from the services, programs or activities of the city. Also, it is the policy of the city not to discriminate against a qualified individual with a disability in its job application procedures; the hiring, advancement or discharge of employees; employee compensation; job training and other terms, conditions and privileges of employment. It is the intention of the city to comply with all applicable requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(Code 1985, § 33.30; Ord. No. 3656, 1-4-1993) 
Sec. 2-545. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  All complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination shall be submitted, in writing, to the ADA coordinator for resolution within 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless a good cause for the delay can be shown. A record of the complaint and action taken will be maintained. A decision by the ADA coordinator will be rendered within 15 working days. 
(b)  If the complaint cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant by the ADA coordinator, it will be forwarded to an ADA compliance committee, composed of representatives from elected officials, the disabled community, business or nonprofit sectors, education and the health/medical profession. 
(c)  The committee will hear such complaints in public, after adequate public notice is given, in an unbiased, objective manner. The committee will issue a written decision within 30 days of notification. 
(d)  If the complaint cannot be resolved to the complainant's satisfaction by the committee, the complaint will be heard by the common council. An open, public meeting of the governing board will precede the vote. A determination must be made within 30 days of the hearing. The decision of the governing board is final. 
(e)  Employees represented by a collective bargaining agreement may follow the grievance procedures set forth in the agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 33.31; Ord. No. 3656, 1-4-1993) 
Sec. 2-546. - Rights and protections. 
(a)  Any individual who believes he has received treatment inconsistent with the policies set forth or any other requirement of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) may take any of the following steps: 
(1)  Call the director of human resources at 219-258-1615, the municipal ADA coordinator or visit his office at city hall, room 203, to find out more about the municipal program, service, activity or employment practice that is the basis for the concern. The ADA coordinator can also provide information on how the municipality is attempting to comply with the ADA. 
(2)  File a grievance with the ADA coordinator. The ADA coordinator will provide information on the municipality's procedure for handling grievances based on ADA rights. 
(3)  Appeals of decisions or other actions of the ADA coordinator are permitted under the grievance procedures. If the ADA coordinator does not adequately respond to a grievance, to the individual's satisfaction, the grievance will be forwarded to the city's ADA compliance committee for review and appropriate action. Decisions of the compliance committee may be appealed to the common council. 
(4)  Individuals have the right to initiate private lawsuits against the city as a means for compelling municipal compliance with the requirements of the ADA. 
(5)  An individual may file a complaint with the U.S. Attorney General alleging discrimination in violation of the ADA, or an individual may file a complaint alleging a violation of the ADA employment provisions with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 
(b)  Employees represented by a collective bargaining agreement may follow the grievance procedures set forth in the agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 33.32; Ord. No. 3656, 1-4-1993) 
Secs. 2-547-2-570. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS; PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 2-571. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buildings means all enclosed areas owned, leased or operated by any department or entity of the city or the city utilities, except areas that are being used for residential purposes. 
    Enclosed means closed in by a roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
    Environmental tobacco smoke means the mixture of smoke exhaled by smokers and the smoke that comes from the burning end of a cigarette, cigar or pipe. 
    Place of public accommodation means any enclosed indoor area used by the general public, including, but not limited to, retail stores, financial institutions, department stores, banks, laundromats, restaurants, beauty shops and barbershops, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, and other commercial establishments regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission. 
    Public meeting means any meeting or assembly open to the public which is held in an enclosed building for the conduct of the affairs of, and the transaction of business by, any legislative or administrative body or agency of the city, including boards, commissions, authorities, councils, committees, subcommittees, and other subordinate groups. 
    Smoking means the act of lighting, carrying, inhaling from, or leaving a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind. 
    Theater means any enclosed facility open to the public which is primarily used for or designed for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, concert, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(Code 1985, § 33.40; Ord. No. 3795, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 2-572. - Smoking prohibited in city buildings. 
(a)  No person shall smoke or use tobacco products in any of the buildings of the city or the city utilities, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Smoking and the use of tobacco products shall be permitted in lobby areas which have exterior doors and which are separated from the interior of a building by closed doors, if such area contains a sign with letters at least two inches high that conveys the message: "Designated Smoking Area." 
(Code 1985, § 33.41; Ord. No. 3795, 12-6-1993) 
Secs. 2-573-2-594. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL POLICIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-595. - Policies established for fulltime nonseasonal employees. 
(a)  Flexible time off (FTO). 
(1)  In recognition of the need for its employees to be away from work, the city agrees to establish and accrue a bank of time off for any personal needs such as personal or family illness, extension of bereavement leave or vacations, or for any other purpose. Such bank may also be used to satisfy the five-day waiting period for longterm disability (LTD) leave described in subsection (b) of this section. Such bank will not include personal holidays, bereavement leave (unless as an extension), jury or subpoenaed witness duty, LTD leave, leave of absence, or military leave. 
(2)  FTO accrual shall begin on the first day of employment for fulltime employees and may be taken as accrued. Accruals shall be credited to each employee's account on the first day of each month for the prior month's service at the rate of one-half day per month and continue at the same rate for each month of credited service. 
(3)  FTO days will continue to accrue as long as the employee remains in paid status, subject to the limitation listed in subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
(4)  FTO days may be taken in full- or half-day increments. If becoming ill at work and leaving early, employees will be charged with one-half FTO day if leaving after mid-shift and a full FTO day if leaving before mid-shift. 
(5)  Employees are expected to plan time off, setting aside some time in their personal bank for sickness. Employees are encouraged to keep a minimum of five days in their bank at all times to provide for unexpected shortterm sickness or for the required five-day LTD waiting period described in subsection (b) of this section. If all FTO days or any other paid leave time is not available, any shortterm illness will be an excused absence, but without pay. Likewise, any longterm illness will result in a loss of pay for the five-day waiting period. The city retains the right to limit the number of excused absence occurrences as described in this subsection. 
(6)  Employees should schedule FTO time at least 24 hours in advance with the approval of a supervisor. The city recognizes that there will be times, such as days an employee or a dependent is ill or a personal emergency arises that cannot be anticipated. In such cases, it is the responsibility of the employee to inform his supervisor, as soon as possible prior to the beginning of a workday or shift, of such absence and when the employee expects to be able to return to work. 
(7)  Employees may carry over accrued but unused FTO days from year to year but in no event can they accumulate more than 25 FTO days. 
(8)  All FTO days shall be on the basis of the employee's regular base day's salary. 
(9)  The city will buy back FTO days from any employee, up to a maximum of six FTO days per year. It is the responsibility of the employee to make timely application prior to this buy-back arrangement if so desired. In any event, the city will not buy back an amount of FTO days which would reduce the employee's personal bank to less than five days, except as provided in subsection (a)(10) of this section. 
(10)  In the event a regular, fulltime employee's service to the city is terminated, including termination due to death or retirement, he shall be entitled to pay, in lieu of FTO days for days due and not yet taken, as of the date of such termination, including any FTO days carried over from prior years. 
(11)  As this section replaces part of the former section's sick leave provisions, the conversion to this FTO plan will be accomplished for each employee on January 1, 1999 by crediting each employee with a starting bank of FTO days, based on the number of sick days surrendered by that employee on that date, based on the following schedule: 
0-20 days 5 days FTO 21-40 days 6 days FTO 41-60 days 7 days FTO 61--80 days 8 days FTO 81-100 days 9 days FTO 101 + days 10 days FTO  
(b)  Longterm disability (LTD) leave. 
(1)  In recognition of the fact that employees may become disabled and may not be able to perform their normal duties due to a longterm illness or injury (whether occupational or otherwise), the city hereby establishes, beginning January 1, 1999, a longterm disability (LTD) leave program for all regular, salaried, fulltime employees, not covered by collective bargaining agreements. 
(2)  LTD leave will not begin until a five-working-day waiting period has elapsed. Employees must bridge this waiting period with any leave time available to them at the start of the leave period. 
(3)  The LTD leave period shall be for a maximum of 52 weeks. While on leave, employees will be paid all or part of their regular approved base salary, according to the following schedule: 
a.  For each complete year of service, one week LTD benefits at 100 percent of pay, to a maximum of 26 weeks, after the waiting period has expired. 
b.  Then, 67 percent of pay through the 26th week following the waiting period. 
c.  Then, 50 percent of pay through the 52nd week following the waiting period. 
d.  Then, no benefit (0 percent). 
The LTD benefit paid to an employee on LTD leave will be reduced or replaced entirely by any amount of workers' compensation or social security disability pay received by the employee, including waiting-period reimbursement. It is the employee's responsibility to make timely application for such benefits if physically possible. 
(4)  Any wage increases scheduled to occur during disability will not become effective until returning to work. Benefits, such as group medical and group life insurance, and FTO day accrual, will continue during LTD leave. 
(5)  The employee must provide medical documentation as to proof of his physical disability to qualify for LTD leave and proof of his ability to return to work following LTD leave. The city retains the right to request an independent medical examination by a physician of the city's choice. Additionally, the city may require subsequent proof of continued disability, obtained at city expense, at intervals of not less than two months during a disability period. Failure to comply with this provision on a timely basis, or failure to return to work as soon as possible may result in termination. 
(6)  No employee will be entitled to LTD leave for a disability resulting from the use of alcohol or drugs, for injury during the commission of a crime, or for disabilities occurring in the course of employment for other than the city or for remuneration through self-employment, for injury occurring while performing any outside work for remuneration or profit, or while on official leave of absence. 
(7)  If the employee returns to work and becomes disabled again within six months from the same injury or illness, the disability is considered a continuation. In this event, no new waiting period will be required. The employee will resume the LTD schedule where he left off upon returning to work. 
(8)  A new disability period, including the requirement for a waiting period, shall begin if the employee returns to work for more than six months and becomes disabled again from the same injury or illness, or returns and becomes disabled due to an unrelated injury or illness. 
(9)  An employee returning to work following LTD leave shall return to his regular work, if so released by a physician. If requested by the physician, light duty work may be arranged on a temporary basis by the city, if such light duty work is available and practical with reasonable accommodation. An employee declared by a physician to be incapable of returning to his regular work may be placed in any available job for which the employee is declared by a physician to be physically fit. The employee's rate of pay following retrogression will be the greater of the rate of pay for his new job classification, or two-thirds of his prior position's pay. In case of the latter, the employee shall remain at this rate of pay, without periodic salary increases until the rate of pay for his new classification equals or exceeds his retrogression rate of pay. 
(10)  As this section replaces part of the former section's sick leave provisions, employees on sick leave as of the effective date of this plan will continue their sick leave under the provisions of the former section until returning to work, when this section will govern any subsequent sick leave. 
(Code 1985, § 34.01; Ord. No. 4365, 12-8-1998) 
Sec. 2-596. - Administration; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Work schedule. The mayor will set the work schedule for all city employees. The board of public works and safety will set the work schedule for city utilities employees. 
(b)  Holidays established. The mayor will establish the holidays to be observed for each year by December 1 of the preceding year for city employees. The board of public works and safety will establish the holidays to be observed for each year by December 1 of the preceding year for city utilities employees. 
(c)  Enactment of rules and regulations. Rules and regulations may be enacted by the mayor at any time including procedures and recordkeeping requirements for all city employees. Rules and regulations may be enacted by the board of public works and safety at any time including procedures and recordkeeping requirements for city utilities employees. 
(Code 1985, § 34.02; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-597. - Medical insurance. 
    Medical insurance is offered to all fulltime nonseasonal employees, all elected officials, city sealer, and members of the legal staff. Details of the current coverage are available in the controller's office. 
(Code 1985, § 34.03; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 4181, 7-7-1997; Ord. No. 4926, § 1(34.03), 2-24-2005) 
Sec. 2-598. - Vacation. 
(a)  Vacation is to be awarded January 1 on the following schedule on a calendar year basis: 
Working Days Hiring date to December 31 (first year) 0 1 year but less than 2 days earned up to 10 2 years but less than 5 years 10 5 years but less than 12 years 15 12 years but less than 17 years 20 17 years or more 25  
(b)  The first year is defined as that period of time from the date of hire to December 31 of the same year. When determining the number of years of service for vacation purposes, date of hire to December 31 of the first year will count as one full year. On January 1 following the first year, one working day of vacation will be awarded for each month worked in the prior year, with a maximum of ten. 
(c)  No paid vacation will be allowed from date of hire to December 31 of the same year. 
(d)  If an employee following previous policies receives more vacation than is provided for herein, that employee will not lose vacation time, but shall not receive any additional vacation time until the employee's service time catches up with the vacation schedule provided herein. Employees who are converting vacation schedule calculations from an anniversary date to a calendar year basis shall be entitled to appropriate transitional adjustments calculated by the city controller. 
(e)  All years are for continuous uninterrupted employment. 
(f)  Vacation will not accrue from year to year. 
(g)  At termination, only vacation that could be taken will be paid. No reimbursement will be made for vacation not yet awarded for the following year. 
(h)  Vacation schedules are subject to prior approval of the employee's department head. 
(Code 1985, § 34.04; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 4926, § 2, 2-24-2005) 
Sec. 2-599. - Military leave. 
(a)  Covered employees. 
(1)  The terms of employment policies embodied within this section apply to all regular fulltime city employees and sworn officers called to active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States or Indiana National Guard for service related to the deployment of troops upon order of the governor or president. 
(2)  Each covered employee shall be considered as remaining in the employ of the city or city utilities in an inactive status while on active duty related to an ordered deployment of troops. Each covered employee shall continue in such inactive status until he returns to active employment with the city. 
(3)  Each covered employee assigned to active military duty shall be responsible to notify the city, in writing, of each change in military status (including, but not limited to, wage changes, promotions, or active-duty status changes), within 48 hours of the change, or as soon as reasonably possible under the circumstances. 
(4)  Each covered employee must notify the city's human resources department of his intention regarding return to active employment with the city on the required forms available from human resources. Such reapplication must occur within 90 days after such time as he is released from active duty assignment, honorably discharged from such service or released from hospitalization continuing after discharge. The employee shall file his final active military pay stub and the final military pay grid with his form for reapplication. 
(5)  Following reapplication, each covered employee, if still qualified to perform the duties of the position he held immediately prior to being called to military duty, shall be restored to such position or to a position of like seniority, status, and pay. If any covered employee is not qualified to perform the duties of the position he held immediately prior to being called to military duty, by reason of disability sustained during such service, but is qualified to perform the duties of any other position in the employ of the city, he shall be offered employment and, if such covered employee so requests, shall be employed in such other position the duties of which the covered employee is qualified to perform as will provide him like seniority, status and pay, or the nearest approximation thereof consistent with the circumstances in his case. 
(b)  Wages and benefits. 
(1)  Each covered employee shall receive paid leave for the number of working days between the last day of active employment with the city and the first day of military duty not to exceed 30 calendar days. This paid leave will be paid in regularly-scheduled, biweekly paychecks unless other arrangements are made with the board of public works and safety. 
(2)  Each covered employee shall be allowed to elect, in writing, to receive compensation at his current rate of pay for all unused leave days available on his last day of active employment with the city before reporting to active military duty. 
(3)  Beginning with the first day of active military pay and ending with the final day of active military pay, each covered employee shall receive a regular biweekly paycheck from the city in an amount equal to the difference between his current gross city wage and his gross military wage. For purposes of this section, gross wages is defined as total compensation subject to FICA withholding. It is the employee's responsibility to inform the city controller's office if the gross military wage is less than the employee's gross city wage. In no event shall the total of gross military and gross city wages (including any amount paid under subsection (b)(1) of this section) paid during the active military period exceed the total gross wages that would have been earned during the same time period by the covered employee in his city position had he not been called to active duty. Reconciliation of the amounts owed to or by the city shall occur as needed, following the employee's return to active city employment. 
(4)  For purposes of computing the covered employee's gross city wages, each covered employee shall receive that annual increase he would have received had he not been called to active military duty. 
(5)  Leave days such as, but not limited to, vacation, sick, FTO and bonus will not accrue during such time the covered employee is on active military duty. 
(6)  Time on the job and seniority will accrue during such time the covered employee is on active military duty. 
(7)  Upon the employee's return to active status with the city, he is eligible for any leave time, including vacation, that is available to all active city employees. Human resources can counsel the returning employee on his options, should leave be necessary. 
(8)  Regular deductions from city paychecks will be honored only in the event the employee expresses his desire, in writing, to continue the deduction and that there are sufficient funds due to the employee. The funds due to the employee include the differential paid according to subsection (b)(3) of this section and any funds deposited by the employee to the city for the purpose of paying the deduction. Such deposits must occur prior to the scheduled deduction or pay period. The employee is solely responsible for maintaining his qualification for each policy or program. In the event insufficient funds are present for all requested deductions and no further direction has been received from the employee, the city shall appropriate the funds in the following order, as appropriate: 
a.  Court-ordered deductions/garnishments; 
b.  Health insurance premium for dependents; 
c.  Union dues; 
d.  Deferred compensation; 
e.  Supplemental insurance or other voluntary deductions. 
(c)  Health insurance. 
(1)  Pursuant to the terms of the group contract providing health care benefits ("the contract") governing the terms and conditions of employee health care coverage provided by the city, health care benefits for each covered employee shall terminate as of the date he is activated to military duty, as medical coverage is provided to the covered employee by the United States government. 
(2)  Dependents of covered employees with city-provided dependent health care coverage at the time the covered employee reports to active duty, shall remain covered under the contract pursuant to contract administration policies while the covered employee is activated to military duty. 
(3)  Pursuant to exclusions listed in life insurance contracts, any life insurance provided to the covered employee by the city will cease while the employee is on active military duty. 
(d)  Public employees' retirement fund (PERF). To the extent allowed by law, the city shall, during each covered employee's term of active military duty, continue to pay the pension contributions normally paid by the employer on behalf of the employee by virtue of his employment. 
(Code 1985, § 34.05; Ord. No. 4750, 3-17-2003) 
Sec. 2-600. - Public employees' retirement fund. 
    All eligible city employees, including members of the sewer department, are covered by PERF (public employees' retirement fund) and all covered employees must participate. All fulltime nonseasonal city utilities employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements will be covered under the utility pension fund. 
(Code 1985, § 34.06; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-601. - Compensatory time. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department managers means all fulltime department managers. 
    Elected officials means the mayor and the city clerk. 
    Staff means all employees who are nonunion, yearround, fulltime and salaried and are not elected officials or department managers. 
(b)  Policy. This policy applies to all nonunion, yearround, fulltime salaried employees of the city, including employees of the city utilities. 
(1)  All employees. 
a.  Effective January 1, 2003, all comp time hours accrued by any employee under any departmental policy that may have been in effect prior to this policy will carry over, subject to the maximum allowable accruals applicable to that employee under this policy. 
b.  In the event an employee is promoted within a department or changes departments during employment with the city, accrued comp time may not be transferred to the new position. Each department is responsible for the comp time earned in that department or at a position in that department. 
c.  Overtime worked must be requested by the employee's supervisor for the purpose of completing regular or emergency work normally conducted by the affected employee. Work that can normally be conducted during regular hours will not be approved for overtime. That is, work will not be manufactured or delayed in order for an employee to perform that work under overtime status, in order to earn comp time at the time-and-a-half rate. Comp time is not intended as a vehicle for "banking" hours to be used at a later time. 
d.  Overtime worked must be preapproved. Staff must secure proper approval for working overtime from their department manager or assistant manager. Department managers must receive proper approval for working overtime from their supervisor, who in most circumstances will be the mayor or general manager of the city utilities. Certain employees, by virtue of the emergency nature of their work assignments, may be given approval to work overtime by an appropriate supervisor. In such a case, written acknowledgment shall be obtained the following business day from the department manager or assistant manager. 
e.  Records must be maintained in each department, on the prescribed form (or HR-approved equivalent), showing employee name, status, date and number of overtime hours worked, hour value of comp time hours earned, date and number of comp time hours taken, and a running balance of the comp time hours due the employee. These records must be completed as the work occurs, signed by the department manager and given to the human resources department quarterly (January 1, April 1, July 1, October 1). 
f.  The human resources department shall keep a comprehensive list as to the status of each nonunion, yearround fulltime salaried employee, as per FLSA definitions. Each department will keep a list as to its department. Additionally, notation to human resources as to the status of an employee will be given on any change-of-status form. 
g.  Time taken away from work in redemption of comp time earned shall be taken at times convenient to the city. Department managers shall take care not to allow extensive comp time accrual, and shall, whenever possible, allow employees to leave work during normal business hours to make up overtime worked within the week of the extra work. If comp time is accrued, the supervisor shall allow the employee time away from work at the soonest possible time the department can afford to continue without that employee. 
h.  Salaries are paid as consideration for work during all regularly scheduled work hours. For some employees, this may include certain regular meetings outside of business hours, as defined in the employee's job description. 
i.  Responsibility for compliance with this policy, recordkeeping and management of comp time accruals, distribution and redemption will rest with department managers. 
j.  The city may, at its sole discretion, elect to pay comp time earned rather than allow time off work or to extend the time limit for redemption of time off. These exceptions shall be authorized, in writing, by the mayor or board of public works and safety. 
(2)  Staff. 
a.  Staff who are normally scheduled to work fewer than 40 hours per week (as described in subsection (b)(1)h of this section), will earn comp time at an hour-for-hour basis for any time (kept in 15-minute increments) requested by a supervisor and worked over the normal scheduled workweek but less than 40 hours per week. 
b.  Staff will earn comp time at a rate of 11/2 hours for each overtime hour worked, kept in 15-minute increments, that exceeds 40 hours worked or paid per week. 
c.  Staff will be allowed to accrue comp time hours with no time limit for redemption, within the guidelines listed in this policy. 
d.  Staff must be paid cash overtime pay after accruing 240 hours of comp time. 
e.  Only approved accrued comp time will be paid out as termination pay. 
(3)  Department managers. 
a.  Department managers will earn comp time at an hour-for-hour basis for any time, kept in 15-minute increments, approved and worked over 40 hours worked or paid per week. 
b.  Department managers will be allowed to accrue comp time hours but must redeem such accrued hours within six months of the date they are earned. If not so redeemed within six months, the employee will lose all claim to any accrued hours, unless an exception is requested and granted, in writing, as described in subsection (b)(1)j of this section. 
c.  Department Managers can accrue a maximum of 40 hours of comp time. At that point, any additional overtime hours worked will not add to the accrued comp time amount earned by the employee unless an exception is requested and granted, in writing, as described in subsection (b)(1)j of this section. 
d.  Only approved accrued comp time will be paid out as termination pay. 
(4)  Elected officials. Elected officials shall not earn or accrue comp tune. It is recognized that an elected official's duties occur at different times of the day and week, and a "regular" work schedule does not exist. An elected official is expected to put in the amount of time necessary to complete his job requirements. 
(Code 1985, § 34.07; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 4735, 12-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-602. - Workers compensation. 
    Workers compensation coverage is carried by the city for job-related injuries or illnesses. 
(Code 1985, § 34.09; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-603. - Jury duty leave. 
    Jury duty leave may be granted to an employee. The city will pay the difference, if any, between jury duty pay and regular city salary for time on jury duty. 
(Code 1985, § 34.10; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-604. - Personal leave days. 
    Personal leave days not to exceed two days per calendar year may be taken by an employee to attend to personal business without loss of pay. Personal leave days cannot be accumulated. Prior approval of personal leave days by the department head is required. An employee must have completed six months of service to be eligible for personal leave days. 
(Code 1985, § 34.11; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-605. - Funeral leave. 
    In the event of a death in an employee's immediate family, funeral leave not to exceed five working days may be allowed to attend the funeral and take care of family business. All funeral leave must have prior department head approval. 
(Code 1985, § 34.12; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-606. - Public safety personnel. 
    Public safety "sworn" personnel (police officers, firefighters and EMS) will continue to follow their respective collective bargaining agreement. Civilian employees shall follow the policies set forth in this article. 
(Code 1985, § 34.13; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989) 
Sec. 2-607. - Longevity bonus. 
    All fulltime nonseasonal city utilities employees not covered by the IBEW collective bargaining agreement will continue to receive the longevity bonus as set out in the IBEW collective bargaining agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 34.14; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 4926, § 1(34.14), 2-24-2005) 
Sec. 2-608. - Life insurance. 
    The board of public works and safety is authorized to negotiate and purchase life insurance with death benefits of not more than $15,000.00 per employee for all civil city and city utilities employees. 
(Code 1985, § 34.15; Ord. No. 3339, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 3720, 7-19-1993) 
Sec. 2-609. - Travel. 
(a)  Introduction and scope. 
(1)  This section contains policies and procedures for employee travel and elected and appointed official travel and reimbursement for expenses while traveling on business for the city and the city utilities. 
(2)  All persons seeking reimbursement should incur the lowest reasonable travel expense and should exercise care to avoid impropriety or the appearance of impropriety. Public funds should never be used for personal gain. 
(3)  Occasionally an employee may take a trip that includes both personal time and business travel. A combination trip benefits the employee to some extent. Employees should exercise special care not to seek reimbursement for expenses that could be construed to be personal. Under no circumstances is an employee to be paid for compensatory time while on travel status, including time beyond the normal workday. 
(4)  Each person requesting reimbursement for travel expenses must submit a claim covering only his own expenses. No reimbursement will be made for the expenses of another person, including family members or other travel companions. 
(5)  If a circumstance arises which is not specifically covered, employees should either adopt the most conservative course within the spirit of this policy or consult with his immediate supervisor. 
(b)  Types of travel. 
(1)  Local. Local travel includes all travel within a 50-mile radius of the city. Although certain expenses, like lodging, will not normally be reimbursed for local travel, other expenses, like compensation for privately owned automobiles used in city business, parking, and the like will be reimbursable. Reimbursement for meals, if not included in registration fees, will be reimbursable while attending preapproved seminars, meetings, conferences or schools in the local area. 
(2)  Outside. Any travel outside a 50-mile radius of the city must be authorized in advance by the employee's department head. Any travel outside a 150-mile radius of the city must be authorized in advance by the employee's department head and the mayor, or department head and general manager for city utilities employees, including approval of the mode of transportation to the destination. Outside travel by the city clerk and staff or the city council and council attorney shall be presumed to be with authorization of the city clerk or council president, and shall not require authorization by the mayor. 
(c)  Types of reimbursable expenses. 
(1)  Allowable. Following are examples of reimbursable expenses: 
a.  Conference/seminar registration fees. 
b.  Auto rental, with prior approval only. 
c.  Taxicab/shuttle fares. 
d.  Parking and tolls, whether using a personal or a city vehicle. 
e.  Telephone calls/facsimile for official city business. 
f.  Airport parking. Although if most economical, employees should use longterm parking lots. 
g.  Fuel costs for city-owned vehicles. 
h.  Lodging, for employee only. If traveling with a companion, the city will reimburse an amount not to exceed the single-room occupancy charge, including taxes. 
i.  Meals, for employee only, if traveling with a companion. 
j.  Mileage, when using privately-owned automobile. For travel 500 miles and under, employees will be reimbursed at the established per mile rate (mileage reimbursement will be the rate as of April 1. This rate will remain fixed through March 31 of the following year, or until replaced by a new rate published by the city controller). For travel between 500 and 2,500 miles, employees will be reimbursed at 50 percent of the established per mile rates (mileage reimbursement will be the rate as of April 1. This rate will remain fixed through March 31 of the following year, or until replaced by a new rate published by the city controller), and 25 percent of the established per mile rate thereafter. Mileage should be calculated beginning at the employee's place of employment. Miles from home to the workplace are not eligible for reimbursement. 
k.  Commercial air; train; bus fares. 
l.  Reasonable gratuities to restaurants and taxicabs/shuttle fares. 
(2)  Not allowable. Following are examples of nonreimbursable expenses: 
a.  Personal entertainment. 
b.  Business entertainment or expenses for noncity employees. 
c.  Fines for parking, traffic violations, and the like. 
d.  Alcoholic beverages. 
e.  Valet, laundry, dry cleaning and other personal services. 
f.  Air travel insurance. 
g.  Expenses for travel companions of city employees. 
h.  Purchase of personal items, including personal phone calls. 
i.  Gratuities to hotel or airport porters, parking attendants, and the like. 
(d)  Mode of transportation. 
(1)  If the employee's travel will be by vehicle, city vehicles shall be used when available and practical. Employees traveling to the same destination shall travel together whenever possible. 
(2)  Employees traveling to locations within four hours' drive time are generally expected to travel by automobile; however, individual circumstances, including airport meetings and time commitments before and/or after travel may necessitate airline use. Airline use in these circumstances must be with prior approval. 
(3)  If an employee, for convenience, prefers to use a privately-owned vehicle in lieu of rail, bus or air travel, or in lieu of a city-owned vehicle, the employee will be reimbursed in the amount equivalent to the coach air fare for the same trip, or the mileage expense as computed in subsection (c)(1)j of this section, whichever amount is less. 
(4)  Coach or tourist class costs of travel by commercial air carrier will be reimbursed. The cost of travel by rail or bus may be reimbursed but must not exceed an amount equal to what airfare to the destination would have been. 
(e)  Meal allowance. 
(1)  The reimbursable meal allowance, including gratuities, will be set April 1 each year and will remain at that rate until March 31 of the following year, or until replaced by a new rate published by the city controller. These rates will be reviewed and updated by the controller each year, based on current IRS standards. Current city meal allowances, along with locations eligible for higher rates are available through the office of the city controller. To be eligible for a breakfast allowance, travel must begin before 7:00 a.m. in the city. To be eligible for the dinner allowance, travel must extend past 6:00 p.m. in the city. When travel takes an employee 50 miles outside of the city, he will not be reimbursed for meals purchased within 50 miles of the city limits. 
(2)  In any event, individual meal reimbursements will be allowed only upon presentation of a valid itemized receipt, showing the name of the restaurant, the date of the meal, a list of each item purchased, and the total cost of the meal, including gratuities (the maximum reimbursement for gratuities will be 15 percent rounded up to the nearest dollar). Each person seeking reimbursement shall produce a receipt. Group receipts, tear off tabs and unitemized charge slips will not be accepted as meal receipts. 
(f)  Lodging. 
(1)  An employee may claim lodging expense (and meal allowance) for Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, even though the employee is not conducting city business on those days, in order to reduce the total cost of travel, including airline fare. The savings must be documented and approved in advance by the mayor or general manager. Neither lodging expenses nor meal allowances may be claimed for that portion of time during travel when the employee is using vacation or personal leave time. 
(2)  If two or more employees in travel status share a room, and each seek reimbursement, they must request separate receipts. 
(3)  An employee may not claim reimbursement for lodging when the lodging was provided by another person who is not in the business of providing lodging. 
(4)  Employees are urged to stay in hotels offering government rates. These reduced rates usually must be requested of the hotel in advance. Employees who secure luxury hotel accommodations out of preference rather than necessity will not receive full lodging reimbursement. In those cases, the reimbursement amount will be equal to the rate from reasonably available hotels offering government discounts. 
(5)  When checking out of lodging facilities, employees must obtain a check-out bill from the front desk. This bill is to be turned in whether or not reimbursement is requested. 
(g)  Recordkeeping; claims procedure. 
(1)  Travel forms, reservations, receipts, etc. 
a.  Request for travel form filled out and approved by appropriate personnel as applicable. 
b.  If applicable, airline, seminar/conference, hotel reservations made by designated city staff person; paperwork processed for direct prepayment. 
c.  While in travel status, employee retains receipts for reimbursable expenses. 
d.  Employee completes approved travel and expense voucher, itemizing each allowable expense; receipts are attached to the voucher. 
e.  Department head signs voucher, approving of the expenses claimed. 
f.  Employee completes approved claim form and presents with voucher and receipts for payment. 
(2)  Credit card charges. Since state law prohibits the payment of interest for employee expenses, only the face value of a purchase on an employee's personal credit card will be reimbursed. Late fees or interest charges will not be reimbursed regardless of the reason. Whenever an employee uses a credit card during business travel he must also provide an itemized receipt. 
(3)  Record of approved travel. Each department must keep a record of all approved travel. The record must include a summary that shows the travel date, employee's name, a brief description of the reason for the travel, the total expended from city funds, the year-to-date travel expenditure by the department and a comparison of budget and actual expenses. 
(4)  Budget. The department head has the responsibility to assure that travel expenses do not exceed amounts budgeted for his department. It is the responsibility of the department head to ensure that employees who travel are familiar with this travel policy and that reimbursed travel expenses on behalf of his department are in compliance with this policy document. 
(h)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Any exception to this policy granted as described below shall be subject to applicable laws and regulations. 
(2)  The mayor or city controller may authorize exceptions to this travel policy for city employees. The mayor, general manager or city controller may authorize exceptions to this travel policy for employees of the city utilities. An employee requesting an exception must state the request in writing. 
(3)  The city clerk may approve exceptions to this travel policy for the city clerk and city clerk's staff. The president of the common council may approve exceptions to this travel policy for all members of the common council and the council attorney. The signing of a claim by the city clerk or council president shall constitute approval of any exception. 
(Code 1985, § 34.16; Ord. No. 4628, 9-17-2001) 
Sec. 2-610. - Payment of retired employee health insurance premiums. 
(a)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly city health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city retirees over age 65 years or their surviving spouses over age 65 years. Such retirees must be receiving a monthly pension benefit through one of the city statutory retirement plans including the public employees retirement plan, the 1977 police and firefighter pension plan, the 1925 police pension plan or the 1937 firefighter pension plan authorized by the state. Retirees or their surviving spouses who are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit not exceeding the sum of $400.00 per year prorated on a monthly basis, beginning on January 1, 1998. 
(b)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly city health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city police and fire retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Such police and fire retirees must be eligible to receive or be receiving monthly pension benefits through one of the city statutory retirement plans including the 1977 police and firefighter pension plan, the 1925 police pension plan or the 1937 firefighter pension plan authorized by the state. Retirees or their surviving spouses who are eligible and are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit that will reduce their contribution to $600.00 per year or $50.00 a month, beginning January 1, 2001, through December 31, 2002. Beginning January 1, 2003, the entire premium for the retiree or their eligible surviving spouse will be paid by the city. 
(c)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly city health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Eligible retirees for this section include only fulltime, nonseasonal, salaried employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement. In addition, such retirees must have a minimum of 20 years of service and be receiving monthly pension benefits through the public employees retirement plan authorized by the state. Retirees or their surviving spouses who are eligible to participate or are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit that will reduce their contribution to $600.00 per year or $50.00 a month, beginning January 1, 2001, through December 31, 2002. Beginning January 1, 2003, the entire premium for the retiree or their eligible surviving spouse will be paid by the city. 
(d)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly city health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Eligible retirees under this section shall include fulltime, nonseasonal, salaried employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement with less than 20 years of service; and fulltime, nonseasonal employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement. Such retirees must be eligible to receive or be receiving monthly pension benefits through the public employees retirement plan authorized by the state. Retirees or their eligible surviving spouses who are eligible to participate or are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit not exceeding the sum of $400.00 per year, prorated on a monthly basis, beginning on January 1, 1998. 
(e)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city utilities retirees over age 65 or their surviving spouses over age 65. Such retirees must be receiving a monthly pension benefit through the city utilities retirement system. Retirees or their surviving spouses who are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit not exceeding the sum of $400.00 per year prorated on a monthly basis, beginning on January 1, 1998. 
(f)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city utilities retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Retirees under this section have less than 20 years of service and must be eligible to receive or be receiving monthly pension benefits through the city utilities retirement system. Retirees or their eligible surviving spouses who are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit not exceeding the sum of $400.00 per year, prorated on a monthly basis, beginning on January 1, 1998. 
(g)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city utilities retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Retirees under this section must have a minimum of 20 years of service and be receiving monthly pension benefits through the city utilities retirement system, retirees or their surviving spouses who are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit that will reduce their contribution to $600.00 per year or $50.00 per month, beginning January 1, 2001 through December 31, 2002. Beginning January 1, 2003, the entire premium for the retiree or their eligible surviving spouse will be paid by the city. 
(h)  The common council hereby authorizes the budgeting and appropriation of funds for the purpose of paying a portion of the monthly city health insurance premiums paid by eligible and participating city retirees under age 65 or their surviving spouses under age 65. Eligible retirees for this section include fulltime, nonseasonal, hourly employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Local 364 or the Mishawaka Emergency Medical Services Association. In addition, such retirees must have a minimum of 20 years of service and be receiving monthly pension benefits through the public employees retirement plan authorized by the state. Retirees or their surviving spouses who are eligible to participate or are participating in a city-sponsored health insurance plan shall receive a total credit that will reduce their contribution to $600.00 per year or $50.00 a month, beginning June 1, 2001, through December 31, 2002. Beginning January 1, 2003, the entire premium for the retiree or eligible surviving spouse will be paid by the city. 
(Code 1985, § 34.17; Ord. No. 4562, 1-2-2001; Ord. No. 4567, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4590, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 2-611. - Equal employment opportunities policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city and city utilities, hereinafter referred to as city, to provide equal employment opportunities to all individuals regardless of their race, religion, color, sex, national origin, ancestry or handicap. This equal employment opportunity refers to all applicable city practices including employee recruiting, hiring, transferring, training, promoting, disciplining, terminating and all other conditions or privileges of employment. 
(b)  The selection of persons for positions in the city is to be based on the qualifications and abilities required to do the job. 
(c)  It is the policy of the city to expand and increase efforts of the city to promote the realization of equal employment opportunities throughout all its operations through a positive and continuing program. 
(Code 1985, § 32.011; Ord. No. 3583, 4-20-1992) 
Sec. 2-612. - [Employer/employee relations; labor organizations; and other terms and conditions of employment.] 
(a)  The City of Mishawaka does recognize that all city employees including working foreman but excluding all elected officials and appointed management and supervisory personnel do have the right to organize into city employee organizations with or without outside affiliations. The provisions of this section shall apply only to full-time employees and shall not apply to part-time or temporary employees. A full-time employee is one who is scheduled to work no less than 30 hours per week and is employed on a yearly basis. All other employees shall be considered part-time or temporary employees. 
(b)  These city employee organizations have the right to freely bargain collectively with the appointed department management on all matters pertaining to employee relations and conditions of employment. 
(c)  Any and all agreements developed and concluded under subsection (b) must be submitted to the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka for its approval in ordinance form. 
(d)  Any and all agreements developed and concluded under subsection (b) and submitted to the common council for its approval under subsection (c) are neither binding nor final until the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka makes the final decision on these agreements. 
(e)  Neither the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka nor any of its elected officials is subject to subsection (b) of this section to the abdication of his authority or lawful responsibility given or assigned to him by statute, law, and the Constitution of the State of Indiana and the United States of America. 
(f)  Recognition of city employee organizations will be made by election upon written request to each member of the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka, provided that 51 percent of the acceptable employees as defined in this section concur that this organization is acceptable. 
(1)  The election itself and the conducting of the election shall be directed by the ordinance committee of the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka, or its designee. This committee, subject to the approval of the full common council, shall establish the time and place of the election and prepare the ballots which shall include, in addition to the names of the employee organizations, the caption "No Recognition", shall establish secrecy of the ballot, count the ballots, and issue their committee report of the election results in writing to the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka at its next meeting following the election. 
(2)  Recognition of any city employee organization will be only accorded and granted to those organizations receiving 51 percent of the votes, coming only from those eligible to vote as defined as acceptable employees in this section. 
(3)  After the ordinance committee of the Common Council of the City of Mishawaka has conducted an election in the acceptable manner as defined in subsection (f)(1), and for an acceptable unit or department of city government, it shall not consider the matter again for one year. Each election shall require the full provisions of subsection (f) of this section. 
(g)  A recognized employee organization shall have the exclusive right to represent the employees of an appropriate unit or department of city government. 
(h)  Employees of any unit or department of city government shall have the right, freely and without fear of reprisal, to form, join, and assist in the activities of the employee organizations of their choosing for the purpose of meeting and negotiating with the executive branch of the city and/or its designated representatives with respect to wages, terms, and other conditions of employment, and each employee shall be protected in the exercise of this right. Nothing in this section shall make it mandatory for every employee of any unit or department of city government to belong to recognized employee organizations as a condition of employment. Each and every employee has the right to refrain from such membership without fear of reprisal from either the employee organization or the unit or department of city government. 
(i)  Any and all strikes are prohibited under this section. In the event of a work stoppage of any kind by the members of an employee organization, it shall be the duty of the Mayor of the City of Mishawaka as its chief executive officer to notify the city attorney as its chief legal officer to apply within 24 hours of such work stoppage to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction against the employee organization and its elected officers for such violations of this subsection. 
(j)  (1)  Any employee organization and its officers which violate subsection (i) shall lose all right of recognition immediately after 24 hours of work stoppage. No election for employee organization recognition shall be held for six months after decertification of the employee organization. 
(2)  Any employee engaging in a work stoppage of any kind shall be dismissed immediately for engaging in the work stoppage. Any employee absent for more than 24 hours during any work stoppage shall present himself to the medical doctor chosen by the executive officer of the City of Mishawaka to determine the medical cause for his absence from his job during the work stoppage. All costs from this medical examination shall be borne by the City of Mishawaka. 
(k)  If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this section, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(l)  Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit or modify the existing right of the City of Mishawaka to: 
(1)  Direct the work of its employees; 
(2)  Hire, promote, demote, transfer, assign, and retain employees in positions within the city; 
(3)  Suspend or discharge employees for proper cause; 
(4)  Maintain the efficiency of government operations; 
(5)  Relieve employees from duties because of lack of work or for other legal and legitimate reasons; 
(6)  Take action as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the agency or department in emergencies; and 
(7)  Determine the methods, means, program, and personnel by which such operations are to be carried on. 
(Ord. No. 5249, §§ 1-12, 2-15-2010) 
Editor's note- Sections 1-12 of Ord. No. 5249, adopted Feb. 15, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-612 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-613-2-640. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 5250, adopted March 15, 2010, repealed div. 2, §§ 2-641-2-647 which pertained to definitions; policy; procedures; statement of philosophy; rules and regulations; treatment measures; and evidence and derived from Code 1985; Ord. No. 3657, adopted Jan. 4, 1993; Ord. No. 4051, adopted May 20, 1996; and Ord. No. 4978, adopted Oct. 3, 2005. Said ordinance states, "The city shall maintain at all times a drug-free workplace policy applicable to all persons employed by the city. This policy shall be made available for inspection in the office of human resources." 

Secs. 2-641-2-667. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT 

Sec. 2-668. - Policy. 
    The City of Mishawaka and Mishawaka Utilities (hereinafter referred to as employer) will comply with the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 effective August 5, 1993. The Family and Medical Act are intended to protect employees who need to attend to their seriously ill children and parents, or to newborn or adopted infants or their own serious illness. Additionally, the FMLA assists the employer in planning for an extended absence and adjusting work schedules and assignments to cover the absence. To comply with the federal law, the employer will require all employees who qualify through the provisions of the FMLA to apply for, or benefit from, family or medical leave. 
(Ord. No. 5183, §§ 1, 2, 10-20-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5183, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 20, 2008, repealed former § 2-668 and enacted new § 2-668 as set out herein. The former § 2-668 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 2-669. - Procedures. 
(a)  An eligible employee will be granted up to 12 weeks of leave of absence in any 12-month period beginning with the first date of absence. This leave may be either paid or unpaid according to benefit time eligibility. In the case of spouses who are both employed by the employer, the total leave available will depend on the reason for the leave. 
(b)  To be eligible for leave, an employee must have been employed by employer for at least 12 months preceding the requested leave. All periods of employment will count towards the 12-month requirement even if there have been breaks in employment. Furthermore, the employee must have worked at least 1,250 hours within that 12-month period. 
(c)  The employee shall request FMLA through the Department of Human Resources using the appropriate request forms as prescribed by the U.S. Department of Labor. 
(d)  The employee's health care provider must designate that the leave appears to qualify under FMLA and Human Resources will request that the medical certification by a health care provider be completed after the appropriate notice is given from the employee. 
(e)  If the employee is absent more than three consecutive days, the absence will be counted toward FMLA leave unless the employee documents the absence does not qualify. 
(f)  If the leave is of a type which can be planned or anticipated, the employee shall provide the employer with not less than 30 days' notice, except that if the date of the illness or treatment requires leave to begin in less than 30 days, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable. 
(g)  A family leave of absence will be granted for: 
(1)  The birth of the employee's child and in order to care for the child; 
(2)  The placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care except when the employee is a licensed foster parent and receiving compensation as an agent of the Department of Public Welfare; 
(3)  The care of the employee's spouse, child or parent who has a serious medical condition; and 
(4)  Eligible employees are entitled to up to 12 weeks of leave because of "any qualifying exigency" arising out of the fact that the spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee is on active military duty, or has been notified of an impending call to active duty status, in support of a contingency operation. By the terms of the statute, this provision requires the Secretary of Labor to issue regulations defining "any qualifying exigency." 
(h)  A medical leave of absence will be granted for: 
(1)  An injury incurred arising outside of the scope of employment or in the course of the employment; 
(2)  A serious medical condition is defined in the FMLA to mean an illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition that (1) involves period of incapacity or treatment connected with in-patient care at a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility or (2) involves continuing treatment by a health care provider or (3) a chronic health condition which requires periodic visits to a healthcare provider or (4) pregnancy or pre-natal care. 
(i)  Leave may be taken intermittently or on a "reduced leave schedule" if: 
(1)  The leave is for the employee's own illness or the care of an ill spouse, child, or parent; 
(2)  The leave is medically necessary; and 
(3)  The employer and employee agree to the arrangement; 
(4)  Provided, however, to accommodate intermittent or reduced schedule leave due to planned medical treatment, the employer can require the employee to transfer to another position, with equivalent pay and benefits, that would accommodate recurring time off and lessen the impact to the employer's operation; and 
(5)  Intermittent leave will not be granted for bonding with newborns or adopted children. This leave time must be taken in one continuous block of time. 
(j)  An eligible employee who is the spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin of a covered service member who is recovering from a serious illness or injury sustained in the line of duty on active military duty is entitled to up to 26 weeks of leave in a single 12-month period to care for the military service member. This provision became effective immediately upon enactment. This military caregiver leave is available during "a single 12-month period" during which an eligible employee is entitled to a combined total of 26 weeks of all types of FMLA leave. 
(k)  The employee may be requested to submit periodic medical certifications while on leave. In its discretion, the employer may require a second medical opinion, and/or periodic recertification, at its own expense. If the first and second opinions differ, the employer, at its own expense, may require the binding opinion of a third health care provider, approved jointly by the employer and the employee. 
(l)  All provisions of this policy shall prevail except as follows: 
(1)  Teamsters-No occurrence shall be incurred for the use of a sick day; also no bonus day shall be earned for the same period of the following year. 
(2)  IBEW-The labor agreement shall prevail when the language is less restrictive that the federal FMLA guidelines. 
(3)  EMS-The labor agreement shall prevail when the language is less restrictive that the federal FMLA guidelines. 
(4)  Firefighters-Nothing in this division should be construed to limit or deny sick leave benefits provided to firefighters in the labor agreement between the city and the firefighters. 
(5)  Police officers-Nothing in this division should be construed to limit or deny sick leave benefits provided to police officers in the labor agreement between the city and the police officers. 
(Ord. No. 5183, §§ 1, 2, 10-20-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5183, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 20, 2008, repealed former § 2-669 and enacted new § 2-669 as set out herein. The former § 2-669 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 2-670. - Health benefits. 
    A covered employer is required to maintain group health insurance coverage for an employee on FMLA leave whenever such insurance was provided before the leave was taken and on the same terms as if the employee had continued to work. If applicable, arrangements will need to be made for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums while on leave. 
(Ord. No. 5183, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-671. - Job restoration. 
    Upon return from FMLA leave, an employee must be restored to the employee's original job, or to an equivalent job with equivalent pay, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment. 
(Ord. No. 5183, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-672. - Keeping the employer informed. 
    An employee must keep the employer informed of his/her leave status including his/her intent to return to work. An employee who fails to return to work on the first day following the expiration of the leave without having received an extension thereof, unless the failure to obtain the extension is beyond the control of the employee, shall be deemed to have voluntarily terminated his/her employment. 
(Ord. No. 5183, § 2, 10-20-2008) 
Secs. 2-673-2-696. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEXUAL HARASSMENT 

Sec. 2-697. - Policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city and city utilities, to prohibit harassment of employees and prospective employees on the basis of sex. All members of management are responsible for the effective administration of this policy. 
(b)  Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when: 
(1)  Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment; 
(2)  Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as a basis for employment decisions affecting the individual; or 
(3)  Such conduct has the purpose or effect of interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment. 
(c)  All forms of sexual harassment are prohibited whether verbal, nonverbal or physical. 
(d)  Sexual harassment includes, but is not limited to, repeated offensive sexual flirtations; advances or propositions; continued or repeated commentaries about an individual's body; offensive language; and the display in the work place of sexually suggestive pictures or objects. 
(e)  Employees who believe they have been sexually harassed should follow the steps outlined in the problem solving procedure approved by the board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 34.50; Ord. No. 4104, 10-21-1996) 
Secs. 2-698-2-722. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WORKPLACE VIOLENCE 

Sec. 2-723. - Policy. 
(a)  Acts of intimidation, threatening language or behavior, violence, or any related conduct that involve or affect city employees or that occur on city property or in the process of performing city business, are not acceptable and will not be tolerated. 
(b)  Any person who makes threats, exhibits threatening behavior, carries a weapon or engages in violent acts in the workplace or at a site where city business is being conducted may be removed from the premises pending the outcome of an investigation. 
(c)  Except as provided herein, weapons of any kind are not allowed in the workplace. No employee of the city is permitted to carry a weapon of any type on his person during working hours or at any time where city business is being conducted or in a city vehicle, nor may any employee carry or store a weapon in any vehicle on city property (this does not apply to sworn police officers on active duty). 
(Code 1985, § 34.60; Ord. No. 4704, 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 2-724. - Scope. 
(a)  All employees are responsible for maintaining a safe work environment. This policy covers acts of physical violence, intimidation and threatening or other disruptive aggressive behavior. This policy covers incidents involving co-workers, employees of companies who do business with the city, and other individuals perpetrating violence. All rules that apply to employees also refer to visitors. Nothing in this policy shall prevent employees from reasonably protecting themselves against bodily harm through self-defense. 
(b)  The term "weapons" is defined as objects that can cause harm or injury to another. This includes firearms, cutting tools, and other items that could be dangerous or intimidating when not used for their intended purpose. The term "weapons" shall not include any item issued or approved by the city when used for its intended purpose. 
(Code 1985, § 34.60; Ord. No. 4704, 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 2-725. - Procedures. 
(a)  An employee shall notify his department supervisor, manager, the department of human resources, the legal department or police of any threats or incidents which they have witnessed, received or of which they have knowledge. All reports will be appropriately investigated and information will be kept confidential to the extent possible. Each employee who receives a protective or restraining order which includes city-owned or city-leased premises as a protected area is required to provide the department manager or the department of human resources a copy of such order. 
(b)  Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination, in accordance with the applicable law, rule, or collective bargaining agreement. If the source of such inappropriate behavior is a member of the public or a contractor or business, the response may also include barring the persons from city-owned premises, termination of business relationships with that individual, and/or prosecution of the persons involved. 
(c)  Any employee who feels he has reasonable cause to carry a personal defense object not issued or approved by the city must first request the approval of the department manager. Prior approval must be made in writing and signed by the department manager, and a representative from the legal department and police chief or designee. 
(Code 1985, § 34.60; Ord. No. 4704, 9-19-2002) 
Sec. 2-726. - Resources. 
(a)  An incident management team may be called upon to investigate and respond to incidents to ensure the safety of employees and the workplace. This team may consist of the department manager and representatives of human resources, EAP, legal department, the EMS division of the fire department, police department and applicable labor union. This team will have access to all applicable records. 
(b)  An employee exhibiting warning signs, symptoms and risk factors may self-refer or be referred to the city's employee assistance program for evaluation and follow-up. If appropriate, fitness-for-duty will be determined prior to return to employment. 
(c)  The city will provide opportunities for all employees to be trained in the risk factors associated with workplace violence, and proper handling of emergency situations in order to minimize the risks of violent incidents occurring in the workplace, including the duty of retreat or self-defense. 
(d)  The department of human resources shall generate and promulgate such forms and instructions as the director deems necessary to effectively implement and enforce this policy. 
(Code 1985, § 34.60; Ord. No. 4704, 9-19-2002) 
Secs. 2-727-2-750. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE; REVENUE 

Sec. 2-751. - Purchasing agency. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety is designated as the purchasing agency for the city and for every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, department, or other establishment of the city. 
(b)  The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and duties authorized under IC 5-22, or as may be supplemented from time to time by ordinance adopted by the common council and policies adopted by the purchasing agency. 
(c)  The purchasing agency shall designate in writing one or more purchasing agents for the city. 
(d)  The purchasing agent may purchase supplies with an estimated cost of less than $25,000.00 on the open market without requesting or receiving quotes or bids. 
(e)  Each board, office, common council or department of the city may purchase services in whatever legal manner it determines to be reasonable. 
(f)  When purchasing supplies, the purchasing agency shall request supplies manufactured in the United States and shall purchase such supplies unless the purchasing agent determines that: 
(1)  The supplies are not manufactured in the United States in reasonably available quantities; 
(2)  The price of the supplies manufactured in the United States unreasonably exceeds the price of available and comparable supplies manufactured elsewhere; 
(3)  The quality of the supplies manufactures in the United States is substantially less than the quality of comparably priced available supplies manufactured elsewhere; 
(4)  The purchase of supplies manufactured in the United States is not in the public interest. 
(Code 1985, § 35.01; Ord. No. 4284, 6-15-1998) 
Sec. 2-752 - Uniform schedule of fees. 
(a)  A uniform fee schedule for the City of Mishawaka is attached to this Code of Ordinances as an addendum labeled Appendix A. This list is intended to be nonexclusive, and may not contain the exhaustive list of all fees collected by the City of Mishawaka. 
(b)  Fees collected are to be paid to the city controller. 
(Ord. No. 5268, §§ 1, 2, 8-17-2010) 
Editor's note- Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 5268, adopted Aug. 17, 2010, repealed the former § 2-752 and enacted a new § 2-752 as set out herein. The former § 2-752 pertained to copying, information and filing fees and derived from Code 1985; Ord. No. 4018, adopted Feb. 5, 1996; Ord. No. 4300, adopted Aug. 17, 1998; Ord. No. 4374, adopted Feb. 1, 1999; Ord. No. 4589, May 21, 2001; Ord. No. 5074, adopted Nov. 20, 2006. 
Sec. 2-753. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 5268, adopted Aug. 17, 2010, repealed the former § 2-753 which pertained to charge for emergency medical service; billing and derived from Code 1968; Code 1985; Ord. No. 2130, adopted April 18, 1978; Ord. No. 2499, adopted Jan. 4, 1982; Ord. No. 3062, adopted July 7, 1987; Ord. No. 3365, adopted March 19, 1990; Ord. No. 3601, adopted June 1, 1992; Ord. No. 4511, adopted Aug. 21, 2000; and Ord. No. 4955, adopted Aug. 1, 2005. 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advertising matter means any written or printed card, circular, coupon, pamphlet, or folder intended for general distribution, except newspapers. 
    Sample means any package or parcel of merchandise intended for general distribution, and for which no charge is made. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 1; Code 1985, § 110.01; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-2. - Compliance with chapter required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any advertising matter, circular or sample in the city except as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 2; Code 1985, § 110.02; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Secs. 6-3-6-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADVERTISING MATTER AND METHODS 

Sec. 6-23. - Scattering, littering prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw, scatter, or distribute, or cause to be thrown, scattered, distributed, or placed, any poster, sign, card, pamphlet, sample of merchandise, or other advertising device upon any sidewalk, street, lane, alley, public ground, or other public place, or upon any private lot or steps, or throw into or upon or attach to any vehicle any advertising matter or sample within the corporate limits of the city. It shall not be unlawful to distribute such advertising matter or samples to private residences, offices, or mercantile establishments if the same is handed in at the door, or placed on a porch, or securely fastened to prevent it from being blown or scattered about. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person when removing any old poster, card, or other advertising device to leave or deposit the same upon any public or private sidewalk, street, alley, lot, or ground within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, §§ 3, 4; Code 1985, § 110.03; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-24. - Posting on trees, poles, or buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paste, or in any way attach or affix any bill, notice, announcement, or other advertisement to any tree located in any alley, street, or other public place in the city, or upon or to any pole used for telegraph, telephone, electric light, fire alarm, or any other purpose as authorized by the common council. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the posting of any notice or order of any court nor to the posting of any legal notice required or authorized by law. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, paint, place, or fasten in any manner, any poster, sign, card, sample package, or other advertising matter or device onto any public sidewalk, curb, or pavement, or onto any public building or other public improvement within the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, §§ 3, 5; Code 1985, § 110.04; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-25. - Placing posters on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or in any manner to affix or cause to be placed or deposited or affixed to any automobile or other vehicle or other automotive vehicle, any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement, or notice of any kind whatsoever not provided by law, unless he is the owner thereof, or without first having secured, in writing, the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 10; Code 1985, § 110.05; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-26. - Crying aloud, carrying banners or signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cry aloud upon the streets or in the doorways of any place of business along the street advertising any commercial business whatever, or carry or have carried along and over the streets of the city, any signs, banners, or displays of any kind or description intended to advertise any commercial business. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 9; Code 1985, § 110.06; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-27. - Advertising used or defective merchandise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in any newspaper, magazine, circular, form letter, or any open publication, published, distributed, or circulated in the city, or on any billboard, card, label, or other advertising medium, or by means of any other method of advertising, to advertise, call attention to, or give publicity to the sale of any merchandise, which merchandise: 
(1)  Is secondhand or used merchandise; 
(2)  Is defective in any manner; 
(3)  Consists of articles or units or parts known as seconds, or blemished merchandise; or 
(4)  Has been rejected by the manufacturer thereof as not first-class; 
unless there is conspicuously displayed directly in connection with the name and description of such merchandise and each specified article, unit, or part thereof, a direct and unequivocal statement, phrase, or word which will clearly indicate that such merchandise or each article, unit, or part thereof so advertised is secondhand, used, defective, or consists of seconds or is blemished merchandise or has been rejected by the manufacturer thereof, as the fact shall be. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 7; Code 1985, § 110.07; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Sec. 6-28. - Defacing, destroying advertisements prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pull down, deface, or destroy any written or printed notice, advertisement, or bill posted up at any place in the city, which notice, advertisement, or bill has been so posted by permission of the owner or persons having control of the place whereon such posting is made. 
(Code 1968, tit. 30, § 8; Code 1985, § 110.08; Ord. No. 1087, 6-21-1954) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARD TABLES AND COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 10-19. - License required. 
    No person shall be permitted to keep for hire or profit within the limits of the city, any billiard, pool, bagatelle table, ball alley, tenpin alley, lifting, striking, blowing or pulling machines, swing or revolving swing or whirligigs, electric machines, telescope, ring board, or any other device kept for hire or pay, without first procuring a license in the manner hereinafter described. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. I, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.01; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 4171, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 10-20. - Fees. 
    Every person desiring such license to operate, within the corporate limits of the city, any of the following devices, shall pay into the city treasury the following sum of money: For each billiard, pool, or bagatelle table, $3.00 per year; and for each ball alley, tenpin alley, lifting, striking, blowing, or pulling machine, swing or revolving swing, whirligig electric machine, telescope, ring board, or other device kept for pay or profit, $5.00 per year. Upon presenting the receipt of the treasurer to the city controller, it shall be the duty of the controller to issue to the applicant a license therefor. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. I, § 2; Code 1985, § 111.02; Ord. No. 793, 10-21-1935; Ord. No. 4171, 5-19-1997) 
Secs. 10-21-10-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHOWS AND THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES 

Sec. 10-44. - License required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or participate in exhibiting, or to manage or conduct or open any curio show, monstrosity, panorama, puppet show, or similar amusement, or any theatrical performance, any tumbling feats, rope or wire walking, dancing, sleight of hand, any circus or menagerie, or freaks of any description, presentation of musical concert or performance or any other display or performance of the same general description, without having first procured a license therefor from the city controller. 
(b)  The amount to be paid for the license shall be as follows: For any circus or menagerie, $50.00 per day and night and $5.00 for each exhibition in addition thereto and for each side-show annexed or attached thereto; for all tent shows other than a circus or menagerie, $10.00 per day, or $25.00 per week; for any other show or concert, or performance, or display of any kind or description enumerated and described in this section, $2.00 per day and night. 
(c)  Any person applying for a license shall first pay to the treasurer the amount fixed therefor and present his receipt for such payment to the city controller who shall cause the proper license to be issued, which license shall state the names of the parties applying therefor, with the name, nature and character of the performance for which the license is issued, and the time of the continuance thereof; and shall also in case of any theatrical performance, circus, menagerie, or show of animals designate the building or place of exhibition or performance. The provisions of this article shall not apply to any such entertainment not indecorous or immoral given for the benefit of any literary, charitable, or scientific purpose. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. II, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.10; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 10-45. - Interruption of shows prohibited. 
    No person shall interrupt or disturb any show, exhibition, concert, or performance of any kind, contemplated by this article, or any auditor or spectator thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. II, § 3; Code 1985, § 111.11; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Secs. 10-46-10-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTION PICTURE THEATERS; OPERA HOUSES 

Sec. 10-64. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful and a punishable offense for any person to operate or conduct any opera house, moving picture theater, vaudeville theater, or other theater without a license. Each day that such opera house, moving picture theater, vaudeville theater or other theater is operated or conducted without a license shall be and constitute a separate offense and a violation of this section. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. III, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.20; Ord. No. 792, 10-21-1935) 
Sec. 10-65. - Fee schedule. 
    The annual license fee to be charged by the city for operating opera houses, moving picture theaters, vaudeville theaters or other theaters within the city, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For opera houses, moving picture theaters, vaudeville theaters, or other theaters, having a seating capacity of 500 or less ..... $35.00 
(2)  For opera houses, moving picture theaters, vaudeville theaters, or other theaters, having a seating capacity of more than 500 and not exceeding 1,000 ..... $50.00 
(3)  For opera houses, moving picture theaters, vaudeville theaters, or other theaters, having a seating capacity of 1,000 or more ..... $75.00 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. III, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.20; Ord. No. 792, 10-21-1935) 
Secs. 10-66-10-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENTERTAINMENT AT RESTAURANTS AND HOTELS 

Sec. 10-89. - Licenses required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give, conduct, keep, allow, or maintain any form of entertainment, dancing, vaudeville, amusement, or exhibition, at, in, or in connection with any public restaurant, inn, tavern, hotel, club, or any other public eating place within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained a license therefor from the city controller. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the use of a radio or television set in such places. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to any person engaged in any civic, religious, or fraternal enterprise. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. IV, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.30; Ord. No. 790, 10-21-1935) 
Sec. 10-90. - Application fee; transferability. 
(a)  Any person desiring to give, conduct, keep, allow, or maintain any form of entertainment, dancing, music, vaudeville, amusement, or exhibition at, in, or in connection with any public restaurant, inn, tavern, hotel, club, or any public eating place, shall first file an application for a license therefor with the city controller, which application shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed place to be licensed, the character and nature of entertainment, dancing, music, vaudeville, amusement, or exhibition proposed to be given, conducted, kept, allowed, or maintained, and with the application shall deposit a receipt from the city treasurer, which receipt shall show that the applicant has paid to such treasurer the sum hereinafter fixed to be paid for such license. The controller shall thereupon issue such license to the applicant unless it shall appear upon careful inquiry that the applicant has been guilty of a violation of any federal or state law, or city ordinance involving moral turpitude, in which case the controller shall refuse to issue the license. 
(b)  The license fee herein provided for shall be $12.00 per annum and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. IV, §§ 2, 5; Code 1985, § 111.31; Ord. No. 790, 10-21-1935) 
Sec. 10-91. - Hours for entertainment. 
    No entertainment, dancing, music, vaudeville, amusement, or exhibition shall be given, conducted, kept, allowed, or maintained in places so licensed between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon of any day. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. IV, § 3; Code 1985, § 111.32; Ord. No. 790, 10-21-1935; Ord. No. 2082, 9-6-1977) 
Sec. 10-92. - Boisterous or indecent entertainment prohibited. 
(a)  No person to whom any license may have been granted under this article shall give, conduct, keep, allow, or maintain in the place so licensed any form of entertainment, dancing, music, vaudeville, amusement, or exhibition which is boisterous, noisy, loud, lewd, indecent, offensive, or immoral. This section shall also apply to the use of a radio or television set in any place or places defined in section 10-89. 
(b)  The license may be revoked by the city controller for any violation of this section, and the licensee shall be subject also to the penalty hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Any such license may be revoked by the city controller for any violation of the federal laws, or laws of the state, or ordinances of this city committed in the place so licensed. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. IV, § 4; Code 1985, § 111.33; Ord. No. 790, 10-21-1935) 
Secs. 10-93-10-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CARNIVALS 

Sec. 10-113. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Carnival means any group of exhibitions consisting of the display of freaks, monstrosities, exhibitions of skill, lewd dancing or lewd exhibitions of any kind or description, or any one or more of such displays; including amusement devices such as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, or any other amusement rides; and including games of chance in which the public or any person attending such place is invited to take part. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. V, § 3; Code 1985, § 111.40; Ord. No. 866, 10-21-1940; Ord. No. 1560, 3-16-1970) 
Sec. 10-114. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons to operate or maintain any carnival within the corporate limits of the city, without first obtaining a permit from the board of public works and safety. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain any carnival within two miles of the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained a permit from the board of public works and safety, provided that this article shall have no effect within the corporate limits of the City of South Bend, Indiana. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art V, §§ 1, 2; Code 1985, § 111.41; Ord. No. 866, 10-21-1940; Ord. No. 1560, 3-16-1970) 
Secs. 10-115-10-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MARATHON CONTESTS 

Sec. 10-142. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, operate, maintain, promote, or aid in the advertising, operating, promoting, or maintaining any mental or physical endurance contest in the nature of a marathon, walkathon, skatathon, or any other such endurance contest of a like or similar nature, whether under that or similar names. Nothing in this section shall apply to the continuance of the ordinary amateur or professional athletic events or contests of high school, college, or intercollegiate sports. 
(Code 1968, tit. 40, art. VI, § 1; Code 1985, § 111.50; Ord. No. 774, 10-29-1934) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), adopted June 1, 2015, amended ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 14, §§ 14-1-14-24, 14-50-14-61, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1985 Code, §§ 91.01, 91.03-91.34; Ord. No. 3092, adopted Sept. 18, 1987; Ord. No. 3105, adopted Oct. 5, 1987; Ord. No. 4152, adopted April 7, 1997; and Ord. No. 4969, § 1(exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2005. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to deposit, leave, drop-off or otherwise dispose of any live animal on public or private property without providing the requisite care prescribed under this chapter. 
    A.D.B.A. means the American Dog Breeders Association. 
    Agent means any person 18 years or older who is authorized by the animal's owner to act on such owner's behalf. 
    A.K.C. means the American Kennel Club. 
    Altered animal means any animal that has been operated on to prevent it from procreating. 
    Animal means any live, nonhuman, vertebrate, or invertebrate creature that is domestic, wild, or exotic. 
    Animal control agency means any governmental or private entity charged with or contracted with and given authority for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter for and on behalf of the city. 
    Animal control commission means the governing board established by this chapter. 
    Animal control officer means a person authorized to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal performances or exhibitions means any spectacle, performance, display, act, exhibition, or event in which animals are used. 
    Animal shelter means a facility or vehicle operated by a governmental or private entity for the purpose of providing or promoting animal welfare and the humane treatment of animals. 
    At large means an animal that is: 
(1)  Not on a leash and is off the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper; 
(2)  On a leash that does not adequately confine the animal to the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper; or 
(3)  On a leash that is not otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. 
    Restrictions pertaining to at large animals shall not apply to free-roaming cats. 
    Attack dog means any dog that is trained to attack upon command or those that do attack or have attacked another animal or human being. This definition excludes K-9 dog corps in use by law enforcement agencies. 
    Auction means any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded by any means, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter as animal shelters. This definition shall also include the groups that sponsor such events. 
    Bite means to seize, tear, wound, or cut with the teeth, resulting in a break in the skin. 
    Breeder means any person or for-profit business or corporation which harbors or keeps any animals, and allows or causes those animals to procreate, for the purpose of selling the offspring. 
    Cattery means any person engaged in keeping more than three unaltered cats. 
    Circus means any performances, which are given for a fee, by traveling companies on vacant lots, using tents, or some other kind of temporary enclosure, for sheltering the public. Circuses are also subject to the licensing provisions set forth in this chapter. 
    Controlled animal means any animal not defined as a domestic animal, with the exception of small, nonpoisonous aquatic or amphibious animals, nonpoisonous reptilian animals, small cage birds, and psittacine, and whose possession requires a valid city controlled animal permit. The term "controlled animal" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  All poisonous animals, including rear-fang snakes. 
(2)  Apes: chimpanzees (Pan), gibbons (Hylobates), gorillas (Gorilla), orangutans (Pongo), and siamangs (Symphalangus); 
(3)  Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus); 
(4)  Bears (Ursidae); 
(5)  Bison (Bison); 
(6)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus); 
(7)  Crocodilians (Crocodilia); 
(8)  Constrictor snakes, such as boa, python, and anaconda; 
(9)  Coyotes (Canis latrans); 
(10)  Deer (Cervidae), including all members of the deer family, such as white-tailed deer, elk, antelope, and moose; 
(11)  Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta); 
(12)  Game cocks and other fighting birds; 
(13)  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae); 
(14)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae); 
(15)  Jaguars (Panthera onca); 
(16)  Leopards (Panthera pardus); 
(17)  Lions (Panthera leo); 
(18)  Lynxes (Lynx); 
(19)  Monkeys; 
(20)  Ostriches (Struthio); 
(21)  Piranha fish (Characidae); 
(22)  Pumas (Felis concolor), also known as cougars, mountain lions, and panthers; 
(23)  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocerotidae); 
(24)  Sharks (class Chondrichthyes); 
(25)  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia); 
(26)  Spiders and insects which are poisonous; 
(27)  Tigers (Panthera tigris); 
(28)  Walking Catfish; or 
(29)  Wolves (Canis lupus). 
    Criminal trespass shall have the meaning set forth in IC 35-43-2-2. 
    Dangerous animal means: 
(1)  Any animal which: 
a.  Has attacked or bitten another animal while off the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper; 
b.  Has attacked, attempted to attack, bitten, or seriously injured any human being, without provocation, whether on or off the property of its owner, its owner's agent, or its keeper; 
c.  Has a history, documented with a public agency or its designee, of attacking or biting any humans or domestic animals; 
d.  Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of humans or domestic animals; 
e.  Has been found to be at large and has been documented to be at large by an animal control officer on three or more separate occasions in a 12-month period and has at any time been documented to show aggressive behavior; or 
(2)  No animal shall be considered a dangerous animal if the animal causes injury or damage to a person while that person is: 
a.  Committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against the owner or agent of the owner; 
b.  Committing a criminal trespass upon the premises occupied by the owner, agent, or keeper of the animal; or 
c.  Teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal. 
(3)  No K-9 patrol dogs or police dogs owned or kept by a law enforcement agency shall be considered a dangerous animal when used in the line of duty or for law enforcement purposes. 
    Designee means a person, organization, or entity selected, appointed, or nominated for a particular purpose or duty. 
    Domestic animal means any animal that is a member of one of the following species: 
(1)  Dog (Canis familiaris); 
(2)  Cat (Felis cattus or Felis domesticus); 
(3)  Cattle (Bos domesticus, Bos taurus, or Bos indicus); 
(4)  Horse (Equus caballus); 
(5)  Donkey (Equus asinus); 
(6)  Sheep (Ovis aries); 
(7)  Goat (Capra hircus); 
(8)  Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus); 
(9)  Mouse (Mus musculus); 
(10)  Rat (Rattus); 
(11)  Guinea pig (Cavis procellus); 
(12)  Hamster (Mesocriecetus auratus); 
(13)  Gerbil (Gerbillus); 
(14)  Cow or ox (Bovine); 
(15)  Pigeon, homing, or racing; 
(16)  Chicken, turkey, goose, duck; 
(17)  Swine; 
(18)  Chinchillas; 
(19)  Mink; 
(20)  Ferrets; 
(21)  Bisons; 
(22)  Llamas; and 
(23)  All other animals defined in IC 15-2.1-2-15. 
    Eartipping means the removal of the distal one-quarter of a cat's left ear to indicate the cat has been spayed or neutered and vaccinated as part of a trap-neuter-return program for feral cats. 
    Escape-proof enclosure means a facility secured by latch, lock, or bolt and is an enclosure or kennel, fully contained by wire (minimum of 11-gauge), six-sided (including the top), of which one can be a concrete or brick floor, and that an animal cannot escape from without opening a lock or bolt. 
    Exotic animal means any animal whose normal native habitat is not indigenous to the continental United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii. This definition does not include fish, furbearing animals commercially bred for the furrier trade, and birds protected under federal laws and regulations. 
    Exposed to rabies means any human or nonhuman, warm-blooded mammal that has been bitten or exposed to any other animal known or reasonably suspected to have been infected with rabies. 
    Exterminator means any person or company who receives payment for the removal of nuisance animals from commercial or private property. 
    Fight means a conflict between two or more animals that is intentionally organized for such purpose. 
    Foster animal means any animal that is being harbored for the purposes of permanent adoption placement. All individuals with foster animals in the city must work with an established agency and adhere to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Fowl means any kind of wild or domestic bird, excluding homing or racing pigeons, canaries, parrots, or similar types of birds normally kept in cages. 
    Free-roaming cat means any unowned, outdoor cat. 
    Harboring means the actions of any person that permit an animal habitually to remain, to be lodged or to be fed within one's home, store, enclosure, yard, or place of business or any premises on which such person resides or controls. An animal shall be presumed harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
    Health care provider means any clinic, physician, veterinarian, nurse, E.M.T., paramedic, first responder, hospital, emergency room, urgent care clinic, or veterinary clinic or hospital. 
    Humane officer means any person or agency designated by the state or the city as a person who is qualified to perform the duties required by the law of this city and state regarding animals. 
    Keeper means any person, other than the owner, who has actual or constructive possession of an animal for the purpose of managing, controlling, or caring for such animal. A person shall be construed as a keeper of an animal even if he does not have the owner's permission. 
    Kennel means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting, or keeping more than three dogs for the purpose of hire, training for a fee, or selling. 
    Leash means a cord, chain, rope, strap, or other such physical restraint. 
    Microchip means a tiny computer chip, implanted underneath the skin of an animal, that contains identification information relating to that animal. For the purposes of this chapter, only standard 125 mz chips implanted in the universal location for small animals are acceptable. 
    Muzzle means a device constructed of strong, soft material or metal, designed to fasten over the mouth of an animal, without interfering with its vision or respiration or causing injury to the animal, to prevent the animal from biting any person or other animal. 
    Nip or scratch means to pinch or squeeze with the teeth or claws, not necessarily breaking the skin or damaging any tissue. 
    Not-for-profit means a business, association, or entity established or organized as a not-for-profit corporation under state law or recognized as not for profit by the Internal Revenue Service or the state department of revenue. The term "for-profit" means all other types of businesses, associations, or entities. 
    Off property means beyond the legal boundaries of the real property on which the owner, agent, or keeper resides. 
    Owner means any person 18 years of age or older having temporary or permanent custody of, sheltering or having charge of, harboring, exercising control over, or having property rights to any animal covered by this chapter. 
    Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act, exhibit or event other than a circus, in which performing animals are used. 
    Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
    Pet shop means any person, group of persons, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise, which sells or barters animals. 
    Police dogs or K-9 patrol dogs means professionally trained dogs used by public safety officers for law enforcement or investigative purposes and activities. 
    Provoked means to deliberately arouse, incite, or excite. 
    Public nuisance animal means any animal that endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any animal found running at large; 
(2)  Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way; 
(3)  Any animal that chases or interferes with motor vehicles in a public right-of-way; 
(4)  Any animal that attacks other animals; 
(5)  Any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any property other than that of its owner; 
(6)  Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(7)  Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(8)  Any animal in heat that is not confined or restrained so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals; 
(9)  Any animal in any section of a public park, playground, school yard, or other recreational area that is found running at large; 
(10)  Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored; 
(11)  Any animal that trespasses on the private property of persons other than the owner of the animal; or 
(12)  Any animal determined to be a dangerous animal. 
    Rabies vaccination means an injection, licensed by the U.S.D.A. and approved by the state board of health, given to a dog, cat, or other animal by a licensed veterinarian to prevent the spread of rabies. 
    Restraint means the securing of an animal by leash or lead, or confining it within the real property limits of its owner or agent. 
    Riding school or stable means any place that provides, for a fee, boarding and/or riding instructions for a horse, pony, donkey, mule, or burro. 
    Rodeo means a performance featuring bronco riding, steer wrestling, calf roping, greased pig contest, or bull riding. 
    Serious injury or death means: 
(1)  Any bodily injury, which is caused by an animal and is medically documented, that: 
a.  Creates a substantial risk of death; 
b.  Causes serious permanent disfigurement, unconsciousness, or extreme pain; or 
c.  Results in a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of a bodily member or organ. 
(2)  This definition shall not include any nip from an animal. 
    Service animal means any animal that is trained to assist a disabled person. 
    Stray means any animal that is not under restraint and/or upon reasonable inquiry by an animal control officer does not appear to have an owner. 
    Trap-neuter-return means a management technique in which homeless, free-roaming cats are humanely trapped, evaluated and sterilized by a licensed veterinarian, vaccinated against rabies, and then returned to the habitat in which they were found. 
    U.K.C. means the United Kennel Club. 
    Unconfined dangerous animal means a dangerous animal which is not securely confined indoors, not under restraint, or not confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner, agent, or keeper of such animal. 
    Unprovoked means without incitement or stimulation. 
    U.S.D.A. means the United States Department of Agriculture. 
    Veterinarian means any person licensed and accredited to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
    Wild animal means any animal not a domestic or exotic animal, with the exception of small, nonpoisonous aquatic or amphibious animals and small cage birds, which are normally found in the wild state. 
    Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals, which is operated by a person, partnership, corporation, or governmental agency that is established for educational purposes and is properly zoned for such use, and which possesses valid licenses and permits as required under federal or state law. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-2. - General animal care requirements. 
    Every owner or his agent residing within the corporate limits of the city shall see that each of his animals: 
(1)  Is kept in a clean, sanitary, and healthy manner and is not confined so as to be forced to stand, sit, or lie in its own excrement; 
(2)  Has sufficient and wholesome food and water, which is proper and nutritional for that species of animal; 
(3)  Lives in a structure, meeting minimum veterinary standards, which will protect that animal from all elements of the weather and will allow that animal to stand, sit, and lie down without restriction, and which is kept in a sanitary manner; 
(4)  If ill, diseased, or injured, receives proper veterinary care as necessary to promote the good health of the animal and prevent the transmittal of a disease to other animals or human beings; 
(5)  Is not beaten, ill-treated, overloaded, over-worked, tormented, or otherwise abused or neglected, or involved in any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans; 
(6)  Is not physically altered in any manner by anyone other than a veterinarian, except for tattooing for identification purposes and grooming; 
(7)  Is not abandoned, neglected, or tortured; 
(8)  Does not become a public nuisance; 
(9)  Does not become a dangerous animal; 
(10)  In the case of a dog or cat over the age of three months, is properly vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian annually, or upon such frequency as may be specified by state law, and such animals shall be licensed as required by this chapter and state law; 
(11)  Is properly restrained and not at large; 
(12)  During mating season, is kept in a secure enclosure in such a manner that it cannot come into contact with another animal of the same species, except for planned breeding; 
(13)  No animal may be induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical, or manual devices in a situation which will cause or is likely to cause excessive physical injury or suffering. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-3. - Sale of animals as novelties or use as prize prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Sale of animals as novelties or use as prize prohibited. 
(1)  No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any animal, reptile, fish, or bird as a novelty or as an advertising device. 
(2)  No rabbit, chick, gosling, duckling, turkey, or other fowl may be dyed or otherwise colored artificially; nor shall any dyed or artificially colored rabbits, chicks, goslings, ducklings, turkeys, or other fowl be sold, offered for sale, displayed, used as barter, or given away. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of natural chicks, ducklings, goslings, turkeys, or other domestic fowl in proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling them to be raised for commercial purposes. Nor shall this section prohibit a pet shop holding a valid permit under this chapter, or a legitimate humane society or animal shelter, from humanely caring for, adopting out, or selling animals as pets. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-4. - Motor vehicle accidents involving animals. 
    Any person operating a motor vehicle who knowingly hits, runs over, or causes injury to an animal shall immediately notify the police department. Such notice shall include the motorist's name, address, phone number, type of animal hit, and the location of the animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-5. - Animals in motor vehicles. 
    No animal shall be left in a motor vehicle when the conditions in that vehicle would constitute a health hazard to that animal, or when the weather would constitute a health hazard to such animal confined in said motor vehicle; nor shall any person transport any animal in an unenclosed truck bed or open section of any vehicle unless the animal is enclosed in a cage which is securely fastened to the vehicle. At the request of a humane officer, a law enforcement officer may act to remedy the hazard by any means, including gaining entry to impound the endangered animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-6. - Poisoning of animals. 
(a)  No person shall deposit, dispose, or place any poisonous substance on any public or private property within the corporate limits of the city, if a human or domestic animal is reasonably likely to consume or come into contact with such substance. 
(b)  A person shall not be liable under subsection (a) of this section for leaving common rat or mouse poisons or insecticides, in any form, on his property if the person exercises reasonable care in restricting a domestic animal's access to such poisons so that only the targeted rodents or insects are exposed to said poisons. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-7. - Trapping of animals restricted. 
    No person shall trap animals or fowl within the city limits, unless such traps are approved by an animal care facility and used for the control of nuisance animals. This prohibition shall not apply to any trap specifically designed to kill rats, mice, gophers, or moles unless the property owner is unaware of their placement. Persons who believe that this section is being violated shall file their grievance with the animal control commission for review. This section does not apply to city-approved practitioners of trap-neuter-return. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-8. - Maximum number of dogs or cats. 
(a)  No person shall keep more than a total of three dogs or cats over the age of six months per household in any residential area zone. These restrictions mean a total of three animals, for example, two dogs and one cat, or two cats and one dog, but in no event shall the total number exceed three of such animals per household. 
(b)  This restriction shall not apply to property which is at least one-third of an acre of land (14,520 square feet); however, any person owning more than three of such animals must comply with subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Persons desiring to have more than three animals who meet the regulation set forth in subsection (b) of this section must have a minimum of 1,000 additional square feet for each additional animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-9. - Acreage requirements for certain domestic animals; prohibition of swine. 
(a)  Any person desiring to keep any of the following domestic animals or fowl in the city must have a minimum of five contiguous acres of land in the city, upon which the animals would be kept and which acreage must be enclosed by a fence to confine such animals: 
(1)  Cow, ox, cattle, calves, or other livestock; 
(2)  Donkey, ass, burro, or mule; 
(3)  Sheep; 
(4)  Goat, except pygmy goat (see subsection (e) of this section); 
(5)  Chickens, roosters, geese, turkeys, ducks, or other fowl, except racing or homing pigeons; 
(6)  Bees; 
(7)  Horses; 
(8)  Bison; 
(9)  Llamas; or 
(10)  Swine, except potbelly pig (see subsection (b) of this section). 
    The maximum number of such animals which may be maintained on such property shall be determined in light of current animal husbandry and veterinary standards. 
(b)  In no event shall the shelter and feeding station for any of the animals or fowl designated in subsection (a) of this section be closer than 50 feet from the adjoining property line. 
(1)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping of bees in a hive, stand, or box located or kept within a zoological park, school, or university building for the purpose of study or observation, as long as the public safety is ensured. 
(2)  Bees must be kept in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  If bee colonies are kept within 50 feet of any exterior boundary of the property on which the hive, stand, or box is located, a barrier shall be erected that will prevent bees from flying through it. 
b.  Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be provided on the said premises. 
c.  The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with the provisions of state statutes. 
(c)  Any person desiring to raise rabbits or pets or racing or homing pigeons within the city must keep such animals and birds in safe and sanitary conditions so that a public nuisance is not created. 
(d)  No person may keep within the city, as presently or hereinafter established, any swine, pig pens, or hog sties. Possession of said items constitutes a public nuisance. 
(e)  Potbellied pigs and pygmy goats shall be allowed only on a lot with a minimum of two acres of land for each individual animal, and all other sections of this chapter shall be added hereto. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-10. - Owners or agents responsible for removing animal wastes and dead animals. 
(a)  Any owner or his agent taking the owner's dog or cat outside of the owner's real property limits must immediately remove any excrement deposited by the animal on any public or private property, except in the case of a guide dog for a blind person or service dog for a deaf or physically disabled person. 
(b)  The owner of any dead animal shall remove and properly dispose of the animal within 24 hours after its death. The real property owner is responsible for removal of any strange animal carcass on his real property. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-11. - Animal bites. 
(a)  If any person is a victim of an animal bite, he shall immediately notify the county health department, city police department, or animal control agency of the incident, and provide a description of the animal and an identification, if possible, of the owner. A written report shall be forwarded to the animal control agency. When an animal is determined to have bitten a person, the animal shall be confined in quarantine for a period of not less than ten days. 
(b)  If the animal's owner which has bitten a person presents proof of current rabies inoculations, the animal may be left in the charge of the owner, under quarantine, unless, in the judgment of the humane officer or police officer and based upon considerations of public safety, the humane officer determines it should be removed to an animal shelter or veterinary hospital for the period of observation. 
(c)  In addition to any other legal obligations prescribed by law, the owner shall pay for all costs incurred in the quarantine and/or impoundment of the animal before such animal will be released. If the owner is unable or unwilling to pay for said costs, the animal may be humanely euthanized, and the owner shall still remain liable to the animal shelter for any costs incurred in said quarantine and/or impoundment. 
(d)  If the owner of the quarantined animal cannot be determined, or if the owner does not furnish proof of current rabies inoculation, the animal shall be impounded under the authority and discretion of the city animal control agency and confined in the city's animal control facility or an approved animal care facility for a period of observation of not fewer than ten days. 
(e)  Animal control officers shall be empowered to enter onto private property for the purpose of impounding animals which are known to have bitten a person and shall obtain legal process to do so if necessary. 
(f)  Unless otherwise provided, the city and any of its agents shall comply with the standards set forth in IC 15-2.1-6-1 through IC 15-2.1-6-13, entitled "Rabies." 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-12. - Vaccination of dogs, cats and ferrets required. 
(a)  No animal owner or his agent shall keep or harbor a dog, cat or ferret over the age of three months unless it has been vaccinated according to the board of animal health requirements by a licensed veterinarian with anti-rabies vaccine. This requirement does not apply to free-roaming cats. 
(b)  The owner shall maintain proof of an animal's vaccination so that it can be presented to the city or its agents upon request. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall subject the owner of said unvaccinated dog, cat or ferret to being issued an ordinance violation citation, subjecting the owner to a fine as set forth in section 14-24. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-13. - Interference with humane officer prohibited. 
    No person shall interfere with or impede a humane officer or any other authorized agent in the performance of his duties as set forth in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-14. - Spaying, neutering, and microchipping of adopted animals. 
(a)  Any dog or cat adopted from a local humane society, animal care facility, or animal adoption agency shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days of adoption if the dog or cat is over three months of age. If the dog or cat is less than three months of age upon adoption, it shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian upon reaching the age of six months. A dog or cat shall not be spayed or neutered if a licensed veterinarian certifies that said animal is physically unable to undergo such an operation within the time limitations. The individual adopting the dog or cat must sign a written agreement with the adopting facility guaranteeing that such animal shall be neutered or spayed within the time limitations specified in this section. 
(b)  Any dog or cat adopted from a local humane society, animal care facility, or animal adoption agency shall be microchipped by a licensed veterinarian, or person supervised by a licensed veterinarian, before leaving the animal shelter. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-15. - Exclusion of service dogs prohibited. 
    No person owning, operating, or maintaining any public place of business to which the general public is invited for any business purpose shall exclude therefrom any dog that has been trained to assist the blind, the hearing-impaired, or the physically disabled. However, such dog must be in the company of the handicapped person for whom it was trained to assist or in the company of a licensed obedience service trainer. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-16. - Confinement by other than city officials; notice required. 
    Unless authorized by the owner of an animal, no person shall hold or retain possession of any animal of which he is not the owner for more than 24 hours without first reporting the possession of the animal to a humane officer, or an animal control agency, or its designee. When reporting possession of an animal, such person shall give his name and address, a description of the animal, a true and complete statement of the circumstances under which he took possession of the animal, and the precise location where the animal is confined. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-17. - Breaking into animal shelter prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break into any animal shelter where animals are impounded by the city or in any way remove or assist in the removal of any animal from the described property, without lawful permission. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-18. - Dangerous and poisonous animals prohibited. 
    No person shall harbor or possess within the city any poisonous animal (whether by birth or otherwise), reptile, amphibian, fish, or insect, or any animal that poses a threat to the public health and safety. Such animal may be impounded by the animal control agency and disposed of in a manner determined to be in the best interest of the animal and the public. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-19. - Impoundment procedures. 
(a)  An animal control officer, humane officer, or police officer may immediately seize, impound, or confine any of the following animals: 
(1)  Any dog or cat without a valid license tag; 
(2)  Any animal running at large; 
(3)  Any animal constituting a public nuisance; 
(4)  Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of care; 
(5)  Any unattended animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected; 
(6)  Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies; 
(7)  Any animal charged with being dangerous or determined to be dangerous by the animal control agency; 
(8)  Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested, or evicted from his regular place of residence; 
(9)  Any unattended animal that is exhibiting aggressive or dangerous behavior and is not sufficiently confined to its own property. 
Parts (1), (2), (3), and (9) above shall not apply to ear-tipped, free-roaming cats. 
(b)  If any dangerous, ferocious, or vicious animal is found at large and cannot be safely impounded, an animal may be tranquilized, slain, or humanely euthanized to prevent harm or undue suffering by a police officer, an animal control officer, or a humane officer. 
(c)  Impounded dogs and cats that are not properly licensed must be kept for no fewer than two days before being adopted out or humanely euthanized. 
(d)  If dogs and cats licensed under this chapter are impounded by the animal control agency, an attempt shall be made by the humane officer to return the animal to the owner, as indicated on the records of the animal control agency, as soon as is practical after the time of the impoundment. If the attempt to return the animal is impossible or without success, the animal control agency shall send a written notice to the owner at the address indicated in the records of the animal control agency, that this agency has in its possession this animal and that unless this animal is claimed by the owner within 14 days from the date of its impoundment, the animal may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. This process shall only apply for a first time violation. On any subsequent violation, the impounded dogs or cats licensed under this chapter shall be kept for no fewer than five days to permit their owners to claim them. After the fifth day, if their owners have not claimed the animal and paid the required fees, the dog or cat may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. 
(e)  All other impounded animals, except dogs and cats specifically covered herein, shall be under the authority of the humane officer. The animals shall be held at least one day, after which time the animal shelter shall have the authority to take whatever action is necessary with regard to adoption or euthanasia of such animals. 
(f)  The city animal control agency shall have authority to take whatever action is reasonably necessary, including humane euthanization, to deal with a sick or injured animal, for the welfare of the animal and for the safety of humane officers and the public. 
(g)  Nothing contained herein shall limit the animal shelter's authority to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to provide veterinary care by a licensed veterinarian for a sick or injured animal. 
(h)  All impounded dogs and cats claimed by their owners shall be permanently microchipped for identification purposes. 
(i)  Any animal impounded in an animal control facility, if not reclaimed by its owner as provided for herein, shall thereby become the property of the animal control agency and, if not adopted by the public, shall be humanely euthanized. 
(j)  Reclaiming procedures of impounded animals. 
(1)  An owner who is reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay the animal control agent for all fees and expenses incurred while the animal is impounded. Such fees and expenses shall include, but are not limited to: redemption fee, boarding fee, microchip identification fee, permit and licensing fee, vaccination expenses, veterinary service expenses, and any other expenses reasonably incurred for the benefit of the animal. 
(2)  No unlicensed dog or cat shall be released from an animal shelter without a city pet license being issued in accordance with this chapter, except a dog or cat less than three months old. Before a city pet license is issued for a dog or cat, the owner must show proof that the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. If the owner cannot show such proof and the shelter where the animal is impounded does not have licensed veterinary services on site to administer such vaccination, the owner can gain release of his dog or cat by showing a receipt for prepaid veterinarian charges for rabies vaccination and agreeing to get his dog or cat vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian within 48 hours after such release. After showing proof within 72 hours after release that the owner's dog or cat actually received a rabies vaccination, the owner shall be issued a license tag. Failure of the animal owner to obtain such vaccination after such release shall constitute a breach of the release agreement and shall entitle the city animal control agency to regain possession of the animal. 
(k)  Licensed animal (reclaiming). 
(1)  An owner redeeming an impounded but licensed animal shall pay no redemption fee to the city, but shall pay for any and all costs incurred by the animal control agency under this chapter. 
(2)  An animal impounded for a second time within a 12-month period shall not be released to its owner unless the owner pays a redemption fee of $25.00 to the animal control agency and pays for any and all expenses incurred by said agency under this chapter. 
(3)  Such redemption fee shall increase by an additional $25.00 per impoundment for each subsequent time within a 12-month period that the same animal or any other animal belonging to the same owner becomes impounded. Any animal impounded, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, on three separate occasions shall be considered a dangerous animal. 
(l)  Reclaiming unlicensed animal. 
(1)  An owner redeeming an impounded but unlicensed animal shall pay to the animal control agency a redemption fee of $50.00 before the animal is released. 
(2)  Such redemption fee shall increase by an additional $25.00 per impoundment for each subsequent time within a 12-month period that the same or any other unlicensed animal belonging to the same owner becomes impounded. 
(m)  Any impounded animal which is not required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner for a fee of $25.00. Any animal impounded on three separate occasions shall be considered a nuisance animal under this chapter. The city animal control agency shall collect all such licensing and redemption fees for the city and shall account and pay over to the city controller such amounts of such fees as required by the animal control contract between the city and the animal control agency. 
(n)  An animal's owner shall be liable for any expenses, including veterinary services, transportation or handling expenses incurred by the local humane society, animal care facility, animal shelter, or any other agency under this chapter. 
(o)  When impoundment is authorized under this section and the animal is not found by animal control officials or the police, the animal control agency is authorized to obtain a court order requiring the animal's owner to present the animal at the time and place of the agency's choosing. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-20. - Protected animals. 
(a)  No person shall possess, offer for sale, attempt to buy or own within the city any of the following animals of either thoroughbred or hybrid stock or pedigree: 
(1)  All wild cats of the family felidae. 
(2)  Polar bear (Thalarctos maritimus). 
(3)  Red wolf (Canis niger and hybrids). 
(4)  Vicuna (Vicugna). 
(5)  Alligator. 
(6)  Caiman or crocodile of the order of crocodilia. 
(7)  Gray or timber wolf (Canis lupus and hybrids). 
(8)  Sea otter (Enhydra lutris). 
(9)  Pacific ridley turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea). 
(10)  Atlantic green turtle (Chelonia mydas). 
(11)  Mexican ridley turtle (Lepidochelys kempi). 
(b)  No person shall buy, sell, or offer for sale or own a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird, amphibian, or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1969 (Public Law 135, 91st Congress), as amended. 
(c)  No person shall import or cause to be imported into this city any part of the plumage, skin, or dead body of any species of hawk, owl, or eagle. This division shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the importation or use of the plumage, skin, body, or any part thereof legally collected for use by American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the preservation of their tribal customs and heritage. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to prevent the importation, possession, purchase, or sale of any species to any person or organization licensed to present a circus or carnival pursuant to this Code. 
(e)  A humane officer may seize and impound any animal being offered for sale or owned in violation of this section. In addition to any fine issued for violation of this section, the person violating any provision of this section shall be responsible for any and all costs expended by the animal control agency in transporting, keeping and/or handling the animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-21. - Keeping certain animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain, or have in his possession or under his control, within the city, any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal, or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious, or dangerous propensities. 
(b)  No person shall keep, maintain or have in his possession or under his control, within the city, any of the following animals of either thoroughbred or hybrid stock or pedigree: 
(1)  Any animal poisonous by birth or otherwise, including rear-fang snakes; 
(2)  Apes such as chimpanzee (Pan), gibbons (Hylobates), gorillas (Gorilla), orangutans (Pongo), and siamangs (Symphalangus); 
(3)  Baboons (Papio, Mandrillus); 
(4)  Bears (Ursidae); 
(5)  Bison (Bison); 
(6)  Cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus); 
(7)  Crocodilians (Crocodilia); 
(8)  Constrictor snakes including, but not limited to, boa, python, and anaconda; 
(9)  Coyotes (Canis latrans); 
(10)  Deer (Cervidae), such as white-tailed deer, elk, antelope, and moose; 
(11)  Elephants (Elephas and Loxodonta); 
(12)  Game cocks and other fighting birds; 
(13)  Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae); 
(14)  Hyenas (Hyaenidae); 
(15)  Jaguars (Panthera onca); 
(16)  Leopards (Panthera pardus); 
(17)  Lions (Panthera leo); 
(18)  Lynxes (Lynx); 
(19)  Monkeys, old world (cercopithecidae), new world; 
(20)  Ostriches (Struthio); 
(21)  Piranha fish (Characidae); 
(22)  Pumas (Felis concolor), such as cougars, mountain lions, and panthers; 
(23)  Rhinoceroses (Rhinocero tidae); 
(24)  Sharks (class Chondrichthyes); 
(25)  Snow leopards (Panthera uncia); 
(26)  Spiders and insects which are poisonous; 
(27)  Tigers (Panthera tigris); 
(28)  Wolves (Canis lupus and hybrids); 
(29)  Monitor lizard; or 
(30)  Wild animals. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to institutions of higher learning, zoological parks, or circuses if: 
(1)  Their location conforms to the provisions of city ordinances. 
(2)  All animals and animal quarters are kept in accordance with the animal care requirements in this chapter. 
(3)  Animals are confined in such a manner so as to prevent their escape and protect the public from coming in direct contact with them. 
(d)  In addition to any fine issued for violation of this section, the person violating any provision of this section shall be responsible for any and all costs expended by the animal control agency in transporting, keeping and/or handling the animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-22. - Seizure of certain animals. 
(a)  No person shall harbor, own, or confine on his premises any wild animal (ferae naturae). Wild animals shall include, but are not limited to, raccoons, skunks, foxes, squirrels, chipmunks, porcupines, wolves, and woodchucks. 
(b)  Zoological parks, animal care facilities, circuses or carnivals properly licensed pursuant to this chapter, and persons possessing a valid wildlife permit from the state department of conservation are exempt from this section. 
(c)  Any person who owns, possesses, or harbors any wild animal in violation of this section may have the animal seized and impounded. 
(d)  In addition to any fine issued for violation of this section, the person violating any provision of this section shall be responsible for any and all costs expended by the animal control agency in transporting, keeping and/or handling the animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-23. - Serious injury or death. 
(a)  If an animal kills or causes serious injury, the animal shall be deemed a dangerous animal, pursuant to section 14-1, and the animal shall be humanely impounded. The owner shall be responsible for the costs of caring for the animal during the period of impoundment, including, but not limited to, costs of boarding and veterinary treatment, if necessary. If the owner institutes an appeal pursuant to section 14-56, and the animal is ultimately determined not to be a dangerous animal, the owner shall not be charged the costs of boarding the animal. 
(b)  Upon the impoundment of the animal pursuant to this section, the owner shall be given 48 hours to show or apply for a license pursuant to section 14-56 or to appeal the determination that the animal is a dangerous animal pursuant to section 14-1. 
(c)  If the owner fails to appeal or to show proof of or apply for a license within 48 hours of impoundment, or if the owner waives in writing all ownership interests in the animal, the owner's right to possession, title, custody, and care of said animal shall be forfeited, and the animal may be humanely euthanized. 
(d)  If the owner's appeal is denied, the owner shall have 48 hours after the denial to apply for a license pursuant to section 14-56 and 14 days after the denial to actually obtain a dangerous dog permit. The failure to apply within 48 hours of the denial constitutes waiver of ownership rights in the animal. 
(e)  The owner of an animal which kills or causes serious injury to a person who is found guilty of criminal trespass as heretofore described shall not be subject to the violation provisions set forth herein. 
(f)  If a conflict arises between the provisions of this section and other sections of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail due to the public health and safety concerns. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision in this chapter is subject to citations and prosecution through the ordinance violations bureau. A fine schedule is located in section 2-2(b). 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Secs. 14-25-14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION AND LICENSING 

Sec. 14-50. - Performing animal license. 
(a)  No person shall operate or maintain a performing animal/animal exhibition without first having obtained a license from the animal control agency. 
(b)  The applicant shall describe the proposed location, the purposes for which it is maintained, and the dates and hours of such performances. The application shall be accompanied by the written approval of the department of code enforcement showing compliance with the local and state regulations governing the location of and sanitation at the establishment, the written approval of the building, zoning, and public health and safety regulations. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide proof of insurance executed by a company legally authorized to do business in the state. The liability limits shall not be less than the amounts set forth under state law. 
(d)  Each license for any performing animal exhibition shall cost $100.00 per day and shall be valid for no more than five consecutive days. 
(e)  Licenses for such performing animal exhibitions shall not be transferable from one owner to another or to different premises. 
(f)  Any license issued under the provisions of this section may be suspended or revoked for violation of any local, county, or state law regulating such establishments, upon notice and hearing to the licensee as provided in section 2-420. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-51. - Pet registration. 
(a)  This section does not pertain to any dangerous animal, attack dog or free-roaming cats. 
(b)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or having custody of any dog or cat over the age of three months must obtain a pet registration for such animal. No pet registration shall be required of any municipal animal control facility or governmental agency, or for a service dog. Animals belonging to those agencies or persons will be issued complimentary registration tags. 
(c)  A written application for such registration shall be made to the city animal control agency or city controller's office. The applicant shall include his name and address, a description of the animal, payment of the appropriate fee, a valid rabies certificate, and written verification by a licensed veterinarian that the pet has been spayed or neutered. This application must be made within 30 days after either obtaining a dog or cat over three months of age, or after a younger animal attains the age of three months. This requirement shall not apply to a nonresident keeping a dog or cat within the city for not longer than 30 days. 
(d)  A durable tag stamped with a registration number and year of issuance will be provided to pet registration holders for each registration granted. Dogs and cats must wear their tags at all times, except when involved in any organized show, obedience demonstration, training situation, when under the care of a licensed veterinarian, or when properly kenneled. 
(e)  No such registration shall be issued for a dog or cat unless the animal owner provides proof of current and effective rabies vaccination. 
(f)  Owners wishing to purchase a multiyear pet license, may do so at participating veterinarians. Multiyear licenses are issued only to animals that are current on rabies vaccinations, have been properly microchipped, and spayed or neutered. Multiyear licenses are renewable at a participating veterinarian's office every three years, upon update of rabies vaccinations. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-52. - Pet shop permit. 
(a)  No person shall operate a pet shop without first obtaining from the city or its agent a pet shop permit and paying the necessary fees. Any person holding a pet shop permit shall furnish, at the time of sale, to each customer purchasing a dog or cat a written statement containing the following information: 
(1)  Date of sale; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser and permit holder; 
(3)  Permit holder's number; 
(4)  Species, breed, description, age, and sex of dog or cat sold; 
(5)  The animal's origin, its owner's name and address, and its health papers, as required under state law; 
(6)  Vaccination and parasite medication administered to the animal, date administered, and the name of the veterinarian or person who administered the same; 
(7)  Guarantee of good health for a period of not less than one week, with recommendation to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  The permit holder shall retain a copy of said written statement for a period of 12 months from the date of sale, and provide a duplicate copy to the licensing authority if the purchaser resides within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The permit holder shall also deliver to the purchaser at the time of sale a written statement of the registration and licensing requirements applicable to the purchased animal if the purchaser resides within the corporate limits of the city. Such statement shall be prepared by the city and provided by the animal control agency. 
(d)  All pet shops shall take care to house animals in a sanitary manner and to provide appropriate veterinary services, humane care, and housing according to the needs of individual species. 
(e)  Pet shop permits shall cost $100.00, annually. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-53. - Breeder permits. 
(a)  No person shall operate as a breeder without first obtaining from the city or its agent a breeder permit and paying the necessary fees. Any person holding a breeder permit shall furnish, at the time of sale, to each customer purchasing a dog or cat a written statement containing the following information: 
(1)  Date of sale; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser and permit holder; 
(3)  Permit holder's number; 
(4)  Species, breed, description, age, and sex of dog or cat sold; 
(5)  The animal's origin, its owner's name and address, and its health papers, as required under state law; 
(6)  Vaccination and parasite medication administered to the animal, date administered, and the name of the veterinarian or person who administered the same; 
(7)  Guarantee of good health for a period of not less than one week, with recommendation to have the animal examined by a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  The permit holder shall retain a copy of said written statement for a period of 12 months from the date of sale and provide a duplicate copy to the licensing authority if the purchaser resides within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The permit holder shall also deliver to the purchaser at the time of sale a written statement of the registration and licensing requirements applicable to the purchased animal if the purchaser resides within the corporate limits of the city. Such statement shall be prepared by the city and provided by the animal control agency. 
(d)  All breeders shall take care to house animals in a sanitary manner and to provide appropriate veterinary services, humane care, and housing according to the needs of individual species. 
(e)  There shall be four types of breeder's permits. 
(1)  Minor breeder permit. 
a.  Any owner or person having custody of a dog or cat that has delivered a litter, who chooses not to relinquish the animal to the animal control agency and does not choose to have the animal neutered or spayed, shall be required to purchase a minor breeder permit for the sum of $50.00 per animal, plus any applicable kennel/cattery permit fees. 
b.  Each permit will be valid for one year from issuance. 
c.  No litter may be delivered from the permitted cat or dog or on the owner's property during the existence of a minor breeder's permit. Such an unauthorized litter will result in the property and/or animal owner being required to obtain a major breeder permit. 
d.  A permit is needed whether the litter was a result of an intentional pregnancy or not. 
(2)  Major breeder permit. 
a.  Any owner or person having custody of a dog or cat that has delivered more than one litter in 12 months time who chooses not to relinquish the animal to the animal control agency and does not choose to have the animal neutered or spayed, shall be required to purchase a major breeder permit for the sum of $100.00 per animal, plus any applicable kennel/cattery permit fees. 
b.  Each permit will be valid for one year from issuance. 
c.  A permit is necessary whether the pregnancies were intentional or not. 
(3)  Combination permit. 
a.  Any owner or person operating a kennel or a cattery and wishing to be a major or minor breeder shall obtain a combination permit annually. 
b.  The annual fee is $150.00. 
c.  The combination permit will replace the need for obtaining individual permits for each activity, but all requirements for each permit shall be met before a combination permit will be issued. 
(4)  Dangerous dog breeder. 
a.  A person who intends to breed any dangerous animal shall apply for a license to breed such animals from the animal control agency and the city's duly authorized agent. The applicant shall specify in the application the breed, age, sex, and license number of such animal that the person intends to use for breeding. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $200.00. The applicant must address the following items when completing said application: 
1.  Description of the physical facilities where the breeding will take place; 
2.  Authorization to inspect said breeding facilities to ensure compliance with this section and section 14-56; 
3.  Consent to comply with all zoning and public safety laws. 
b.  If the animal control agency or the city's duly authorized agent is satisfied that the applicant meets the requirements under this section, he shall issue a local breeder's license to the applicant; however, a breeder's license shall not be issued to anyone convicted of an offense against an animal as set forth in IC 35-46-3-1. 
c.  The licensee must notify the department of code enforcement, the animal control agency, or the city's duly authorized third party of the birth of all offspring of such animal within 48 hours of such births. 
d.  No person shall breed such animals unless the person has been issued a breeder's license under this section. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-54. - Kennel/cattery permit. 
    Any owner or person operating a kennel or cattery must comply with all animal care and acreage requirements within this article. In addition, such owners or persons must obtain an annual permit according to the following schedule: 
(1)  4-15 animals ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  16-25 animals ..... 75.00 
(3)  26 or more animals ..... 100.00 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-55. - Public nuisance animal permit. 
(a)  License required; appeal from determination of dangerous animal. A person shall not own, harbor, possess, or keep a public nuisance animal unless such animal is licensed under this section or an application for licensing of such animal under this section is pending. Any person whose pet has been determined to be a nuisance animal may file an appeal within 48 hours after such determination. The appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by a nonrefundable appeal fee of $25.00, and be directed to the animal control agency and the department of code enforcement. Free-roaming cats are exempt from this requirement. 
(b)  Application for license; form; accompanying information. Any owner of a public nuisance animal shall apply to the animal control agency or the city's agent for the licensing of said animal. The application shall be on a form provided by the city's agent and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A valid driver's license or state-issued picture identification showing the owner's name and current address; 
(2)  Proof that the applicant owns said animal and is 18 years of age or older; 
(3)  One copy of the current immunization and health records for said animal showing that the animal received a current rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian; 
(4)  Proof that the animal has been microchipped by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  Confinement of animal. The nuisance animal shall be confined, at all times, within an escape-proof dwelling, kennel or appropriate animal control commission-approved fenced-in yard. All exterior doors or gates shall be locked in such a way that the animal cannot remove or unlock it. When such animal is not confined within a dwelling, kennel, or yard, it shall be reined or tethered to its master, owner, or keeper who shall maintain control over the animal to prevent injury to any person or animal. 
(d)  Permit tag. The nuisance animal shall wear a permit tag issued by the animal control agency stating that the animal is registered as a nuisance animal. 
(e)  Assignment of license number. When licensing an animal not previously licensed under this section, the animal control agency or its designee shall microchip the animal and assign a specific license number to said animal, without duplication, which number shall remain the same for the life of the animal. 
(f)  Lost or escaped animal. If the animal is lost or escapes, the owner or the owner's agent shall report said incident immediately to the city animal control agency. 
(g)  Inspection of premises where animal is kept. The animal control agency shall visually inspect the premises where the animal is kept. The inspection will consist of the cage, or if there is no cage, the officer will inspect the escape-proof habitat dwelling, doors, windows, and screen opening to determine if, in fact, they are escape-proof. The animal control agency must be satisfied that the owner has met all licensing requirements before issuing or renewing a permit. 
(h)  Revocation of permit. If a nuisance animal permit is revoked, the owner shall not be reissued another permit. 
(i)  Determination of nuisance animal; time limit for obtaining permit. If the animal control agency and/or department of code enforcement determines that an animal should be deemed a nuisance animal, the owner shall have a maximum of 14 days to obtain the proper permit. If the permit is not obtained within the 14-day period, the animal shall be impounded. The animal will then be held a maximum of ten days so that a permit can be issued. If a permit is still not obtained, the animal shall be adopted or euthanized. 
(j)  Violation of chapter provisions. If the owner of a nuisance animal violates any provisions of this chapter, the animal shall be impounded immediately and held until an animal control commission hearing. At such hearing, the animal control commission shall determine whether in fact a violation of this chapter has occurred. If the commission determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, it shall have the authority to impose a fine and/or order the animal into the custody of the humane society for adoption or euthanized. 
(k)  Change of owner. If a nuisance animal changes owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. The original owner's permit shall not be transferable to the new owner. The original owner shall notify the animal control agency that the animal has been sold or given away. 
(l)  Change of address; notification of animal control agency. The owner of a nuisance animal shall notify the animal control agency if the address changes where the animal is being kept. The owner must report the new address so an inspection can be made of the premises. 
(m)  Expiration of license. All licenses issued under this article shall expire one calendar year from the date of issue, unless authorized, in writing, by the animal control commission pursuant to other provisions in this chapter. 
(n)  Animal running at large, stolen, etc. The owner, or owner's agent, of an animal required to be licensed under this article shall notify the city police department and the city's animal control agency within four hours if said animal is running at large, has been stolen, or has attacked a person or a domestic animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-56. - Dangerous animal/attack dog permit. 
(a)  License required; appeal from determination of dangerous animal. A person shall not own, harbor, possess, or keep an attack dog or any other dangerous animal unless such animal is licensed under this section or an application for licensing of such animal under this section is pending. Any person whose pet has been determined to be a dangerous animal may file an appeal within 48 hours after such determination. The appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by a nonrefundable appeal fee of $25.00, and shall be directed to the animal control agency and the department of code enforcement. 
(b)  Application for license; form; accompanying information. Any owner of an attack dog or other dangerous animal shall apply to the animal control agency or the city's agent for licensing of said animal. The application shall be on a form provided by the city's agent and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A valid driver's license or state-issued picture identification showing the owner's name and current address; 
(2)  Proof that the applicant owns said animal and is 18 years of age or older; 
(3)  One copy of a registration certificate issued for said animal by the A.K.C. and/or A.D.B.A., if available and applicable; 
(4)  One copy of the current immunization and health records for said animal showing that the animal received a current rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian; 
(5)  Proof that the applicant has insurance coverage for not less than $300,000.00 for any injury, damage, or loss caused by said animal; 
(6)  Four photographs of said animal from four different sides taken not more than one month before the date of the application. Such photographs shall consist of a front, back, left, and right side view of the animal; 
(7)  Proof that the animal has been microchipped by a licensed veterinarian; 
(8)  The name, address, and phone number of the animal's previous owner. 
(c)  Confinement of animal. The dangerous animal/attack dog shall be confined, at all times, within a habitable escape-proof dwelling or an escape-proof cage made of at least 11-gauge wire with at least six feet high sides, a wood or wire roof, and a brick or cement floor. The cage door also shall be locked with a padlock. When such animal is not confined within a habitable dwelling or an escape-proof cage, it shall be muzzled and reined or tethered to its master, owner, or keeper who shall maintain control over the animal to prevent injury to any person or animal. 
(d)  Permit tag. The dangerous animal/attack dog shall wear a permit tag issued by the animal control agency stating that the animal is registered as a dangerous animal/attack dog. 
(e)  Assignment of license number. When licensing an animal not previously licensed under this section, the animal control agency or its designee shall assign a specific license number to said animal, without duplication, which number shall remain the same for the life of the animal. 
(f)  Lost or escaped animal. If the animal is lost or escapes, the owner or owner's agent shall report said incident immediately to the city animal control agency. 
(g)  Posting of signs on property where animal will be kept. The owner of a dangerous animal/attack dog shall post signs on his property where such animal will be kept, clearly visible from the closest street, advising the general public about such animal's presence on the premises. Such signs shall be supplied by the animal control agency after applicant pays for the permit. The permit, shall not be issued until the owner posts the signs, and the animal control agency inspects the property to verify proper posting of the signs. The cost of the signs is nonrefundable, and they will belong to the applicant even if the permit is reissued or revoked. 
(h)  Persons convicted of certain felonies not to be issued a license. No person shall be issued an attack dog/dangerous animal permit if they have been convicted of a felony involving violence, drugs, animal cruelty or animal fighting. 
(i)  Inspection of premises where animal is kept. The animal control agency shall visually inspect the premises where the animal is kept. The inspection will consist of the cage, or if there is no cage, the officer will inspect the escape-proof habitat dwelling, doors, windows, and screen opening to determine if, in fact, they are escape-proof. Also, the inspection will consist of the placement of warning signs, the animal leash, the muzzle, and the padlock for the cage. The animal control agency must be satisfied that the owner has met all licensing requirements before issuing or renewing a permit. 
(j)  Revocation of permit. If an attack dog/dangerous animal permit is revoked, the owner shall not be reissued another permit. 
(k)  Exemption from provisions of section. Duly authorized members of the police department or other law enforcement agencies including, but not limited to, game wardens, conservation officers, and other law enforcement officers shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if the animal is used for law enforcement duties. 
(l)  Failure to notify animal control department or code enforcement department of address of dangerous animal. If the animal control agency and/or department of code enforcement is notified of an address where an attack dog is being kept or harbored, and that animal and owner of the property has not been in violation of any section of this chapter, the owner shall have a maximum of 14 days to obtain the attack dog/dangerous animal permit. If the permit is not obtained within the 14-day period, the animal shall be impounded. The animal will then be held a maximum of ten days so that a permit can be issued. If a permit is still not obtained, the animal shall be euthanized. 
(m)  Violation of chapter provisions. If the owner of a dangerous animal/attack dog violates any provisions of this chapter, the animal shall be impounded immediately and held until an animal control commission hearing. At such hearing, the animal control commission shall determine whether in fact a violation of this chapter has occurred. If the commission determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, it shall have the authority to impose a fine and/or order the animal euthanized. A dangerous animal/attack dog shall not be euthanized until after the animal control commission has rendered a final decision. 
(n)  Change of owner. If an attack dog/dangerous animal changes owner, the new owner must apply for a new permit. The original owner's permit shall not be transferable to the new owner. The original owner shall notify the animal control agency that the animal has been sold or given away. 
(o)  Notification of address change. The owner of an attack dog/dangerous animal shall notify the animal control agency if the address changes where the animal is being kept. The owner must report the new address so an inspection can be made of the premises. 
(p)  Expiration of license. All licenses issued under this article shall expire one calendar year from the date of issue. 
(q)  Fighting. No person shall fight, bait, conspire to fight or bait, or keep, train, or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting, any animal required to be licensed under this chapter. A person who violates this section shall be reported by the department of code enforcement or its designated agent to the county prosecutor's office for prosecution under IC 35-46-3-8 et seq. 
(r)  Notification by owner/agent. The owner, or owner's agent, of an animal required to be licensed under this chapter shall notify the city police department and the city's animal control agency within four hours if said animal is running at large, has been stolen, or has attacked a person or a domestic animal. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-57. - Permit exemptions. 
(a)  No permits shall be required for the following organizations or animals: 
(1)  The city animal control agency; 
(2)  A state-licensed veterinary hospital/ clinic; 
(3)  Birds held under state or federal falconry permits; or 
(4)  Service dogs specifically trained to assist their disabled owner. 
(b)  All other animal care provisions of this chapter shall apply to such exempt persons or entities. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-58. - Issuance of permits; additional requirements. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  Information to be included. A person may register or apply for a permit with the city animal control agency. The applicant shall include, on the appropriate forms, the following information: his name, address, and phone number; the type of permit requested; the number and description of animals; proof of a valid rabies vaccination by a licensed veterinarian, if required by law; information regarding sterilization; and the appropriate registration or permit fee. Appropriate state and federal permit numbers must be provided in cases involving wildlife or federally protected animals, or any animal which requires any state or federal permit. 
(2)  Compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws. All applicants shall comply with all other applicable federal, state and local laws, and the applicant shall not have been convicted of any cruelty to animal offense pursuant to the state code. 
(3)  On-site inspection. Applicants for permits shall allow, upon reasonable notice, the city animal control agency to conduct on-site inspections prior to the issuance of any permit and/or at any time during the valid term of such permit. 
(b)  Issuance or denial of permit; factors to be considered. The city or the animal control agency shall have the authority to issue or deny an application for registration and/or a permit. In determining whether to issue or deny an application for registration or a permit, the city or the animal control agency shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the person has been convicted of cruelty to animals; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has the proper facilities in place for a specific species as required by this law; 
(3)  Whether the applicant has sufficient knowledge and proof of previous experience in handling and keeping such animal species; and 
(4)  Whether the applicant has a history, documented by the animal control agency or the city's designated agent, of providing inadequate or improper care for such animals. 
(c)  Length of validity. Registrations and permits, except dangerous animal/attack dog, shall be issued for a term of one year, effective for one year from the date of issue. They shall be purchased within 30 days of acquiring the animal. A performing animal license shall only be valid for 14 days. 
(d)  Approval of application; issuance of permit and tag. Upon approval of an application for registration or a permit, the city animal control agency shall issue a pet registration or permit in written form which shall include the registration or permit number, the type of registration or permit, and any pertinent information. In addition, for each registered pet, the city animal control agency shall issue a durable tag stamped with the registration number and year of issuance for each said registration. 
(e)  Animal control agency to keep records of registration number, etc. The city animal control agency shall maintain records with the identifying registration number, microchip number and permit number. 
(f)  Fees. All fees shall be paid at the time of application and prior to the issuance of the permit or registration. 
(g)  Registration, permit, etc., not transferable. No person shall use any registration, permit, license, or tag for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(h)  Forged registration, permit, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, to cause to be manufactured, or to have in his possession or control a stolen, counterfeit, or forged animal registration, permit, license, tag, rabies or neutering certificate, or other form of licensing or documentation required by this section. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-59. - Fees. 
    In addition to all other fees required by law, an animal owner shall pay the following annual fees: 
(1)  Each altered and microchipped animal ..... $10.00 
(2)  Each altered and 
nonmicrochipped animal ..... 15.00 
(3)  Each unaltered and 
microchipped animal ..... 15.00 
(4)  Each unaltered and 
nonmicrochipped animal ..... 25.00 
(If a licensed veterinarian determines that the neutering or spaying process constitutes a threat to the health of said animal, the fee shall be calculated as though the animal were altered.) 
(5)  Replacement one-year tag ..... 5.00 
(6)  Multiyear tag ..... 30.00 
(7)  Replacement multiyear tag ..... 30.00 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-60. - Registration or permit revocation. 
    Any pet registration or permit, provided for in this article, may be revoked after notice and a hearing before the code enforcement hearing officer and/or animal control commission. An owner's pet registration or permit shall be revoked only after said officer or commission finds that the animal owner or permit holder has failed to comply with any requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-61. - Inspection. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this chapter or state law, a health officer, police officer, code enforcement officer, or humane officer is authorized at all reasonable times to inspect the same for compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any state law, provided that: 
(1)  If the property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor; and 
(2)  If the property is unoccupied, the officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having control of the property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. 
(b)  If the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of an animal is so hazardous, unsafe, dangerous, or constitutes a public nuisance as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If entry is refused or cannot be obtained, the officer shall have recourse to secure lawful entry and inspection of the property. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Sec. 14-62. - Trap-neuter-return. 
(a)  Individuals or organizations must obtain approval from the animal control commission to practice trap-neuter-return in City of Mishawaka limits. 
(b)  Free-roaming cats captured by a practitioner of trap-neuter-return shall be inspected a minimum of every two hours to ensure the safety of the cat(s). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to remove an animal from any trap not on the person's property, unless such person has the express permission of the property's owner to do so. 
( Ord. No. 5485 , § 1(exh. A), 6-1-2015) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FUMIGATORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10. 

Sec. 18-24. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fumigant means any substance which by itself or in combination with any other substance emits or liberates, or is made to emit or liberate, a gas, fume, or vapor used for the destruction or control of insects, vermin, rodents, or other pests. 
    Fumigation means the use of fumigants. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 1; Code 1985, § 114.01; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Sec. 18-25. - License required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall use fumigants or engage in fumigation within the city unless he is the holder of a license issued therefor by the board of health of the city and unless the work is done in accordance with the provisions of this article, the terms of the license, and the regulations of the board. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person engaged as an owner or employee in a business which requires the use of fumigants in connection with its own products, goods, wares, and merchandise, or the goods, wares, and merchandise of others stored on the premises. Any person who conducts fumigation work under such circumstances shall be approved as a qualified operator by the board of health. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 2(a); Code 1985, § 114.02; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Sec. 18-26. - License classifications. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued by the board of health covering the following classifications: 
(1)  Fumigation license for the conduct of the business of fumigation; 
(2)  Owner-operator license for the individual owner of a fumigation business, who is also an operator; 
(3)  Employee-operator license for the employees of a fumigation business. 
(b)  The holder of an employee-operator license may engage in fumigation work only in the course of employment on behalf of the holder of an owner-operator license. 
(c)  If the applicant for a fumigation license is a partnership, at least one member thereof shall be the holder of an owner-operator license. 
(d)  If the applicant for a fumigation license is a corporation, at least one officer thereof shall be the holder of an owner-operator license. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 2(b); Code 1985, § 114.03; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Sec. 18-27. - License fees. 
    Applicants for the issuance of licenses shall be required to pay the following amounts as annual fees for such licenses: 
(1)  Fumigation license ..... $5.00 
(2)  Owner-operator license .....  3.00 
(3)  Employee-operator license .....  3.00 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 2(c); Code 1985, § 114.04; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Sec. 18-28. - Applicant to pass examination. 
(a)  Before any license is issued, all applicants for an owner-operator license or for an employee-operator license shall be required to submit to and pass an examination given by the board of health covering the knowledge, ability, and experience of the applicant to do the particular work covered by the license for which the application is made. 
(b)  Licenses may be revoked or refused by the board of health after proper hearing, in the event that the board determines that the action is necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 3; Code 1985, § 114.05; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Sec. 18-29. - Bond or insurance to be filed. 
    Every person making application for the issuance of a fumigation license shall annually file with the city controller a good and sufficient bond or policy of insurance running to the city in the penal sum of not less than $5,000.00 to indemnify and to save and keep harmless the city from any and all costs or damages which may be sustained by the city, or expense of any kind whatsoever to which it may be put, or which may accrue against the city by reason of the granting or issuance of any licenses as provided hereunder, and to indemnify any and all persons who may suffer personal injuries or damage to property by reason of improper, negligent, or careless performance of fumigation work. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 4; Code 1985, § 114.06; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
_____
Sec. 18-30. - Fumigation procedure. 
(a)  All masks used in connection with fumigation shall be of the type approved by the United States Bureau of Mines. 
(b)  Every holder of a fumigation license shall notify the board of health before commencing any fumigation work by giving notice in writing in the following form: 
"BOARD OF HEALTH, CITY OF MISHAWAKA, INDIANA 
Location of Fumigation_____________________________ 
Street Address______________________________ 
Name of Owner of Premises_________________________ 
Kind of Fumigant_____________________________ 
Date to be Done______________________________ 
Hours of Fumigation___________ to___________ 
Name of Owner-Operator_____________________________ 
Name of Operator doing work_________________________ 
Number of Operator's License_________________________" 
_____
(c)  Written or printed notice of warning shall be served on all occupants of the building in which the fumigation work is to be performed. 
(d)  Prior to fumigation, suitable warning signs shall be posted on all doors or entrances to the premises to be fumigated, bearing the following notice: 
"DANGER 
KEEP OUT 
This place is being fumigated with a DEADLY GAS. No one allowed to enter until after Operator in charge has aired out thoroughly. 
___________ 
Name of Fumigation License Holder" 
Such signs shall be printed in red ink, and the words "DANGER," "KEEP OUT" and "DEADLY GAS" shall be in letters not less than two inches high. 
(e)  Only fumigation operators shall be allowed to enter the room to be fumigated during the placing of the fumigants, and no one shall be allowed to enter premises on which the work is being performed until the work has been completed and the premises have been thoroughly aired and made safe for occupancy. 
(f)  All fumigant containers, residues, and materials shall be removed from the premises and properly disposed of in accordance with recommendations and instructions of the manufacturers thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 180, § 5; Code 1985, § 114.07; Ord. No. 927, 5-21-1945) 
Secs. 18-31-18-63. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbroking Law, IC 28-7-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-64. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pawnbroker means every person whose business it is to take or receive by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange any goods, wares, or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever as the security for the repayment of the money lent thereon, or who purchases personal property or choses in action, on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, § 1; Code 1985, § 116.01; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 18-65. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or continue in the business of pawnbroker in the city unless he has paid the $500.00 annual license fee to the city controller and procured the license as a pawnbroker as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city controller upon payment of the fee to issue the license applied for to the person entitled thereto. The license shall be designated a pawnbroker's license. The license shall bear the date of January 1 of each year, and no reduction shall be made for any part of the year elapsed at the time of making application for the license. For all licenses issued for the remainder of the year expiring December 31, issued after the expiration of the first quarter, pro rata reductions for the unused part of the license shall be made. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, § 2; Code 1985, § 116.02; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 18-66. - Bond. 
(a)  Before the issuance of any pawnbroker's license by the city controller as provided in section 18-65(b), the applicant for the license shall file with the city controller a bond, payable to the city, in the sum of $5,000.00 conditioned on the faithful compliance with the terms and conditions of this article, and such rules and regulations as may from time to time be made for the enforcement thereof, and conditioned further that any person depositing any article of value or pledging any property or article of value with the pawnbroker shall have a right of action upon the bond, in case the licensee fails to properly account for the goods or property, and turn over same to the owner, or in case any goods or property are lost, destroyed, or not so turned over to the owner of the property. 
(b)  The bond shall be signed by the applicant and two or more freeholders of the city, or by a surety company, as surety, and shall run for the period of the license and may be renewed from year to year by certificates of applicant and sureties. The bond and all renewals thereto shall be approved by the city controller. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, § 8; Code 1985, § 116.03; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 18-67. - Record book, daily reports to city. 
(a)  It is made the duty of every person engaged in business in the city as a licensed pawnbroker to keep at his place of business, a book in which he shall enter in writing a minute description of all personal property received on deposit, or by purchase, the exact time when the property was received, a description of any prominent or distinguishing marks found on the property, and the name and address of the person from whom the property was received. The book shall at all times be open to inspection by the city police department or any public officer that may be deputized by the city police department to make the inspection. The licensee shall at all times, when required by the city police department, or by any other officer appointed by the chief of police, produce, show, and exhibit to inspection any article so listed and described which may be in his possession. 
(b)  The person licensed shall maintain and preserve data on or through an electronic or computer data system database on a daily basis for the preceding 24-hour period of all purchases of any precious metal items. Such information shall be sent via electronic forms of transmission to the police department using the records management system used by the police department for the proceeding 24-hour period on a daily basis. The reports must contain the seller's name, address, social security number, the price paid for each item, the purchase date and time, a description of each article purchased, including identifying marks and the manufacturer (where known), and the seller's driver's license number or the number of any other identification issued by a governmental authority bearing the seller's photograph, and the account number from one additional piece of recognized identification. The form shall also bear a clear, inked impression of the seller's right thumb print and the same transaction number as recorded in the dealer's record book as required. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, §§ 3, 4; Code 1985, § 116.04; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 5440, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 18-68. - Personal property to be held for 24 hours. 
    No personal property received on deposit, purchased, or pledged by any licensed person shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of the licensed person for the space of 24 hours after the written report is delivered in the office of the chief of police as required by section 18-67. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, § 5; Code 1985, § 116.05; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 18-69. - Transaction with minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of pawnbroker to purchase or receive from a minor any article whatever without first having obtained the written consent of the minor's parents or guardian. 
(Code 1968, tit. 340, § 6; Code 1985, § 116.06; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Secs. 18-70-18-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Transient Merchant Law of Indiana, IC 25-37-1-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of businesses, crafts, professions and occupations, IC 36-8-2-10; regulation of solicitations, IC 36-8-2-11. 

Sec. 18-104. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser or solicitor means one who takes orders for future deliveries of goods and services in public or private places or from house to house, and not from an established place. 
    Peddler means one who sells or offers for sale tangible commodities directly to a consumer from house to house, store to store, or on the streets. Peddlers shall include persons selling and peddling the goods from stalls, stands, pushcarts, receptacles, motor vehicles, or other vehicles, or offering them from such in any public or private sale; and persons going on foot as pack peddlers. 
(Code 1985, § 117.01; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987; Ord. No. 3387, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-105. - License required. 
    Every peddler and canvasser shall, before engaging in such business, obtain a license from the office of the city controller. 
(Code 1985, § 117.02; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-106. - Application for a license. 
(a)  Application for a license under this article shall be made to the office of the city controller, and shall be sworn to by or on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name under which the business is to be conducted; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The license plate number of the vehicle to be used, if any, and the driver's license number of the operator of the vehicle; 
(4)  The location where the applicant intends to do business; 
(5)  The type of goods, wares, or merchandise which the applicant intends to sell; 
(6)  A complete description of method to be used in conducting the sales; 
(7)  The dates for the beginning and ending of the solicitation; 
(8)  A statement to the effect that if a license is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city, or any department or office thereof; and 
(9)  The social security number or the business identification number of the applicant. 
(c)  All applicants for licenses to sell any goods, merchandise, or produce sold by weight or measure shall file a valid certificate signed by the inspector of weights and measures that all scales to be used by the applicant in his business have been tested and approved at the time of application. 
(Code 1985, § 117.03; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-107. - Conditions of licensing. 
    Upon receipt of an application, the office of the city controller shall refer the application to the police department for review and recommendation. 
(Code 1985, § 117.04; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-108. - Fees; bonds. 
(a)  The license fee for a peddler or canvasser using a stall, stand, pushcart, receptacle, motor vehicle shall be as follows: $50.00 per year, or $25.00 per day. 
(b)  The license fee for pack peddlers or pack canvassers shall be $40.00 per year, or $20.00 for up to ten consecutive calendar days. 
(c)  The city controller may require an applicant to file a personal or surety bond with a maximum limit of $1,500.00. 
(Code 1985, § 117.05; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-109. - Identification. 
(a)  Each peddler or canvasser receiving a license under this article shall be provided with an identification card which shall clearly state the following: 
(1)  The name under which the business is being conducted; 
(2)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(3)  The number of the license issued; 
(4)  The expiration date of the license; and 
(5)  The following words prominently displayed: "Peddler's identification: This is not an endorsement by the city." 
(b)  Each peddler or canvasser shall carry the identification card in his possession while engaged in peddling or canvassing. The identification card must be shown, upon request, to any person solicited and to any public officer of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 117.06; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-110. - Permissible hours. 
    No person shall sell or solicit sales within the city pursuant to a license issued under this article other than from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Sunday. 
(Code 1985, § 117.07; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-111. - Private property. 
    No person shall sell or solicit sales on private property pursuant to a license issued under this article without first obtaining written permission from the owner of the property and filing a copy of the written permission with the office of the city controller. The property must be properly zoned to permit such use, except sales or solicitations on a house-to-house basis. 
(Code 1985, § 117.08; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-112. - Public property. 
    Every person who operates pursuant to a license issued under this article and who operates on the streets and public places of the city shall keep moving from place to place, except while in the act of negotiating a sale. 
(Code 1985, § 117.09; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-113. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person or organization who has filed for a charitable solicitation permit pursuant to chapter 26. 
(2)  Any person or organization who is exempted from filing for a charitable solicitation permit pursuant to section 26-23. 
(Code 1985, § 117.10; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-114. - Lottery sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any merchant, peddler, or canvasser to conduct any prize or lottery sale, or to advertise any prize or lottery sale, within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 117.11; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Sec. 18-115. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates or disregards any of the provisions of this article in any manner whatsoever shall be fined according to the provisions of section 1-7, general penalty and continuing violations; and the license for that person may be revoked by the city controller after hearing on ten days' notice given to the person at the address indicated on the license application. 
(Code 1985, § 117.99; Ord. No. 3014, 3-2-1987) 
Secs. 18-116-18-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRECIOUS METALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10. 

Sec. 18-154. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means any person who holds himself out to the public as a purchaser of precious metals, or in doing business engages in the purchasing of silver, gold, or precious metals. 
    Precious metals means any article made, in whole or in part, of gold, silver, or platinum, but not including any coin or any gold or silver ingot or any gold or silver bar. 
    Wholesale precious metals means articles made in whole or in part of silver, gold, or platinum that have not been previously used, traded, or sold by a retailer and that are being purchased by a dealer from a manufacturer or from a wholesaler or distributor of newly manufactured precious metals. 
(Code 1985, § 118.01; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-155. - License required; fee. 
(a)  No dealer shall operate in the city who does not possess a valid precious metals dealer license. 
(b)  The applicant for a precious metals dealer license shall pay an annual fee of $100.00 to the city controller, upon issuance of the license. This license shall be purchased on or before January 31 of each year. 
(c)  A precious metals dealer license fee for the dealer who conducts his business within the city for less than 15 days per year, shall be $25.00 per year. 
(Code 1985, § 118.02; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-156. - Place of operation. 
    No dealer shall operate in the city except from a permanent shop or place of business. No dealer shall operate upon public property or from a vehicle, flea market, hotel room, or similar location. 
(Code 1985, § 118.03; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-157. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Every dealer shall maintain and preserve data on or through an electronic or computer data system database on a daily basis for the preceding 24-hour period of all purchases of any precious metal items. Such information shall be sent via electronic forms of transmission to the police department using the records management system used by the police department for the proceeding 24-hour period on a daily basis. The reports must contain the seller's name, address, social security number, the price paid for each item, the purchase date and time, a description of each article purchased, including identifying marks and the manufacturer (where known), and the seller's driver's license number or the number of any other identification issued by a governmental authority bearing the seller's photograph, and the account number from one additional piece of recognized identification. The form shall also bear a clear, inked impression of the seller's right thumb print and the same transaction number as recorded in the dealer's record book as required by paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  The dealer shall also record the description of the seller and the property purchased as required in this section in a bound book with consecutively numbered pages which shall be retained for three years from the date of the purchase. 
(c)  The dealer shall also take a photograph of each group of purchased precious metals using an instant photography process when the total value of the purchase exceeds $50.00, which photographs shall be forwarded to the chief of police with the daily record required in this section. 
(d)  The police department shall not reveal a seller's identity supplied under this section, except to other law enforcement agencies and prosecuting officials, or pursuant to a court order or in the course of any criminal prosecution. 
(Code 1985, § 118.04; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982; Ord. No. 5440, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Sec. 18-158. - Purchases from minors prohibited. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metal from a person under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1985, § 118.05; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-159. - Precious metals to be held ten days before resale. 
    All precious metals purchased by a dealer must be held within the city, in the possession of the dealer, before being resold, melted, or altered in any manner, for a period of ten days from date of purchase. If such goods are held or stored at a location other than the point of purchase, the location of these goods and the identification of the person in possession of these goods must be filed with the chief of police within 24 hours from the time of the relocation from the point of purchase. All goods required to be held under this section shall at all times be open to the inspection of the chief of police or any officer duly authorized by him to inspect the same. 
(Code 1985, § 118.06; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982; Ord. No. 5440, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 5440, adopted June 2, 2014, changed the title of § 18-159 from "Precious metals to be held seven days before resale" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 18-160. - Coin purchases. 
    Any purchase of coin made up in whole or in part of gold or silver, where the total purchase exceeds the sum of $50.00, shall comply with section 18-157(a), (b) and (c). 
(Code 1985, § 118.07; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-161. - Right of police to make inspections. 
    Any license or records required to be kept or maintained by this article shall at all times be open to the inspection of the chief of police or any officer duly authorized by him to inspect the same. 
(Code 1985, § 118.08; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982) 
Sec. 18-162. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to purchases of wholesale precious metals, nor shall it apply to a transaction between dealers of precious metals, where the selling dealer has already complied with the terms of this article, including the ten-day holding period. 
(Code 1985, § 118.09; Ord. No. 2505, 3-1-1982; Ord. No. 5440, § 1, 6-2-2014) 
Secs. 18-163-18-187. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAXICABS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-188. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means an individual, firm, co-partnership, association, or corporation. 
    Street means any street, alley, court, lane, bridge, or public place within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Taxicab means a vehicle furnished with a driver and carrying passengers for hire, for which public patronage is solicited over and upon the streets of the city. Vehicles commonly known as rent-a-cars, for which a driver is not furnished, shall not be considered as taxicabs, nor shall buses operating over a fixed route. 
    Taximeter means any instrument or fare-registering device attached to a taxicab and designed to register mechanically the distance travelled by such vehicle, to record the time the vehicle is in waiting and to indicate upon such record in figures the fare to be charged in dollars and cents. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 1; Code 1985, § 119.01; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-189. - Board of public works and safety to enforce. 
    The licensing and inspecting of taxicabs, the inspecting and sealing of taximeters, the examining of applicants for license to drive such taxicabs, the licensing of drivers as hereinafter provided in this article, and the enforcement of the provisions thereof shall be under the control of the board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 2; Code 1985, § 119.02; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-190. - Exemptions from regulations. 
    This article shall not apply to the owner or driver of any taxicab which is domiciled and licensed in another municipality, and such taxicab and driver may carry passengers from such municipality to any place or point within the city, and may freely enter and temporarily travel over the streets thereof for that purpose, without procuring licenses as herein provided, but such driver shall not solicit business on the streets of the city, or otherwise operate within the city, without first procuring licenses within the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 20; Code 1985, § 119.03; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Secs. 18-191-18-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-224. - Required. 
(a)  No taxicabs shall be operated upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a license, as provided in this division, and otherwise complying with the several requirements of this article. No taxicabs shall be operated upon the streets of the city except by a driver duly licensed, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Applications for licenses for taxicabs shall be made by the owners to the city controller, and shall contain the full name and address of the owner, a description of the vehicle, including make, model, year of manufacture, state license number for current year, and motor and chassis numbers, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons, exclusive of the driver's compartment, it is capable of carrying, and such other information as the board of public works and safety may from time to time require. 
(c)  No taxicab shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers, is clean and reasonably presentable in both outward and interior appearance and is registered under the laws of the state. Its taximeter shall be tested, as hereinafter provided, and found to be not in error in excess of five percent. If such examination shall disclose compliance with all of the foregoing provisions, such fact shall be so certified to the city controller by the chief of police or police officer making the inspection. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 3; Code 1985, § 119.10; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-225. - Certificate of public convenience a prerequisite. 
(a)  No license for the operation of any taxicab within the city shall be granted until the person applying for such license shall have secured from the board of public works and safety a certificate certifying that public convenience and necessity require additional taxicab service. In determining whether public convenience and necessity require the licensing of such taxicabs for which application for license may be made, the board shall take into consideration the adequacy of present taxicab service within the city, the financial responsibility of the applicant, the number, kind and type of equipment, the increased traffic congestion upon the streets of the city, the demand for increased parking space upon the streets which might result, and whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such license, and such other relevant facts as the board may consider advisable and necessary. 
(b)  If the board finds that in the interest of public convenience and necessity such license should be granted, it shall so declare by resolution, and authorize the city controller to issue a license for such vehicle so specified in such resolution, upon the applicant's furnishing liability insurance and payment of the license fee, as hereinafter provided. The decision and judgment of the board shall be final and conclusive. 
(c)  It is expressly provided that it shall not be necessary that such board investigate and make a finding of public convenience and necessity for the renewal of the licenses theretofore issued to the same applicant, for which the board shall have at any time prior to the date of application for such renewal made a declaration of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 4; Code 1985, § 119.11; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-226. - Issuance. 
    For every vehicle so licensed, the city controller shall issue (a) a license certificate, fully identifying the licensed vehicle, which shall be conspicuously displayed in the licensed vehicle at all times, and (b) a decal to be conspicuously displayed on the upper left side of the rearmost vertical exterior surface of the vehicle. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 5; Code 1985, § 119.12; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971; Ord. No. 5439, § 1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-227. - Payment, determination of fees. 
(a)  Before any license shall issue, license fees, determined in accordance with the following schedule, shall be paid, to-wit, for each vehicle designed to carry comfortably inside thereof, exclusive of the driver's compartment or seat: 
(1)  Not more than five persons ..... $20.00 
(2)  Not more than seven persons .....  25.00 
(3)  More than seven persons .....  35.00 
(b)  Beginning on January 1, 2015, such license shall be issued as of January 1 of each year and shall be effective for the period of one year from such date unless sooner suspended, cancelled, or revoked, as provided in this article. The above fees shall apply for any part of a year ending on the following December 31, and no licensee shall be entitled to a rebate because of the use of such license for a shorter period than one year. No license so granted may be used upon another vehicle after proper compliance with the provisions of this chapter in respect thereto. 
(c)  Every taxicab licensee shall have his name legibly painted on such vehicle on at least both sides thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 6; Code 1985, § 119.13; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971; Ord. No. 5439, § 1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-228. - Insurance coverage. 
(a)  Before any license for a taxicab shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the city controller an insurance policy, the same to be approved by the board of public works and safety, providing insurance coverage in an amount of not less than $50,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property as a result of one occurrence and a public liability policy covering accidental bodily injury, including death, to any member of the public in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 for all public liability from any one occurrence. 
(b)  Every such policy of insurance shall contain provisions that the liability of the insurer shall continue thereunder to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the assured, and that the amount of the insurance shall run to the city for the benefit of any and all such judgment creditors. Every such insurance policy shall extend for the period to be covered by the license applied for, and shall further provide that the insurer shall be obliged to give ten days' written notice to the city controller and to the insured before any cancellation or termination; and termination shall automatically revoke and terminate the license thereof issued for the vehicle covered by such policy, unless another insurance policy, complying with the provisions of this section, shall be provided and be in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 8; Code 1985, § 119.14; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971; Ord. No. 3787, 12-7-1993) 
Sec. 18-229. - Transfer. 
    Licenses issued for any vehicle may be transferred to another vehicle belonging to the same licensee upon his filing with the city controller an application therefor, duly verified, showing that the vehicle previously licensed has become obsolete or has been destroyed, or that such vehicle is no longer to be used for the purpose herein contemplated. The applicant shall also furnish all the information as to the vehicle proposed to be substituted in the same manner as upon the original licensing. If satisfied that such transfer is in good faith and not for the purpose of evasion, the city controller shall require a surrender of the former certificate, and issue a new one for the remainder of the license year, charging therefor the sum of $2.50, and shall thereupon correct his records to show such transfer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 7; Code 1985, § 119.15; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-230. - Revocation. 
(a)  Licenses granted under this article may be suspended or revoked at any time by the mayor or by the board of public works and safety, if the holder thereof fails to maintain insurance in force, or if the holder thereof, or any of his agents, shall operate any vehicle covered thereby which is not of good appearance, clean, or safe, or shall charge or collect any rate of fare in excess of the amount permitted under this chapter, or shall violate any other provision of this article. 
(b)  The mayor or the board of public works and safety shall notify the applicant of the denial and shall by ordinary letter, mail, or notice, personally served by the police department, notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing in which the mayor or board shall determine and find whether the license shall be denied. The holder of the license shall be given an opportunity to present his defenses to the proposed action at the hearing and may be represented by counsel. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 12; Code 1985, § 119.16; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Secs. 18-231-18-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 

Sec. 18-264. - License required. 
(a)  Requirements. Every person driving a vehicle licensed under the provisions of this article must be licensed as a public passenger chauffeur. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall meet the requirements prescribed by state statute. 
(1)  Each applicant must be at least 18 years of age to receive a taxicab driver's license in the city. 
(2)  The city shall not issue any license or permit to any individual proscribed by state statute. 
(b)  Examination of drivers; denial of application. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license under the provisions of this chapter shall be examined by the chief of police, or by a person appointed by him, as to his knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, ability to safely handle his vehicle in heavy traffic and the geography of the city. 
(1)  If the result of such examination is unsatisfactory, or if all of the requirements set for in subsection (a) of this section are not met, or if any false statement is made by the applicant in connection with his application, he shall be refused a license. 
(2)  The chief of police shall notify the applicant of the denial, and shall by ordinary letter, mail, or notice, personally served by the police department, notify the applicant of the time and place of the hearing in which the police department shall determine and find whether the license shall be denied. The holder of the license shall be given an opportunity to present his defenses to the proposed action at the hearing and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  Personal photographs. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license must file with his application two recent photographs of himself, of a size which may be easily attached to the license, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued, and the other shall be filed together with the application, in the office of the city controller. 
(d)  Renewals. The renewal of a taxicab driver's license from year to year may be obtained upon the application of the licensee, which shall be endorsed by the chief of police recommending such renewal. A taxicab driver, in applying for a renewal of license, shall make such application upon a form to be supplied by the city controller, which shall be filled out with the full name and address of the applicant, together with a statement of the date upon which his original license was granted and the number thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 9; Code 1985, § 119.25; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
State Law reference- Public passenger chauffeur's license, IC 9-24-5-1 et seq.; persons prohibited from securing a license, IC 9-24-2-3. 
Sec. 18-265. - Fees. 
(a)  The license fee per annum for a taxicab driver's license, to be issued by the city controller, shall be: 
(1)  For each original license ..... $2.00 
(2)  For each renewal thereof .....  2.00 
(b)  Such license shall be for the calendar year, or any part thereof, and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 10; Code 1985, § 119.26; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-266. - Revocation. 
(a)  Taxicab driver's licenses may be suspended or revoked at any time, if the holder thereof shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall be engaged in any immoral or illegal business, or shall be convicted of a felony or of violation of a state law or city ordinance governing the use, ownership, or operation of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Prior to the revocation, the city shall notify the holder of the license of the proposed action and shall by ordinary letter, mail, or notice, personally served by the police department, notify the licensee of the time and place of the hearing in which the city shall determine and find whether the license shall be revoked. The holder of the license shall be given an opportunity to present his defenses to the proposed action at the hearing and may be represented by counsel. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 12; Code 1985, § 119.27; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-267. - City to keep records. 
    There shall be kept by the city controller a complete record of each taxicab license issued to a driver, and of all renewals, suspensions, or revocations thereof, which record shall be kept on file with the original applications for taxicab licenses. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 11; Code 1985, § 119.28; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Secs. 18-268-18-297. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATION 

Sec. 18-298. - Passengers to be seated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to drive or operate the same with any person seated upon the doors, hood, or fenders or standing upon the running boards thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 13; Code 1985, § 119.35; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-299. - Taxicab stands. 
    The board of public works and safety may assign certain designated places upon the streets as stands for taxicabs, and when so assigned they shall be appropriately marked as such at the curb. However, no stand shall be permitted within two blocks of the intersection of Lincolnway and Main Street, and within one block of the intersection of Main Street and Mishawaka Avenue, except by resolution of the common council authorizing such stand. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 14; Code 1985, § 119.36; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-300. - Taximeters. 
(a)  Requirements. It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab within the city, unless the taxicab is equipped with a taximeter, in good working condition, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Wheel-operation prohibited. No taximeter shall be operated from any wheel to which the power is applied. 
(2)  Face to be visible. Every taximeter shall be so connected or affixed to the taxicab that the amount of fare determined and charged for its use shall be plainly visible to all passengers. After sundown the face of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a suitable light. 
(3)  Case to be sealed. Before issuance of a taxicab license, the taximeter shall be inspected by the chief of police, or by some police officer by him designated, and shall not be in error in excess of five percent. The case shall then be sealed, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, driver, or any other person to break the seal or open the case. Thereafter such taximeter shall be inspected and tested every six months, or at any other time that the chief of police may have reasonable cause to believe that such taximeter is not registering correctly. 
All fares collected shall be based upon taximeter readings, unless the operator or driver, by previous agreement with the passenger, arranges for transportation upon an hourly basis. 
(b)  Duty of driver to reset meter. It shall be the duty of the driver, at the beginning of every employment, to reset such taximeter, so that it will correctly register the fare to be paid. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 15; Code 1985, § 119.37; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Secs. 18-301-18-323. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 18-324. - Schedule. 
(a)  No person owning or operating any vehicle used as a taxicab within the limits of the city shall charge or collect more than the rates duly established by the procedures set forth herein. 
(b)  The operator of the taxicab shall establish rates of fare according to a mileage rate as measured by the taximeter, an hourly rate or a flat rate. The rates of fare established by an operator shall be effective only after: 
(1)  The rates of fare and proof of legal publication have been sent to, and noted as received by, the city controller; and 
(2)  Thirty days after legal publication of such first scheduled rates or such change of scheduled rates in at least two newspapers circulating in the city. 
(c)  If a taxicab is hired on an hourly rate for driving within the city, the taxicab operator shall compute charges for waiting time based on a fraction thereof of the hourly rate. Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning at its arrival at the place to which it has been called for the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost because of the inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver or time consumed by the premature response to a call. 
(d)  The charge in subsection (c) of this section shall be for one or more persons. No taxicab shall be let or hired upon a meter basis when the taximeter does not accurately register the fare. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 6; Code 1985, § 119.45; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 2072, 8-15-1977; Ord. No. 2296, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 2434, 3-16-1981; Ord. No. 2870, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3068, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 4394, 5-17-1999) 
Sec. 18-325. - Rates to be displayed. 
    There shall be posted in each taxicab, for the convenience and information of the passengers, in such manner as to be easily read by any passenger therein, a card or sign, plainly legible, showing the rates of fare under which such taxicab is operating; and the driver shall not demand or be entitled to collect any fare for the conveyance of a passenger unless the card or sign bearing the rates of fare shall be conspicuously displayed; nor shall the driver charge or collect a rate of fare greater than that revealed on the card or sign. Each taximeter installed in such licensed taxicab shall be in accordance with the rates of fare authorized and displayed on such card or sign and not otherwise. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 17; Code 1985, § 119.46; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-326. - Payment in advance. 
    Every driver of a vehicle licensed hereunder shall have the right to demand payment of the estimated legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver shall carry any person, other than the passenger first employing such vehicle, without the consent of the passenger, and he shall transport passengers to their place of destination by the shortest route. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 19; Code 1985, § 119.47; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Sec. 18-327. - Customer receipts. 
    If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver to the passenger paying a fare a receipt therefor in legible type or writing, containing the name of the owner, the city license number and the taximeter number, and the total amount paid and the date of payment. 
(Code 1968, tit. 500, § 18; Code 1985, § 119.48; Ord. No. 937, 3-18-1946; Ord. No. 1137, 11-19-1956; Ord. No. 1678, 1971) 
Secs. 18-328-18-356. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WEIGHTS AND MEASURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Standards control system, IC 36-8-2-12. 

Sec. 18-357. - Inspector of weights and measures. 
(a)  Office established. The board of public works and safety shall appoint an inspector of weights and measures, subject to the approval of the state division of weights and measures (pursuant to state statute, as may be amended from time to time). The inspector of weights and measures shall, within five days after notice of his appointment shall have been given to him, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for other city officers, which oath shall be endorsed upon his certificate of appointment and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  Inspector to keep public register of inspections. The inspector of weights and measures shall keep in his office a substantially bound register book, wherein he shall note at the time in alphabetical order the name of each owner of the weight and measure inspected by him, the kind and denomination thereof, the date of the examination, whether sealed or not. The register shall be deemed a public record, and shall be transmitted by each inspector to his successor in office. 
(Code 1968, tit. 570, §§ 3, 10; Code 1985, §§ 120.15, 120.19; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 375, 6-3-1912) 
State Law reference- City inspectors of weights and measures, IC 24-6-3-4 et seq. 
Sec. 18-358. - Unlawful to interfere with inspections by city. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or company engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, bartering, peddling, or hawking in the city any goods or merchandise to refuse to exhibit to the inspector of weights and measures on demand by him for the purpose of inspection or test under the provisions of this article any weights, measures, scales, beams, or other instruments or means for determining quantity used or proposed to be used by him in the business. 
(Code 1968, tit. 570, § 7; Code 1985, § 120.03; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 375, 6-3-1912) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to inspect, IC 24-6-3-5. 
Sec. 18-359. - Unlawful to use equipment that has not been inspected. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or company engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, bartering, peddling, or hawking in the city any goods or merchandise, to use in determining by weight or measure the quantity of the goods or merchandise for the purpose of sale, barter, or exchange, any weights, measures, scales, beams, or other instruments or means used therefor, unless the same shall have been inspected by the inspector of weights and measures as provided in this article. 
(Code 1968, tit. 570, § 8; Code 1985, § 120.04; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 375, 6-3-1912) 
State Law reference- Offense to use false weight or measure, IC 35-43-5-3(a)(4); use or retention of false scales, IC 24-6-3-11. 
Sec. 18-360. - Scales to be protected against the elements. 
    All scales used for weighing merchandise and articles for the public in the city shall be covered with a good, substantial cover or shelter, so as to prevent the elements from interfering with the action of the scales. 
(Code 1968, tit. 570, § 18; Code 1985, § 120.07; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 375, 6-3-1912) 
Secs. 18-361-18-413. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Transient Merchant Law of Indiana, IC 25-37-1-1 et seq.; municipal regulation of businesses, crafts, professions and occupations, IC 36-8-2-10; regulation of solicitations, IC 36-8-2-11. 

Sec. 18-414. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Established business merchant means any person who engages in the sale of merchandise and anticipates becoming a business merchant for a continuous period of time of 60 days or longer in the city. 
    Group event means vendors or exhibitors participating in a group event including, but not limited to, antique shows, recreational vehicle, boat, or automotive shows, hobby shows, or similar events which are to be held for the purpose of sale or rental for such items or services to the general public. Group events shall not include events not open to the general public where there may be on-floor sales which are not the primary purpose of the event. 
    Transient merchant means any person who engages in the sale of merchandise in any place in the city on a temporary basis and does not anticipate becoming an established business merchant for a continuous period of time of 60 days or longer. Transient merchants include anyone who for himself or as an agent for another, rents, erects, purchases, uses, or occupies any vehicle, room, building, or other structure including, but not limited to, those located in or along parking lots, shopping centers, sidewalks, or other areas for the purpose of purchasing, selling, or offering for sale anything of value at such location without becoming an established business merchant. 
(Code 1985, § 121.01; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-415. - License required. 
    Everyone who anticipates selling merchandise as a transient merchant shall, before engaging in business in the city, obtain a license from the city controller's office. 
(Code 1985, § 121.02; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-416. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application forms shall be provided by the city controller's office. Completed forms must be filed no later than 30 days prior to the first date for which the applicant intends to do business. Said application shall require, but not be limited to, the applicant providing the following information: 
(1)  The name under which the business will be conducted. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the business includes more than one person all principal partners and owners must be listed by name, address. 
(3)  The location where the applicant intends to do business and a description of the facilities or premises to be used. 
(4)  The dates and times for which the applicant intends to do business. 
(5)  A description of the types of merchandise intended to be sold or contracted for. 
(6)  A copy of all proposed advertisements intended to be used on the radio, television, newspapers or other media, including handbills. 
(7)  The name, address, and telephone number of the contact person who will be available for a period of time of not less than 60 days following the last date of business who will respond to consumer complaints. Said information must be included in all written advertisements prior to engaging in business. 
(8)  The applicant's state retailer license number. 
(9)  A notarized statement or copy of a signed contract verifying that the owner of the property where the transient merchant anticipates selling merchandise has agreed to lease said location for the dates and times indicated, and that the property owner realizes that such a sale requires a lessee to have a valid transient merchant license issued by the city prior to the transaction of such transient merchant business. 
(10)  Verification under oath that all of the information provided is truthful. 
(b)  If the application is for a group event, the sponsoring organization, agency, group, or person, shall complete one application form on behalf of all proposed participants in the group event. For such group events, one fee shall be required of the sponsoring organization for the number of days that the group event shall take place, and one bond or property liability insurance policy shall be filed by the sponsoring organization on behalf of all participants. A listing of all participants by name, address, telephone number, and the state retailer's license number shall be attached to said application when filed by the sponsoring organization. The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsoring organization shall be sufficient for all requirements addressing contact persons required by this section. 
(c)  All applicants who intend to sell any type of merchandise sold by weight or measure must file a copy of a current and valid certificate signed by the inspector of weights and measures of the city that all scales and measures to be used by the applicant in his business have been tested and approved. Said copy must accompany the written application. 
(d)  All applications and accompanying information shall then be referred to the police department for review and recommendation to the board of public works and safety. Said review shall address a background investigation of the applicant. 
(e)  All proposed locations must be properly zoned for the proposed business activity. Therefore a copy of the completed application form shall be referred to the city planner or his designee for review and recommendation to the board of public works. Said review shall address but not be limited to the following: ingress and egress, parking requirements, zoning requirements, and related health and safety requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1985, § 121.03; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-417. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the written reports of an applicant from the police department and the city planner, the clerk of the board of public works shall submit to the board for its review and action a copy of said reports, the application, and all other required documents filed by the applicant. 
(b)  The clerk of the board shall set a date for the public hearing on said application with the board and notify the applicant of the date and time of said hearing. 
(c)  The applicant, or a proper designee, must be present at said hearing and be available to answer any questions propounded by the city with regard to the proposed business activity. 
(d)  The board shall make all licenses approved under this section subject to the applicant filing a bond or property liability insurance policy. Said bond or policy shall be in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property as a result of any one occurrence and a public liability amount covering accidental bodily injury, including death, to any member of the public in the amount of not less than $5,000,000.00 for all public liability from any one occurrence. Any policy of insurance filed must contain the following provision: "The city, through the office of the city controller, shall be given 15 days of notice prior to the effective date of the cancellation or material change of this policy." 
(e)  Upon favorable review by the police department and city planner of the applicant's application, favorable action by the board of public works and safety, and the filing of all documents and fees required by the city, the city controller's office shall issue a transient merchant license. 
(Code 1985, § 121.04; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-418. - Display of license and other documents required. 
(a)  Anyone intending to operate as a transient merchant and who is issued a license herein, must display the license along with all written advertisements used for the proposed sale, and the name, address, and telephone number of the contact person for consumer complaints in a conspicuous location near the entry of the facilities or premises. 
(b)  The documents must remain posted throughout the duration of the time for which the license was issued. 
(Code 1985, § 121.05; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-419. - License fees. 
    The license fees for transient merchants shall be as follows: 
(1)  Three hundred and fifty dollars for proposed business operations of three consecutive days or less. 
(2)  Five hundred dollars for proposed business operations of more than three consecutive days but less than 14 total days of operation. 
(3)  One thousand dollars for proposed business operations of more than 14 total days, but less than one year in any licensing year. 
(Code 1985, § 121.06; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Sec. 18-420. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any person or organization who has filed and received a charitable solicitation permit pursuant to chapter 23, charitable solicitation. 
(2)  Any person or organization who is exempted from filing for a charitable solicitation permit pursuant to section 26-23. 
(3)  Any person or organization that participates in an event which is sponsored or co-sponsored by the city. 
(4)  Work proposed for business operations for applicants who are veterans of the United States Armed Services and have provided proper documentation of an honorable discharge from a branch of the armed services. Upon the presentation of the person's certificate and papers of discharge, properly executed, and proving the person's identity as the person named in the person's certificate of honorable discharge, the controller shall issue to the former soldier, airman or sailor a free license. 
(Code 1985, § 121.07; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 3475, 5-6-1991) 
Sec. 18-421. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates or disregards any of the provisions of this article in any manner whatsoever shall be fined as provided in section 1-7, general penalty; continuing violation, and the license for that person may be revoked by the city controller, after hearing on ten days' notice given to the person at the address indicated on the license application. 
(Code 1985, § 121.99; Ord. No. 3388, 7-2-1990) 
Secs. 18-422-18-445. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SHOOTING GALLERIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10. 

Sec. 18-446. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Shooting gallery means any public building or enclosed area for shooting and discharging firearms at a target, except shooting galleries or ranges maintained or operated by a law enforcement agency and which are not available to the public. 
(Code 1985, § 122.01; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-447. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, or cause to be conducted, maintained, or operated any public shooting gallery within the corporate limits of the city without being licensed under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 122.02; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-448. - Application for license. 
(a)  A person or organization shall apply for a shooting gallery license with the city controller. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a firm or partnership, the application shall state the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons constituting such firm or partnership. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state its principle place of business, the full name of such corporation, the state under whose laws it is incorporated, and the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of all officers and directors thereof; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of any employees, agents, or designees of the applicant who will manage, supervise, train, instruct, or oversee users of the shooting gallery; 
(3)  A description of the applicant's knowledge and experience in handling firearms; 
(4)  The address and description of the facilities or premises to be used for the business; 
(5)  The type and caliber of firearms to be used on the property; 
(6)  A description of the manner and plan for stopping and controlling bullets or other ammunition to be used on the property; and 
(7)  Verification under oath that all information included in the application is true and accurate. 
(c)  The application and accompanying information shall then be referred to the police department for review and recommendation to the board of public works and safety. Said review shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Verifying the information contained in the application; 
(2)  Determining whether the applicant or any of his employees or agents have been convicted of any criminal offenses; and 
(3)  Determining whether the applicant or any of his employees or agents have been involved in any alleged misconduct involving the use of a firearm. 
(d)  A copy of the completed application form shall then be referred to the department of city planning to determine whether the location is properly zoned. 
(e)  A copy of the completed application form shall be referred to the building department for review and recommendation to the board of public works and safety. Said application shall include a certification by an engineer or other professional who has accepted expertise in the field of building design. The professional shall provide information regarding his expertise and a review of the shooting gallery location, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The adequacy of backstops and bullet traps; 
(2)  The adequacy of baffles, deflectors, and shields protecting light fixtures, ventilation, and heating ducts; 
(3)  The adequacy of the ventilation and filtering systems; 
(4)  The adequacy of the lighting; 
(5)  The adequacy of sound control measures; 
(6)  Whether the walls, ceilings, and floors are impenetrable; 
(7)  Whether the facility meets local zoning requirements; and 
(8)  Whether the facility meets other city and state building code requirements. 
(f)  A copy of the completed application form shall also be referred to the fire prevention bureau for review and recommendation to the board of public works and safety. Said review shall include, but not be limited to, an inspection of the premises to ensure compliance with all fire prevention laws of the city and the state. 
(g)  No applicant shall be issued a shooting gallery license if the applicant or any of his employees or agents have been: 
(1)  Convicted of a felony or of an offense involving a firearm; 
(2)  Has been known to be a drug user or alcohol abuser; or 
(3)  Has been determined by a licensed mental health professional to be mentally incompetent. 
(Code 1985, § 122.03; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-449. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the written reports of an applicant from the police department, city planning department, building department, and fire prevention bureau, the clerk of the board of public works and safety shall submit to the board for its review and action a copy of said reports, the application, and all other required documents filed by the applicant. 
(b)  The clerk of the board shall set a date for the public hearing on said application with the board and notify the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. 
(c)  The applicant, or his proper designee, shall be present at the hearing and be available to answer any questions propounded by the city with regard to the proposed business activity. 
(d)  The board shall make all licenses approved under this section subject to the applicant filing a bond or property liability insurance policy. Said bond or policy shall be in the amount of not less than $500,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property as a result of any one occurrence and a public liability amount covering accidental bodily injury, including death to any member of the public, in the amount of not less than $5,000,000.00 for all public liability from any one occurrence. Any policy of insurance filed with the city must contain the following provision: "The City, through the Office of the City Controller, shall be given at least 15 days notice prior to the effective date of the cancellation or material change of this policy." 
(e)  Upon favorable review by the police department, city planning department, building department, and fire prevention bureau, favorable action by the board of public works and safety and, the filing of all required documents and payment of all fees, the city controller's office shall issue a shooting gallery license to the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 122.04; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-450. - Denial of license application; right to public hearing. 
(a)  If the board of public works and safety denies an application for a license, it shall notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within five days after the receipt of such notification, the applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application, together with exceptions to the grounds on which the board based its denial of application. Upon the filing of the request, the board shall fix a time and place for the hearing, which shall be within 15 days after the request is filed, and shall notify the applicant thereof. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in the hearing to present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render a written report either granting or denying the application and shall state grounds on which the decision is based. 
(b)  A copy of the report shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 122.05; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-451. - Display of license. 
(a)  The person or organization which is issued a license pursuant to this article to operate a shooting gallery shall display such license along with the name, address, and telephone number of the contact person for any complaints in a conspicuous location near the entry of the facilities or premises. 
(b)  The documents shall remain posted throughout the duration of the time for which the license was issued. 
(Code 1985, § 122.06; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-452. - Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1985, § 122.07; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-453. - License fees. 
    The annual fee for a shooting gallery license shall be $100.00. 
(Code 1985, § 122.08; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-454. - Hours of operation. 
    No shooting gallery shall be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1985, § 122.09; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-455. - Annual license renewal. 
    The licensee shall reapply for a shooting gallery license on an annual basis, according to the application requirements and licensing procedures set forth in this article, although if no changes have been made since the previous application period, the applicant need not appear for the hearing, unless requested by the board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 122.10; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-456. - Transfer of license. 
    Licenses issued under this article shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person. 
(Code 1985, § 122.11; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 18-457. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article or any rules and regulations either now or hereafter adopted pursuant hereto, or of any laws of the state. 
(2)  Permitting, aiding, or abetting the commission of any illegal act in or on the licensed premises. 
(3)  Selling or permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances on the licensed premises. 
(4)  Permitting any person under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances to use the facilities or gallery. 
(5)  Hiring or designating a person to supervise, train, instruct, or oversee users of the shooting gallery who: 
a.  Has been convicted of a felony or of an offense involving a firearm; 
b.  Appears for work at the gallery under the influence of drugs or alcohol; 
c.  Has been determined by a licensed mental health professional to be mentally incompetent. 
(6)  Engaging in acts, conduct, or practices detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of any person in the city. 
(b)  Procedures. If the board of public works and safety has reason to believe that a licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, the board shall immediately suspend the license and give the licensee written notice in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within seven days of the suspension to determine whether or not the license should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts on which the board has acted in suspending the license. At the hearing, the licensee, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence showing cause why the license should not be revoked by the board for violation of the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes. If, after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes have been violated, it shall send the licensee within three days after the hearing a written statement of the facts on which it bases its findings and shall immediately revoke the license. If after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes have not been violated, it shall send the licensee within three days after the hearing a written statement canceling the suspension of the license and stating that no violation of said ordinance or statute has occurred. 
(Code 1985, § 122.12; Ord. No. 4169, 5-19-1997) 
Secs. 18-458-18-497. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10; rules for tattoo parlors, IC 16-19-3-4.1; rules for body piercing facilities, IC 16-19-4-4.2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-498. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions, as prescribed by the state department of health, shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Blood means human blood. 
    Bloodborne pathogens means pathogenic microorganisms that are present in human blood and can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The hepatitis B virus. 
(2)  The hepatitis C virus. 
(3)  The human immunodeficiency virus. 
    Board means the board of public works and safety of the city. 
    Body piercer means any person who performs body piercing on an individual. 
    Body piercing means any penetration in or through any skin or mucous membrane on the human body with or by a needle, pin, or other sharp object. 
    Body piercing establishment means any room or space where a body piercer performs any body piercing acts on an individual or where body piercing activities take place. 
    Cleaned means removal of all visible dust, soil, or any other foreign material. 
    Contaminated means the presence or reasonably anticipated presence of blood or other potentially infectious materials (OPIM) on an item or surface. 
    County health department means the county department of health. 
    Decontaminated means the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or destroy bloodborne pathogens on a surface or item which does not require sterilization to the point where they are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for handling, use, or disposal. 
    HBV means the hepatitis B virus. 
    HCV means the hepatitis C virus. 
    HIV means the human immunodeficiency virus. 
    Infectious waste means waste that epidemiologic evidence indicates is capable of transmitting a dangerous communicable disease. Infectious waste includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Contaminated sharps or contaminated objects that could potentially become contaminated sharps. 
(2)  Infectious biological cultures, infectious associated biologicals, and infectious agent stock. 
(3)  Pathological waste. 
(4)  Blood and blood products in liquid and semi-liquid form. 
(5)  Carcasses, body parts, blood and body fluids in liquid and semi-liquid form, and bedding of laboratory animals. 
(6)  Other waste that has been intermingled with infectious waste. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    Other potentially infectious materials or OPIM means the following: 
(1)  Human body fluids as follows: 
a.  Semen. 
b.  Vaginal secretions. 
c.  Cerebrospinal fluid. 
d.  Synovial fluid. 
e.  Pleural fluid. 
f.  Pericardial fluid. 
g.  Peritoneal fluid. 
h.  Amniotic fluid. 
i.  Saliva in dental procedures. 
j.  Any body fluid that is visibly contaminated with blood. 
k.  Any body fluids that are difficult or impossible to differentiate between other body fluids. 
(2)  Any unfixed tissue or organ, other than intact skin, from a human, either living or dead. 
(3)  HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, and HIV- or HBV-containing culture medium or other solutions, and blood, organs, or other tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV. 
    Parenteral means piercing the mucous membranes or the skin barrier through such events as needle sticks, human bites, cuts, or abrasions. 
    Personal protective equipment means specialized clothing or equipment worn for protection against contact with blood or OPIM. 
    Secure area means an area that is designated and maintained to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons. 
    Semi-liquid blood or blood products means blood or blood products that have intermediate fluid properties and are capable of flowing in a manner similar to liquid. 
    Sterilize means the use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores. 
    Store means the containment of infectious waste in such a manner as not to constitute collection, treatment, transport, or disposal. 
    Tattoo means: 
(1)  Any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol, or other mark placed with the aid of needles or other instruments; or 
(2)  Any design, letter, scroll, figure, or symbol done by scarring upon or under the skin. 
    Tattoo artist means any person who provides a tattoo to an individual. 
    Tattoo establishment means any room or space where a tattoo artist provides tattoos to individuals or where the tattooing activities take place. 
    Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts, manages, or owns any tattoo establishment. 
    Universal precautions means an approach to infection control in which all human blood and certain human body fluids are treated as if known to be infectious for HIV, HBV, HCV, and other bloodborne pathogens. 
(Code 1985, § 123.01; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-499. - License required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, or cause to be conducted, maintained, or operated, any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment within the corporate limits of the city without first being licensed under this article. 
(b)  No tattoo artist, body piercer, employee of a tattoo or body piercing establishment, or person acting on behalf of a tattoo or body piercing establishment, who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood, shall do business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 123.02; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Secs. 18-500-18-521. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 18-522. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Form; required information. A person or organization shall apply for a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment license with the city controller on forms prescribed by the board. The application shall contain, in addition to other information required by the board, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall state the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all persons constituting such partnership. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state its principle place of business, the full name of such corporation, the state under whose laws it is incorporated, and the full names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all officers, directors, and managers thereof; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of all employees, agents, or individuals who will be working at the business location; 
(3)  The applicant's business address and telephone number; 
(4)  Qualifications of the applicant or, if a corporation, of the manager, officers, or directors in operating, maintaining, or conducting a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, and dates and locations of any previous operations, if any; 
(5)  Written documentation indicating that the applicant has successfully completed the training program required under the requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogen Standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030); 
(6)  A statement of prior criminal record, if any, of the applicant, or in case of a corporation, its officers, directors, managers, or stockholders and details relating to any such prior criminal record; 
(7)  The number of work stations at the business location; 
(8)  The tattoo and/or body piercing establishment's hours of operation; and 
(9)  Verification under oath that under the penalties for perjury, all information and representations contained in the application are true and accurate. 
(b)  Certificate of inspection. Each applicant shall obtain a certificate of inspection from the county health department indicating that his establishment has been inspected and is in compliance with the provisions of this division and shall submit such certificate with its application to the board for review and action. 
(c)  Approval of department of city planning approval. Each application must receive approval from the department of city planning, indicating that the location of the business complies with local zoning requirements. 
(d)  Permit application requirements. Each applicant for a permit to provide tattoos or perform body piercing shall make application with the city controller on forms prescribed by the board which shall include, in addition to other information required by the board, the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant, including previous name or alias, if any; 
(2)  Place and date of birth; 
(3)  Present residence address; 
(4)  Previous residence addresses during the past five years; 
(5)  For whom the applicant intends to work; 
(6)  Nature of work the applicant intends to perform; 
(7)  A description of the applicant's qualifications, including dates and names of previous employers, if any; 
(8)  Details relating to any prior criminal record, if any; 
(9)  Written documentation from a duly licensed physician certifying that the applicant has been examined within the 30-day period preceding the date of application for a permit and that he is free from any communicable diseases; and 
(10)  Written documentation that the applicant has successfully completed the training program required under the requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogen Standard (as found in 29 CFR 1910.1030). 
(e)  Denial of permit. No applicant for a license or permit under this article shall be issued such license or permit if the applicant: 
(1)  Has been determined by a licensed mental health professional to be mentally incompetent. 
(Code 1985, § 123.03; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998; Ord. No. 5571 , § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Sec. 18-523. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the recommendations from the city planning department, the clerk of the board shall submit to the board for its review and action a copy of the application, any reports, and any other documents filed by the applicant. The clerk of the board shall set a date for a public hearing on said application with the board and shall notify the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. The applicant shall be present at the hearing and be available to answer any questions propounded by the board with regard to the proposed business activity. 
(b)  No license shall be issued by the board if it shall be determined that the proposed operation by the applicant will probably constitute a menace to the public health and welfare. No license shall be issued by the board in the event that it is determined that the applicant or, in the case of a corporation, the officers, directors, or manager have previously been connected with any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment the license of which has heretofore been revoked or if the premises sought to be so licensed failed to comply in any manner with the regulations, ordinances, and laws applicable thereto. Employment by the applicant of any person who practices tattoo artistry or body piercing and is not in possession of a valid permit under this article shall be grounds for the denial of an application or for its revocation. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued by the board if it is determined that an applicant has not met all the requirements established under this division and will probably constitute a menace to the public health and welfare. 
(d)  All applicants shall file with the city controller within ten days of their application's approval by the board a certificate of insurance indicating coverage against all public liability in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 from any one occurrence. Such insurance policy shall be used to compensate any and all persons who may have any claims or injuries, including death, arising out of or resulting from any tattooing or body piercing activities performed by a licensed individual at a business location. Any insurance policy filed with the city shall contain the following provision: "The City, through the Office of the City Controller, shall be given at least 15 days' notice prior to the effective date of the cancellation or material change of this policy." 
(e)  Upon favorable action by the board of public works and safety and the filing of all required documents and payment of all fees, the city controller's office shall issue a "Tattoo Establishment" and/or "Body Piercing Establishment" license to the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 123.04; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-524. - Denial of application; right to public hearing. 
(a)  If the board of public works and safety denies an application for a license or permit, it shall notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within five days after the receipt of such notification, the applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application, together with exceptions to the grounds on which the board based its denial of application. Upon the filing of the request, the board shall fix a time and place for the hearing, which shall be within 15 days after the request is filed, and shall notify the applicant thereof. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence and make arguments in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in the hearing to present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render a written decision either to affirm, modify, or reverse its original decision. 
(b)  A copy of the decision shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 123.05; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-525. - Display of license. 
(a)  The person or organization which is issued a license pursuant to this division to operate a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall display such license in a conspicuous location near the entry of the facilities or premises. 
(b)  The license and information concerning the contact person shall remain posted in the business establishment throughout the duration of the time for which the license was issued. 
(Code 1985, § 123.06; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-526. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses or permits issued under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Each licensed individual shall renew his license or permit on an annual basis according to the application requirements and procedures set forth in this division. 
(Code 1985, § 123.07; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-527. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual license fee for a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment license shall be $100.00. 
(b)  The annual permit fee for a tattoo artist and/or body piercer shall be $30.00. 
(Code 1985, § 123.08; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-528. - Hours of operation. 
    No tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1985, § 123.09; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-529. - Transfer of license. 
    Licenses issued under this division shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person. 
(Code 1985, § 123.10; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-530. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. Any license or permit issued under this division may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this division or any rules and regulations either now or hereafter adopted pursuant hereto or of any laws of the state; 
(2)  Permitting, aiding, or abetting the commission of any illegal act, or committing or attempting to commit any illegal act on premises licensed under this division; 
(3)  Selling or permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, or consuming alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, on premises licensed under this division; 
(4)  Tattooing or body piercing any person under the influence of alcoholic or controlled substances; 
(5)  Engaging in acts, conduct, or practices detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of any person in the city. 
(b)  Procedures. If the board of public works and safety has reason to believe that a licensee or permittee has violated any of the provisions of this division, the board shall immediately suspend the license or permit and give the licensee or permittee written notice in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within 14 days of the suspension to determine whether or not the license should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts on which the board has acted in suspending the license. At the hearing, the licensee or permittee, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence showing cause why the license should not be revoked by the board for violation of the provisions of this division or other applicable ordinances or statutes. If, after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this division or other applicable ordinances or statutes have been violated, it shall send the licensee or permittee within ten days after the hearing a written statement of the facts on which it bases its findings and shall immediately revoke the license. If, after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this division or other applicable ordinances or statutes have not been violated, it shall send the licensee or permittee within ten days after the hearing a written statement canceling the suspension of the license and stating that no violation of said ordinance or statute has occurred. 
(Code 1985, § 123.11; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Secs. 18-531-18-563. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEALTH AND SANITATION 

Sec. 18-564. - Operator training responsibilities. 
    All operators of tattoo or body piercing establishments shall comply with the following training responsibilities: 
(1)  Ensure that the training described in the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogens Standard is provided to all tattoo artists and body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo or body piercing establishment, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM. 
(2)  Ensure that training on the handling of infectious waste is provided to all tattoo artists and body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo or body piercing establishment or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parental contact with blood or OPIM. 
(3)  Ensure that a record of training described in subsection (1) of this section is maintained, as required under the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogens Standard of an individual's participation in the training that is provided. The record shall be made available for inspection upon request by the board or its duly authorized agent or designee. 
(4)  Ensure that a record of training described in subsection (2) of this section is maintained. 
(Code 1985, § 123.12; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-565. - Operator general responsibilities. 
(a)  All operators of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall ensure that tattoo artists or body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo or body piercing establishment, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood are provided personal protective equipment and expendables needed to implement the precautions required by this division and the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogens Standard. 
(b)  All operators of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall require tattoo artists or body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo or body piercing establishment, or anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood to provide evidence of compliance with the universal precautions education requirements contained in section 18-567. 
(c)  All operators of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall display, or make available to the public, a description of his compliance with the requirements contained in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  All operators of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall display, or make available to the public, written materials prepared or approved by the city or its designee explaining universal precautions and patrons' rights under this division. These materials shall include information on how to report violations of universal precautions and shall include information regarding the county health department's duties to investigate. 
(Code 1985, § 123.13; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-566. - Operator policies. 
    All operators of any tattoo and/or body piercing establishment shall develop a written policy in compliance with this chapter and the requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogen Standard that: 
(1)  Requires the use of universal precautions when performing tattooing and any activity or duty that includes any reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM; 
(2)  Includes the safe handling of infectious waste; and 
(3)  Provides sanctions, including discipline and dismissal if warranted, against employees for failure to use universal precautions and/or handle infectious waste safely. 
(Code 1985, § 123.14; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-567. - Minimum training, certification, and license requirements. 
(a)  All tattoo artists and/or body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, and anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or (OPIM) shall complete the training program which is required under the requirements of the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's Bloodborne Pathogen Standard. The programs under this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  A bloodborne pathogen training session provided by the operator meeting the requirements under the Indiana Occupational Safety and Health Administration's bloodborne Pathogens Standard. 
(2)  Any bloodborne pathogen continuing education program accredited by a health care licensing entity. 
(b)  All tattoo artists and/or body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, and anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM must be trained in the establishment's policies on the handling of infectious waste. 
(c)  All tattoo artists and/or body piercers, anyone employed by the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment, and anyone acting on behalf of the tattoo and/or body piercing establishment who has a reasonably anticipated risk for skin, eye, mucous membrane, or parenteral contact with blood or OPIM shall provide written evidence from the establishment operator stating that all requirements under this division have been met. Then an application for an artist's license may be obtained from the city. 
(Code 1985, § 123.15; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-568. - Patron records. 
    Records of each patron shall be maintained for seven years. Each record shall include the following: 
(1)  Patron's name; 
(2)  Address; 
(3)  Age; 
(4)  Date patron made decision to receive tattoo; 
(5)  Date tattooed; 
(6)  Design of the tattoo; 
(7)  Location of the tattoo on the patron's body; and 
(8)  The name of the tattoo artist who performed the work. 
(Code 1985, § 123.16; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-569. - Condition, illness, and/or infections. 
(a)  Tattoo artists or body piercers who are experiencing symptoms of acute disease, which include but are not limited to diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, productive cough, jaundice, draining or open skin infections, boils, impetigo, or scabies, shall refrain from providing tattoos or performing any body piercing. 
(b)  Inquiry shall be made, and anyone giving a history of recent jaundice, hepatitis, or AIDS/HIV shall not be tattooed or body pierced. 
(c)  No person, customer, or patron having any skin infection or other disease of the skin or any communicable disease shall be tattooed or body pierced. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body piercing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to the county health department and the board by the operator of the tattoo and/or body piercing, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician. 
(d)  No tattooing or body piercing shall be done on skin surfaces that have a rash, pimples, or boils or manifest any evidence of unhealthy conditions. 
(e)  No tattooing or body piercing shall be done on any person, customer, or patron who is deemed under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol. 
(Code 1985, § 123.17; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-570. - Handwashing and skin preparation. 
(a)  Handwashing facilities shall be readily accessible in the same room where tattooing is provided. 
(b)  Hands shall be washed with soap and running water immediately before putting on gloves and after removal of gloves or other personal protective equipment. 
(c)  Only single use towels shall be used. 
(d)  The area to be tattooed or body pierced shall first be thoroughly washed with warm water containing an antiseptic liquid soap. A single-use sterile article shall be used to scrub the area. 
(e)  After shaving and before tattooing or body piercing has begun, a solution of 70 percent alcohol shall be applied to the area with a sterile single-use article. 
(Code 1985, § 123.18; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-571. - Other restrictions. 
    No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded, or treated with chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging, or altering any blemish, birthmark, scar, or tattoo. 
(Code 1985, § 123.19; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-572. - Personal protective equipment. 
    Appropriate personal protective equipment shall be worn as follows: 
(1)  A clean protective clothing layer shall be worn whenever there is a reasonably anticipated risk of contamination of clothing by blood or OPIM. 
(2)  Masks in combination with eye protection devices, such as goggles or glasses with solid side shield, or chin length face shield, shall be worn whenever splashes, spray, splatter, or droplets of blood or OPIM may be generated and eye, nose, or mouth contamination can be reasonably anticipated. 
(3)  Disposable gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo or the piercing of the body, when the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever the ability to function as a barrier is compromised. Disposable gloves shall not be reused. 
(4)  Gloves shall be worn when decontaminating environmental surfaces and equipment. 
(Code 1985, § 123.20; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-573. - Equipment. 
    The tattoo artist shall only use a single-use razor to shave the area to be tattooed. All stencils shall be properly disposed of after a single use. If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(Code 1985, § 123.21; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-574. - Needles. 
    The tattoo artist or body piercer shall only use single-use needles that are individually packaged and sterilized prior to use. Contaminated needles shall be discarded in sharps containers immediately after use and shall not be bent or broken or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(Code 1985, § 123.22; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-575. - Reusable equipment. 
(a)  Sterilization. Heating procedures capable of sterilization must be used when heat stable, nondisposable equipment is sterilized. 
(b)  Documentation of sterilization technique. Records must be maintained to document the following: 
(1)  Duration of sterilization technique; 
(2)  Determination of effective sterility, such as use of a biological indicator, is performed monthly; and 
(3)  Equipment is maintained as recommended by the owner's manual, and proof is available that the owner's manual recommendations are reviewed monthly. 
(c)  Storage. Reusable contaminated equipment shall not be stored or processed in a manner that requires any person to reach by hand into the containers where these sharp items have been placed. 
(d)  Labeling. Reusable contaminated equipment shall be placed in puncture resistant containers, labeled with the biohazard symbol, leakproof on both sides and bottom, and stored in a manner that does not require reaching by hand into the container where the equipment is stored until cleaning prior to sterilization. 
(e)  Cleaning prior to sterilization. Contaminated reusable equipment shall be effectively cleaned prior to sterilization. 
(f)  Reusable tubes. Reusable tubes shall be effectively cleaned and sterilized before reuse. 
(Code 1985, § 123.23; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-576. - Dyes or pigments. 
(a)  Use of professional suppliers. All dyes or pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  Preparation. In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by tattoo artists, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  Unused dye or pigment in individual containers. After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Code 1985, § 123.24; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-577. - Work environment. 
(a)  Tattooing or body piercing in room used as living quarters. No tattooing or body piercing shall be conducted in any room used as living quarters or in any room which opens directly into living or sleeping quarters. 
(b)  Live animals. Live animals shall be excluded from areas where tattooing or body piercing is being conducted. This exclusion does not apply to the following: 
(1)  Patrol dogs accompanying security or police officers; 
(2)  Guide dogs accompanying the following: 
a.  Blind persons; 
b.  Partially blind persons; 
c.  Physically disabled persons; 
d.  Guide dog trainers; and 
e.  Persons with impaired hearing. 
(c)  Eating, drinking, smoking, etc. Eating, drinking, smoking, or applying cosmetics shall not be allowed in work areas where there is a likelihood of exposure to blood or OPIM. 
(d)  Food and drink. Food and drink shall not be kept in areas where there is a reasonably anticipated risk of exposure to blood or OPIM. 
(e)  Equipment and environmental surfaces. 
(1)  All equipment and environmental surfaces shall be cleaned and decontaminated after contact with blood or OPIM. 
(2)  Environmental surfaces and equipment not requiring sterilization, which has been contaminated by blood, shall be cleaned and decontaminated. 
(f)  Work surfaces. All work surfaces shall be nonabsorbent, easily cleanable, smooth, and free of breaks, open seams, cracks, chips, pits, and similar imperfections. 
(g)  Disinfectant solutions. Disinfectant solutions shall be: 
(1)  A hospital grade, tuberculocidal, environmental protection agency (EPA) registered disinfectant; or 
(2)  Sodium hypochlorite five-tenths percent concentration, by volume (common household bleach in ten percent concentration in water); the solution shall be dated and shall not be used if it is more than 24 hours old. 
(Code 1985, § 123.25; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-578. - Infectious waste containment. 
(a)  Disposable needles or instruments. Contaminated disposable needles or instruments shall be stored in leak-resistant, puncture-resistant containers, tightly sealed to prevent expulsion, labeled with the biohazard symbol, and effectively treated in accordance with this rule prior to being stored in an unsecured area and sent for final disposal. 
(b)  Infectious waste not contaminated with sharps. Infectious wastes that are not contaminated sharps or objects that could potentially become contaminated sharps shall be placed in containers that meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Impervious to moisture; 
(2)  Sufficient strength and thickness to prevent expulsion; 
(3)  Secured to prevent leakage expulsion; 
(4)  Labeled with the biohazard symbol; and 
(5)  Effectively treated in accordance with this rule prior to being placed in an unsecured area and sent for final disposal. 
(c)  Storage prior to final disposal. If infectious waste is stored prior to final disposal, all persons subject to this rule shall store infectious waste in a secure area that: 
(1)  Is locked or otherwise secured to eliminate access by or exposure to the general public; 
(2)  Affords protection from adverse environmental conditions and vermin; and 
(3)  Has a prominently displayed bio-hazard symbol. 
(d)  Manner of storage. Infectious waste shall be stored in a manner that preserves the integrity of the container and is not conducive to rapid microbial growth and putrefaction. 
(e)  Reusable containers. All persons subject to this section shall disinfect reusable containers for infectious waste each time that they are emptied, unless the surfaces of the reusable containers have been protected from contamination by disposable liners, bags, or other devices that are removed with the infectious waste. 
(Code 1985, § 123.26; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-579. - Treatment and transport of infectious waste. 
(a)  All operators of any tattoo establishment and/or body piercing establishment shall ensure that infectious waste is either treated on-site in accordance with this rule or transported off-site for treatment in accordance with this rule. 
(b)  A treatment is effective if it reduces the pathogenic qualities of infectious waste for safe handling, is designed for the specific waste involved, and is carried out in a manner consistent with this rule. Effective treatment may include: 
(1)  Incineration in an incinerator designed to accommodate infectious waste; 
(2)  Steam sterilization; 
(3)  Chemical disinfecting under circumstances where safe handling of the waste is assured; 
(4)  Thermal inactivation; 
(5)  Irradiation; or 
(6)  Discharge in a sanitary sewer or septic system that is properly installed and operating in accordance with state and local laws. 
(c)  All persons subject to this rule shall: 
(1)  Transport infectious waste in a manner that reasonably protects waste haulers and the public from contracting a dangerous communicable disease; and 
(2)  Effectively treat infectious waste in accordance with this rule before it is compacted. 
(d)  All operators shall ensure that infectious waste, effectively treated or not is transported off-site in compliance with 410 IAC 1 through 3. 
(Code 1985, § 123.27; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-580. - Licensees to permit inspections. 
    All licensees under this article shall permit the inspection of their business premises at all reasonable times by duly authorized representatives of the city, or their designees, upon the showing of proper credentials by the inspectors. The denial of inspection privileges shall constitute grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1985, § 123.28; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Sec. 18-581. - Minors. 
    No minor shall receive a tattoo or body piercing without the presence of a parent or guardian and written permission from both parents or guardians, if not deceased. 
(Code 1985, § 123.29; Ord. No. 4248, 2-2-1998) 
Secs. 18-582-18-605. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SECONDHAND STORES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to impose license fees, IC 36-1-3-8; authority to regulate operation of businesses, crafts, professions, etc., IC 36-8-2-10. 

Sec. 18-606. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Secondhand store . Any person who in doing business engages in the purchasing or selling of secondhand clothing, secondhand furniture, or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise of any kind shall be considered operating a secondhand store. 
(Code 1985, § 124.01; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-607. - License requirements. 
    No person or entity shall operate a secondhand store, act as a secondhand store, or advertise, transact or solicit business as a secondhand store within the corporate limits of the city without first being licensed under this article. 
(Code 1985, § 124.02; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-608. - Application. 
(a)  A person shall apply for a secondhand store license with the city controller on forms prescribed by the board of public works and safety. The application shall contain, in addition to other information required by the board, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the secondhand store. 
(3)  Types of material to be sold. 
(b)  Said application shall be referred to the police department for review and recommendation. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the recommendation from the police department, the clerk of the board shall submit to the board for its review and action a copy of the application and any other documents filed by the applicant. The clerk of the board shall set a date for a public hearing on said application with the board and shall notify the applicant of the date and time of the hearing. The applicant or a representative of the applicant must be present for the hearing on an initial application. 
(d)  No license shall be issued by the board if it determines that: 
(1)  An applicant has not met all the requirements established under this article; or 
(2)  The applicant's business will probably constitute a menace to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Upon favorable action by the board of public works and safety, and the filing of all required documents and payment of all fees, the city controller's office shall issue a secondhand store license to the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 124.03; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-609. - Denial of application; right to public hearing. 
(a)  If the board of public works and safety denies an application for license, it shall notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within five days after the receipt of such notification, the applicant may file a written request for a public hearing on the application together with exceptions to the grounds on which the board based its denial of the application. Upon the filing of a request, the board shall fix a time and place for the hearing, which shall be within 30 days after the request is filed and shall notify the applicant thereof. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence and make arguments in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in a hearing to present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render a written decision to either affirm, modify, or reverse its original decision. 
(b)  A copy of the decision shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the application. 
(Code 1985, § 124.04; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-610. - Display of license. 
(a)  The person who is issued a license pursuant to this article to operate a secondhand store shall display such license in a conspicuous location near the entry of the facility or premises. 
(b)  The license and information concerning its contact person shall remain posted in the business establishment throughout the duration of the time period for which the license was issued. 
(Code 1985, § 124.05; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-611. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Each secondhand store dealer shall renew his license on an annual basis according to the application of requirements and procedures set forth in this article, except that if no applicant information has changed since the previous application, the applicant need not be present for the hearing, unless requested by the board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 124.06; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-612. - License fee. 
    The applicant for a secondhand store license shall pay an annual fee of $15.00 to the controller upon approval of the board of public works and safety and issuance of a license. 
(Code 1985, § 124.07; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-613. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article or any rules and regulations either now or hereafter adopted pursuant hereto or of any laws of the state; 
(2)  Permitting, aiding or abetting in the commission of any illegal action or committing or attempting to commit any illegal act on the premises licensed under this chapter; 
(3)  Engaging in acts, conduct or practices that are detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare or any person in the city. 
(b)  Procedures. If the board of public works and safety has reason to believe that a licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, the board shall immediately suspend the license and give the licensee written notice in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the suspension and a hearing to be held within 14 days of the suspension to determine whether or not the license should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts on which the board has acted in suspending the license. At the hearing, the licensee, and any other interested person, shall have the right to present evidence showing cause why the license should not be revoked by the board for violation of the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes. If, after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes have been violated, it shall send the licensee within ten days after the hearing a written statement of the facts on which it bases its findings and shall immediately revoke the license. If, after the hearing, the board finds that the provisions of this article or other applicable ordinances or statutes have not been violated, it shall send the licensee within ten days after the hearing a written statement canceling the suspension of the license and stating that no violations of said ordinance or statutes have occurred. 
(Code 1985, § 124.08; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-614. - Records and books required. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designated representative, shall prepare, maintain and make available a list of articles frequently stolen or otherwise illegally acquired by individuals engaged in criminal activities. 
(b)  Any secondhand store dealer who, in the conduct of business, purchases any article included on said list shall comply with the record and bookkeeping requirements described herein. 
(c)  If a secondhand store dealer acquires any property on said list, he shall obtain a properly signed bill of sale from the seller evidencing the sale of certain items to said dealer. All bills of sale must be in duplicate and must recite the following separate items: 
(1)  A bold heading with the words, "Bill of Sale" on the forms. 
(2)  Date and time of the bill of sale. 
(3)  Name of secondhand store. 
(4)  Amount of consideration. 
(5)  Description of all articles received therein. 
(6)  Full name, date of birth, and address of the seller. 
(7)  Driver's license number or social security number of the seller. 
(8)  Signature of the seller. 
(9)  Right thumb print of the seller. 
(d)  The original copy of the bill of sale shall be retained by the secondhand store dealer. The second copy shall be delivered to the seller at the time of sale. 
(e)  The secondhand store dealer shall keep at his place of business a bound book with consecutively numbered pages in which he shall record in writing, using permanent ink, any purchase totaling $5.00 or more from any individual seller, or any purchase that is traded, bartered, or otherwise conveyed to the secondhand store dealer. When recording the purchase in the bound book, the secondhand store dealer will include the date of the transaction, along with the name, address and identification number of the seller, and a description of the property received from the seller in a manner that will aid in the identification of the property (i.e., manufacturer and model, serial number, style, size, color, etc.). 
(f)  All property purchased or received by the secondhand store dealer shall be recorded in the bound book within 24 hours of time of possession of the property. 
(g)  Notwithstanding subsection (e) of this section, the secondhand store dealer may use electronic or computerized recordkeeping methods, instead of the bound book, provided written printouts or hardcopies of the required data are readily available. The dealer may maintain the information required by this subsection in a computer program compatible with a program maintained by the police department or pre-approved by the police department. 
(Code 1985, § 124.09; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 5439, § 1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-615. - Inspection of books and property. 
    Every secondhand store dealer required to comply with section 18-614 shall, during the hours of ordinary business, allow any member of the police department to inspect the books kept pursuant to section 18-614 and articles reported therein. In addition, said dealers shall send copies of or present books to the police chief or his designee for inspection and copying upon request of the chief or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 124.10; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-616. - Holding period. 
    All items purchased or received by the secondhand store dealer which are included on said list shall be held for ten days prior to resale or other disposal by the dealer. 
(Code 1985, § 124.11; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 5439, § 1, 5-7-2014) 
Sec. 18-617. - Purchase from minors prohibited. 
    No secondhand store dealer shall receive or purchase any property included in the designated property list from a person under the age of 18 years or from anyone acting as an agent for a minor, excepting a parent or legal guardian of the minor, unless prior written approval from a parent or legal guardian is on file with the secondhand store dealer. 
(Code 1985, § 124.12; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Sec. 18-618. - Exemptions. 
    Any not-for-profit or charitable organization doing business as a not-for-profit corporation under the laws of the state shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 124.13; Ord. No. 4409, 7-6-1999) 
Secs. 18-619-18-659. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Public indecency, IC 35-45-4-1. 

Sec. 18-660. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent deleterious effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the state constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this article to in any way condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or material harmful to minors. 
(Code 1985, § 125.01; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-661. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means a person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
    Establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, regardless of whether it currently exists as a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this article; 
(3)  The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this article to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any such sexually oriented business. 
    Nudity or state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male or female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover human buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. 
    Operator means the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises. 
    Permitted or licensed premises means any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business. 
    Permittee and/or licensee means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Public building means any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes. 
    Public park or recreation area means public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, nature trails, swimming pools, reservoirs, athletic fields, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities. 
    Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
    Residential district or use means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family, or mobile home park or subdivision as defined in chapter 137, zoning. 
    School means any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities. The term "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
    Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty shop, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter establishment, escort agency or nude model studio. 
    Sexually oriented businesses means those businesses defined as follows: 
    Adult arcade means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
(3)  An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club," or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or in a state of nudity or seminude; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, or leaflets, radio or television; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Escort means a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Massage parlor means any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his specified anatomical areas. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice of massage in or by any licensed hospital; nor by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath; nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath; nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas for money or any form of consideration and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its primary business purposes offers for any form of consideration a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other intentional touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means increase an in the floor area occupied by the business by more than 15 percent, as the floor area exist on the date the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1985, § 125.02; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-662. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, or cause to be conducted, maintained, or operated, any sexually oriented business within the corporate limits of the city without first being licensed under this article. 
(b)  The board of public works and safety, or its designee, is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented businesses. The board of public works and safety, or its designee, is also responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business for which a permit is being applied complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in the city and the city's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  The police department shall be responsible for providing information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the time period set forth. 
(d)  The city's code enforcement department shall be responsible for inspecting a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and articles. 
(e)  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the board of public works and safety. Any person desiring to operate a sexually oriented business shall file with the city an original and two copies of a sworn permit application on the standard application form supplied by the board of public works and safety or its designee. 
(f)  The completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he is 18 years of age; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he must state: 
a.  The sexually oriented business' fictitious name; and 
b.  Submit the required state registration documents. 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the application has, within the two- or five-year period as specified in section 18-664 immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, and the date and place of conviction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed in the application has had a previous permit under this article, or other similar sexually oriented business articles from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individual listed in the application has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this article whose permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
(5)  Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in the application holds any other permits and/or licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business article from another city, county, or state and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(6)  The single classification of permit for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if any. 
(8)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(9)  A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a state registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established existing uses regulated by this article within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential property within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(10)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business collectively with a group of individuals, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant. 
(11)  If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, or other video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the application requirements stated in section 18-673 et seq. 
(g)  Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within 30 days from the date of such change, shall be grounds for suspension of a permit. 
(h)  If the board of public works and safety or its designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten days to properly complete the application. (The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.) 
(i)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes and laws. 
(j)  The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee of $100.00 at the time of filing an application under this section. 
(k)  Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any sexually oriented business defined in this article, and as part of any application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the board of public works and safety or its designee a certification that the proposed location of such business complies with chapter 137, zoning. 
(l)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. 
(m)  By applying for a permit under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the board of public works and safety or its designee, the police department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws, this article and codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(n)  The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to section 18-672. This shall be a continuing requirement even after a permit is granted or renewed. 
(Code 1985, § 125.03; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-663. - Investigation and application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city controller shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, the application and the proposed sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth in this article. Said investigation shall be completed within 20 days of receipt of the application by the city controller. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state the reasons. The police department shall only be required to certify the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) records request check mentioned at section 18-664. The police department shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications. 
(b)  A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the city controller who shall forward the application and any accompanying materials to the board of public works and safety for consideration. 
(Code 1985, § 125.04; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-664. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Time limit for issuance or denial. The board of public works and safety or its designee, shall grant or deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the 30th day, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall be permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the board of public works and safety or its designee, notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for that denial. 
(b)  Grant of application for permit. 
(1)  The board of public works and safety or its designee, shall grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection (c) of this section is present. 
(2)  The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business shall be subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to IC 35-45-4-1. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at any time. 
(c)  Denial of application for permit. 
(1)  The board of public works and safety or its designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
a.  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
b.  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
c.  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the board of public works and safety to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or is residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
d.  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or permit application for the issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
e.  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating said compliance. 
f.  The application or permit fees required by this article have not been paid. 
g.  An applicant of the proposed business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this article or chapter 137, zoning. 
h.  The granting of the application would violate a statute, article, or court order. 
i.  The applicant has a permit under this article that has been suspended or revoked. 
j.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering, or tax violations; 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses for specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity or materials harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring within any 24-month period; 
4.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
5.  An applicant who has been convicted of the above described "specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit only when the time period required in subsection (c)(1)j of this section has elapsed. 
k.  An applicant knowingly has in his employ, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in section 18-672. 
(2)  If the board of public works and safety or its designee denies the application it shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason for the denial. 
(3)  If a person applies for a permit for a particular location within a period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application shall be denied. 
(Code 1985, § 125.05; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-665. - Annual permit fee. 
    The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $200.00. 
(Code 1985, § 125.06; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-666. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the city and county to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who refuses to permit any such inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 125.07; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-667. - Expiration of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 18-664 (for renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient). Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected. 
(b)  When the board of public works and safety or its designee, denies renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this article for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the board of public works and safety or its designee, finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Code 1985, § 125.08; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-668. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety or its designee shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any controlled substances while working in the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(5)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute, code, ordinance or regulation violation, the board of public works and safety or its designee, shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee a seven-day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period, the board of public works and safety or its designee, shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension; 
(6)  Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of operation set forth in section 18-676; or 
(7)  Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as required in section 18-672. 
(b)  The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected. 
(Code 1985, § 125.09; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-669. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety or its designee shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension as set forth in section 18-668 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The board of public works and safety or its designee shall revoke a permit upon determining that: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's opportunity for obtaining a permit; 
(2)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises; 
(3)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; 
(5)  A permittee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time period required in section 18-664 has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offense was committed. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit; 
(7)  A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees related to a sexually oriented business; or 
(8)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; 
(9)  A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented business under a single roof; 
(10)  A permittee has engaged in or attempted to engage in the transfer of a permit in violation of section 18-671. 
(c)  When the board of public works and safety or its designee, revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the board of public works and safety or its designee finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the number of years required under this section have elapsed. 
(Code 1985, § 125.10; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-670. - Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation. 
    After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek judicial review of the administrative action in the county superior or circuit court. 
(Code 1985, § 125.11; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-671. - Transfer of permit. 
(a)  A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application for a permit. 
(b)  A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. 
(c)  A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location. 
(d)  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Code 1985, § 125.12; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-672. - Sexually oriented business employee license. 
(a)  Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented business, as defined in section 18-661, who engages in the services rendered by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor (except for licensed massage parlors), or a live performer or entertainer shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25.00. Said fee is to cover reasonable administrative costs of the licensing application process. 
(b)  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the board of public works and safety or its designee the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name or any other names (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual; 
(2)  Age, date, and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(4)  Present business address and telephone number; 
(5)  Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(6)  A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application; 
(7)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined in section 18-664(c)(1)j. This information shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction; 
(8)  The board of public works and safety designee shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the police department for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be completed within ten days from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation, the board of public works and safety or its designee shall issue a license unless the report from the police department finds that one or more of the following findings is true: 
a.  That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the sheriff's department or other department of the city; 
b.  That the applicant is under 18 years of age; 
c.  That the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined in section 18-664(c)(1)j; 
d.  That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this article; 
e.  That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application. 
(c)  Renewal of license. 
(1)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal by the board of public works and safety or its designee upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the board of public works and safety or its designee and the police department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal act as defined in section 18-664(c)(1)j or committed any act during the existence of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application. 
(2)  The renewal of the license shall be the same as the initial application fee. 
(Code 1985, § 125.13; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-673. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos in video booths. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued to said business under this article, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises wherein patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight feet. The diagram shall also designate the place where the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The board of public works and safety and its designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the board of public works and safety or its designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or person at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes," shall be allowed in the walls or partitions which separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room or restroom. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than two footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described subsection (8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 125.14; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-674. - Prohibitions regarding minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to knowingly or with reasonable cause knows, permits, suffers, or allows: 
(1)  Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business premises; 
(2)  A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business premises as an employee; 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of 18 years from entering the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless the attendant asked for and was furnished: 
a.  A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's license; or 
b.  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older. 
(Code 1985, § 125.15; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-675. - Advertising and lighting regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable state statute or local ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to display or otherwise exhibit the materials and/or performances at such sexually oriented business in any advertising or any portion of the interior premises which is visible outside the premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of such sexually oriented business. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to allow the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than as permitted by chapter 129, pertaining to on-premises signs, and as follows: 
(1)  Signage shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations in any manner; and 
(2)  May contain only the legal name of the enterprise. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to allow the exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The establishment is a part of a commercial multiunit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multiunit center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multiunit center. 
(f)  All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
(g)  Nothing contained in this section of the article shall relieve the operator of a sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of this article, or any subsequently enacted city ordinances or regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 125.16; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-676. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person while working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(Code 1985, § 125.17; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-677. - Nudity at sexually oriented businesses prohibited. 
    No person shall allow public nudity in any sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section 18-668. 
(Code 1985, § 125.18; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-678. - Regulations pertaining to live entertainment. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "live entertainment" means a person who appears nude, seminude, or a performance which is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
(b)  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least 18 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patron. No patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a performer. 
(c)  The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers that shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers. 
(d)  The sexually oriented business establishment shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum four-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and performers. 
(e)  No entertainer, either before, during, or after a performance, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a performance. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the premises of the establishment. 
(f)  Fixed rails at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this section. 
(g)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. 
(h)  No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment shall cause or allow a performer to engage in any entertainment such as a couch or straddle dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. No performer shall contract to or engage in a couch or straddle dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, the term "couch or straddle dance" is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming within ten feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, or any specified sexual activity. For purposes of this subsection, "employee" is defined as it is in section 18-661. 
(i)  This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within ten feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any "specified sexual activity" or display or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender. 
(j)  Compliance with this section: 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "establishment" is defined as it is in section 18-661. No establishment shall be in compliance with this section until the city's designated agent has inspected and approved the establishment's compliance. The city shall have ten days from the date it receives written notice from the operator that the establishment is ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of compliance required by this section. Failure to approve or disapprove of compliance within ten days shall constitute a finding of compliance under this section. 
(2)  The operator of an establishment that has been providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit shall have the time periods listed in subsections (j)(5) through (j)(11) of this section in which to bring the establishment into compliance with this section. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live entertainment shall cause the establishment's permit to be suspended under section 18-668. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment is approved by the city's designated agent as being in full compliance with this section. 
(3)  The operator of an establishment, that has been operating under a valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business and who wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this article. 
(4)  The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment, who wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is provided. No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this article. 
(5)  Compliance with subsection (b) of this section must occur within 60 days from the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(6)  Compliance with subsection (c) of this section must occur within 90 days from the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(7)  Compliance with subsection (d) of this section must occur within 90 days from the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(8)  Compliance with subsection (e) of this section must occur upon the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(9)  Compliance with subsection (f) of this section must occur within 60 days from the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(10)  Compliance with subsection (g) of this section must occur upon the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(11)  Compliance with subsection (h) of this section must occur upon the date the ordinance from which this section is derived becomes effective. 
(Code 1985, § 125.19; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-679. - Exemptions. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted under this article, exposed any specified anatomical area during an employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during an employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Code 1985, § 125.20; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-680. - Penalty and injunctive relief. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine as prescribed by section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to seeking penalties against individuals who violate provisions of this article, the city attorney or his designated representative may commence legal action seeking injunctive relief against any individuals violating the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 125.21; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Sec. 18-681. - Prohibition of distribution of sexual devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
(b)  Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia shall include, but are not limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, leather restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding earrings or other decorative jewelry) or other tools of sado-masochistic abuse. 
(Code 1985, § 125.22; Ord. No. 4415, 7-20-1999; Ord. No. 4788, 9-15-2003) 
Secs. 18-682-18-705. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RUBBISH HAULERS; LICENSE AND VEHICLE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 18-706. - License required. 
(a)  Private haulers. Garbage, refuse, and ashes may be removed from any premises within the city by private rubbish haulers if the resident who wishes the matter removed so desires, but all such haulers, including those who may be under contract to the board of public works and safety, must first procure a license from the city controller. 
(b)  Fee; expiration. The city controller shall charge the sum of $10.00 annually for each license granted, which license shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Multiple vehicles; number plate; display. If the applicant operates more than one vehicle in the collection and hauling of rubbish, each vehicle must be so licensed, and the city controller shall furnish with each license a number plate which must be prominently and visibly displayed on the licensed vehicle at all times it is engaged in the collecting or hauling of rubbish. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 6; Code 1985, § 94.11(A); Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Sec. 18-707. - Covering and construction of vehicle. 
    No license shall be issued for the hauling of rubbish unless the vehicle which displays the license is completely covered and so constructed that the material transported therein will not sift through, drop, or fall out, or be blown off. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 7; Code 1985, § 94.11(B); Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Sec. 18-708. - Exception to licensing provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter which require the licensing of trash haulers shall not apply to persons hauling, transporting, or carrying rubbish, trash, and other refuse from his own premises, but shall apply only to persons carrying, hauling, or transporting such matter for hire. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 9; Code 1985, § 94.11(C); Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Sec. 18-709. - Violation of article provisions. 
    The board of public works and safety may terminate the license required by this chapter when it is determined that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this article or any of the rules or regulations of the board. License revocation under this section may only be after notice to the holder of the license giving him an opportunity for a hearing before the board. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 8; Code 1985, § 94.11(D); Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City and town cemeteries, IC 23-14-65-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-1. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all city-owned cemeteries that are owned by the city and located within five miles of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 92.01; Ord. No. 4591, 5-21-2001) 
Sec. 22-2. - Jurisdiction of board of public works and safety. 
    The city's board of public works and safety shall have exclusive jurisdiction and authority to do the following: 
(1)  Collect, preserve, and pay all money, funds, securities, obligations, and property of any kind related to cemetery purposes. 
(2)  Protect the cemetery and sanctity of the dead. 
(3)  Regulate or prohibit the interment of bodies. 
(4)  Authorize the removal of buried bodies or whole cemeteries to some other place. 
(5)  Any other action authorized by state law, as codified in IC 23-14-65, including employing and discharging agents and employees necessary for controlling and maintaining the cemetery. 
(Code 1985, § 92.02; Ord. No. 4591, 5-21-2001) 
Chapter 26 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of solicitations, IC 36-8-2-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
    Charitable organization or charity means an organization established for any charitable purpose and includes, but is not limited to, organizations described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
    Contributions means and includes the term "alms," "food," "clothing," "money," "property," "subscription" or "pledge," and also donations under the guise of loans of money or property. 
    Cost of solicitation means all costs of whatever nature incurred in raising the funds solicited, specifically including, but not limited to, the reasonable cost of acquiring goods, merchandise, or an entertainment event, and compensation in whatever form paid to a professional promoter or solicitor. 
    Professional promoter means a person who, for compensation, plans, promotes, conducts, manages, or carries on or attempts to plan, promote, conduct, manage, or carry on any drive or campaign for the purpose of soliciting contributions for or on behalf of any charity or engages in the business of soliciting contributions for charitable purposes. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charity shall not be deemed a professional promoter by reason of his participation in charitable solicitations made by or on behalf of his employer. A professional promoter must register with the Consumer Protection Division, Office of the Attorney General of the State of Indiana, pursuant to IC 23-7-8-2. 
    Professional solicitor means any person other than a professional promoter who is employed or retained for compensation to make solicitations in connection with a charitable solicitation. A bona fide officer or regular employee of a charity shall not be deemed a professional solicitor by reason of his participation in charitable solicitations made by or on behalf of his employer. A professional solicitor must register with the Consumer Protection Division, Office of the Attorney General of the State of Indiana, pursuant to IC 23-7-8-2. 
    Religious, religion or church means any organization or activity directly involving the promulgation or observance of any system of worship or to the building or maintenance of places of worship. The term "religious," "religion," or "church" as used herein do not include charitable activities as defined herein, even though carried on or sponsored by a religious organization. 
    Solicit and solicitation means the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea or representation that the money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose as those purposes are defined in this section. These words shall also mean and include, but not be limited to, the following methods of securing such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  The making of any announcement to the local press or by telephone concerning a local appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith; 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting, or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or other local publications; 
(4)  The sale of, or the offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing; 
(5)  Solicitation shall be deemed to have taken place when the request is made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution referred to in this section. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 1; Code 1985, § 112.01; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person, or any agent, servant, employee, or officer thereof violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who aids or abets in the procuring of a violation of any provision of this chapter, or who files or causes to be filed an application for a permit which contains false or fraudulent statements of fact, shall be subject to the provisions and procedures of section 2-2, pertaining to the ordinance violations bureau. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 19; Code 1985, § 112.99; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-3. - Exemptions from regulations. 
    The following solicitations shall not be subject to the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Charitable solicitations which are expected to raise less than $500.00 in total contributions. 
(2)  Solicitations made by and on behalf of a charitable organization which is being conducted solely by members or officers thereof voluntarily and without remuneration, among the established and bona fide membership or the normal constituency or supporters thereof. 
(3)  Solicitations which are in the form of collections or contributions collected at regular assemblies or services of a charitable organization. 
(4)  Solicitations conducted by and for the benefit of schools, churches and other religious organizations. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 1; Code 1985, § 112.02; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Secs. 26-4-26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 

Sec. 26-23. - Solicitation permit required. 
    No person shall solicit contributions within the city for any person or charitable purpose unless the person for whose benefit the solicitation is conducted has applied for, and received, a permit issued by the city controller. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 3; Code 1985, § 112.10; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-24. - Application. 
(a)  An application for registration and a permit to solicit shall be made to the controller's office on forms prescribed by it. The application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the controller not less than 60 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; however, the controller may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less than 60 days prior to the effective date of the registration and permit applied for. The application herein required shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, or principal office of the person applying for the permit; 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and executives and a copy of the resolution, if any, authorizing the solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of the applicant's records; 
(3)  The purpose for which solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom, and the percentage of the funds raised that will go toward charitable purposes; 
(4)  A specific statement, supported by facts and figures, if any, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited; 
(5)  The names and addresses of the person by whom the receipts of the solicitations will be disbursed; 
(6)  The name, birth date and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names and birth dates of all fund raisers connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation if the fund raisers shall receive any paid compensation for their services; 
(7)  An outline of the method to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
(8)  The time when the solicitation will be made, giving the preferred dates and the hour of day for the commencement and termination of the solicitation; 
(9)  The estimated cost of the solicitation; 
(10)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses, or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons. The controller may elect not to require the information as to regular staff or charitable organizations maintaining a permanent office in the county; 
(11)  If a professional promoter or solicitor is engaged, a copy of the contract of each and proof of registration with the Consumer Protection Division, Office of the Attorney General shall be attached to the application; 
(12)  The estimated percentage of the solicited funds which will be used directly for charitable purposes; 
(13)  A financial statement for the preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, the statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and the final distribution thereof; 
(14)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done or to be done by the applicant, and showing how much thereof is being done or to be done in the city; 
(15)  A statement to the effect that if registration and a permit are granted, they will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof; 
(16)  Any other information as may be reasonably required by the controller in order for it to determine the kind, character, and method of the proposed solicitation, and whether the solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the safety, convenience, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any substantial change in fact, policy, or method that would materially alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the controller in writing thereof within 72 hours after the change. Should the applicant fail to so notify the controller, any permit issued to the applicant prior thereto shall stand suspended until a hearing is had pursuant to section 26-30. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 4; Code 1985, § 112.11; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4085, 8-19-1996; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-25. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The permit fee for solicitations involving professional promoters and/or professional solicitors shall be $50.00. 
(b)  The permit fee for solicitations which do not involve professional promoters and/or professional solicitors shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 5; Code 1985, § 112.12; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-26. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The controller shall examine all applications filed under this article and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as the controller shall deem necessary in order to perform duties under this article. Upon request by the controller, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the controller, or his designee, all of the applicant's books, records, and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 6; Code 1985, § 112.13; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-27. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
(a)  The controller shall grant the registration and permit whenever it finds or reasonably believes the following: 
(1)  All of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  The applicant is not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(3)  The local control and supervision of the solicitation will be under local, responsible, and reliable persons; 
(4)  The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public; 
(5)  The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the charitable purpose described in the application, and will not be conducted primarily for private profit; 
(6)  At least 25 percent of the total receipts collected in the solicitation will be given to the charity after all costs of solicitation have been paid; and 
(7)  The kind, character, and method of the proposed solicitation are such that the solicitation will be in the interests of the safety, convenience, and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(b)  A copy of each application, permit, and all supporting documentation shall be available in the controller's office for public inspection for a period of not less than three years after the effective date of the permit. 
(c)  The controller's office will notify the applicant, by certified mail to the address given on the application, of its decision on the application. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 7; Code 1985, § 112.14; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-28. - Form of registration, permit. 
(a)  Registrations and permits issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the serial number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit holder does not constitute an endorsement by the city or by any of its departments, officers, or employees of the purpose or of the persons conducting this solicitation. 
(b)  All permits must be signed by the controller or the controller's designee. 
(c)  Each solicitor of the charity will be provided with an information card or similar identification signed by the person having control and supervision of the solicitation. The card or identification shall carry on its face the name and address of the person to whom the permit was issued, the number of the permit, the dates during which the permit holder may solicit, and shall identify by name the individual holder of the card or identification. Any individual soliciting without the card or identification shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. The card or identification shall be provided for the individual solicitor by and at the expense of the permit holder. 
(d)  Any permit issued by the controller under this article shall not be transferable or assignable. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 13; Code 1985, § 112.15; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-29. - Denial of permit application; right to public hearing. 
(a)  If the controller denies an application for registration and permit, it shall notify the applicant of its decision and the grounds therefor by certified mail, return receipt requested. Within ten days after the receipt of such notification, the applicant may file a written request with the city's board of public works and safety for a public hearing on the application and the grounds upon which the controller based the denial. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such request, the board of public works and safety shall fix a time and place for the hearing, which shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed, and shall notify the applicant of same by personal service which shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in support of his application. Within five days after the conclusion of the hearing, the board of public works and safety shall render a written decision granting or denying the application and shall state the grounds upon which the decision was based. A copy of this decision shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the applicant. 
(c)  Any action taken by the board of public works and safety shall be final for purposes of judicial review. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 16; Code 1985, § 112.16; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-30. - Suspension, revocation of permit. 
(a)  Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the controller has reason to believe that any person registered under this article has violated any of the provisions thereof, or that any promoter, agent, or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the controller shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder written notice in person or by certified mail, of the suspension and of a hearing to be held before the board of public works and safety within seven days of the suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This notice must contain a statement of the facts on which the controller has acted in suspending the permit. At the hearing, the permit holder, and any other interested persons, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts on which the controller based the suspension of the permit and any other facts which may aid the board of public works and safety in determining whether this chapter has been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. At any time before this hearing takes place, the controller may reinstate the permit and withdraw the request for a hearing. 
(b)  If, after the hearing, the board of public works and safety finds that this chapter has been violated or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, the board shall within seven days after the hearing file in the controller's office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by certified mail, or in any manner permitted by general law for the serving of notices, a written statement of the facts on which it bases such a finding and shall immediately revoke the permit. 
(c)  If, after the hearing, the board of public works and safety finds that this chapter has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, it shall within seven days after the hearing file in the controller's office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by certified mail, or in any manner permitted by general law for serving of notices, a written statement canceling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed. 
(d)  In all cases where a suspension of the permit occurs, the chief of police shall be notified forthwith by the controller of the suspension or revocation of any permit issued under this article. In like manner, the controller shall immediately notify the chief of police, subsequent to the hearing provided for in this section of the decision of the board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 18; Code 1985, § 112.17; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Secs. 26-31-26-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-49. - When written receipt required. 
    Any person receiving money or anything having a value of $1.00 or more from any contributor under a solicitation made pursuant to a permit granted under article II of this chapter shall give to the contributor, upon request, a written receipt signed by the solicitor showing plainly the name and permit number of the person under whose permit the solicitation is conducted, the date, and the amount received. This section shall not apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle used in solicitation with the written approval of the controller, where it is impractical to determine the amount of such contributions. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 15; Code 1985, § 112.20; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-50. - Permissible hours of solicitation. 
    No person shall solicit contributions within the city pursuant to a permit issued under article II of this chapter other than during daylight hours. 
(Code 1985, § 112.21; Ord. No. 2223, 11-20-1978; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-51. - Misrepresentation. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social position, residence, or principal place of business, and no person shall make or cause to be made any misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this chapter. 
(b)  No charitable organization or professional solicitor shall use a name, symbol, or statement so closely related or similar to that used by another charitable organization or governmental agency that the use thereof would tend to confuse or mislead the public. 
(c)  No charitable organization or professional solicitor shall solicit funds by the use of statements or material that would misrepresent the purpose or ultimate recipient of the funds. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 10; Code 1985, § 112.22; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-52. - Accounting system to be maintained. 
    No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations and all disbursements are entered on the official books or records of the organization. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 11; Code 1985, § 112.23; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Sec. 26-53. - Final report, financial statement required. 
    All persons to whom permits are issued under this chapter shall furnish to the controller, within 60 days after the solicitation has been completed, a report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a report of the wages, fees, commissions, and expenses paid to any person in connection with the solicitation, the total amount used directly for charitable purposes and the amount to be used for charitable purposes within the city. The entire report shall be available for public inspection. The permit holder shall make available to the controller, or to any person designated in writing by the controller, all books, records, and papers by which the accuracy of such report may be verified. Failure to submit a final report and financial statement may result in a citation, as well as being disqualified from receiving future solicitation permits. 
(Code 1968, tit. 111, art. 12; Code 1985, § 112.24; Ord. No. 1799, 11-5-1975; Ord. No. 4503, 7-17-2000) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOMESTIC REFUSE, RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND YARD WASTE 

Sec. 30-19. - City to provide disposal service. 
    The city or its designated agent shall provide eligible residents (which shall mean private residences and residential buildings containing not more than four individual dwelling units) a collection, transportation, and disposal service for domestic garbage, refuse or trash, recyclable materials, yard waste and large items/white goods one day each week. 
(1)  The board of public works and safety may adopt rules and regulations governing the implementation of the mandatory domestic garbage, refuse or trash collection, recycling, large items/white goods and yard waste programs which shall include the authority to appoint an agent for collection of the fees due for such service. 
(2)  The fees levied for the service under this article are the sole responsibility of the property owner. The board of public works and safety shall set forth the amount of and responsibility for collection of these fees in its rules and regulations. 
(3)  The board of public works and safety shall have the authority to purchase or lease such necessary equipment or facilities, and to hire or contract for such services, as will provide the collection and disposal service of domestic garbage, refuse or trash, recycling, yard waste and large item/white goods programs established in this section, but any such action or contract shall be subject to the approval of the common council. 
(4)  A copy of all current rules, regulations, and contracts for this service shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 2; Code 1985, § 94.10; Ord. of 6-1-1970; Ord. No. 3771, 11-1-1993; Ord. No. 3911, 12-19-1994; Ord. No. 4286, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 4770, 7-9-2003) 
Sec. 30-20. - Dumping. 
(a)  No person shall dump any garbage, rubbish, refuse, or ashes of any sort at any place within the city, except in such areas as may be designated for that purpose by the board of public works and safety, and then only on such terms and regulations as may be set forth by the board. 
(b)  It shall not be considered unreasonable for the board of public works and safety to require a fee for the use of any facilities it provides for the dumping of the materials. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 4; Code 1985, § 94.13; Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Sec. 30-21. - Littering. 
    No person shall throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, any refuse of any sort into or on any street, alley, sidewalk, river, stream, or bank thereof, or any public or private property within the city limits. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 5; Code 1985, § 94.14; Ord. of 6-1-1970) 
Secs. 30-22-30-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 30-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance vehicle means any vehicle: 
(1)  That is covered by a tarpaulin or other covering obscuring reflective devices, while parked on a city street or public property; 
(2)  Which by its general state of deterioration, poses an immediate threat to the public's health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, any vehicle which in its current state of disrepair causes any harmful materials or substances including, but not limited to, glass, oil, transmission fluid, or brake fluid to be deposited upon a city street or public property; 
(3)  That is on blocks or is otherwise inoperable and unlicensed and on a city street or public property; 
(4)  That is on private residential property outside in a state of disrepair, is missing parts, or is an abandoned vehicle as defined in section 30-71; or 
(5)  That is partially dismantled, inoperable, wrecked, junked or discarded, is located outside, not enclosed in a garage, and is located on private property operated as an automobile sales or service business for a period exceeding 30 days. 
(Code 1985, § 94.01; Ord. No. 4771, 7-9-2003) 
Sec. 30-47. - Offenses and conditions deemed public nuisances. 
(a)  In addition to what is declared in this article to be a public nuisance, those offenses which are known to the common law and the statutes of the state as public nuisances may, when found to exist within the city limits, be treated as such and be proceeded against as provided in this article, or in accordance with any other provisions of law. Wherever the word nuisance is used in this article, it refers to a public nuisance. 
(b)  The following conditions shall be considered to constitute public nuisances for the purpose of this article: 
(1)  Litter. 
(2)  Fallen tree stumps, dead trees, cut brush, fallen or cut limbs. 
(3)  Boxes, appliances, household items, and tires. 
(4)  Demolition remains or improper storage of building materials. 
(5)  Open excavations, uncovered or improperly covered holes whether lined or unlined, and dirt piles on any open or unfenced real property within the city. 
(6)  Accumulated garbage and trash. 
(7)  Any nuisance vehicle, automobile parts, disassembled automobiles, and automobiles without engines; plumbing and piping materials and parts; scrap metal; unseaworthy or dilapidated, deteriorated or nonoperable jet skis, snowmobiles, motorcycles, bicycles, trailers, or mopeds. 
(8)  Structures defaced with paint or wording. 
(9)  Any portion of real property or any personal property which emits an unwholesome odor. 
(10)  Any wastewater, filth, offal, garbage, rubbish, animal waste, or human excrement, which is deposited, allowed, or caused to be upon any public or private property. 
(11)  Any water or any other substance which is caused or permitted to flow onto or be deposited upon any public property or public way, except natural surface water drainage. 
(12)  Any dead animal or animal parts. 
(13)  The erection of a dam or any other obstruction by a private party which prevents the natural flow of water and causes it to collect in a pool upon any public property. 
(14)  Any real or personal property which is infected with contagious disease or is likely to cause an immediate health hazard. 
(15)  The placing or accumulating on or within any real or personal property or permitting the same, of any matter which attracts or may attract rodents, insects, or domestic or wild animals in such a manner as to create a health hazard or unsanitary or dangerous condition. 
(16)  Any real or personal property, used as a place of residence or habitation or for sleeping, that is maintained in such a way as to be dangerous or detrimental to life or health due to lack of or defects in water, drainage, heat, electricity, plumbing, ventilation, or garbage and trash removal. 
(17)  The storage of any explosive, combustible, or other material which creates a safety or health hazard. 
(18)  Trees, shrubbery, weeds, snow, motor vehicles, or other matter obstructing public ways, or causing visual barriers which create vehicular traffic or pedestrian safety hazards. 
(19)  Trash, garbage or recycling containers left upon the sidewalk, the area between a street and sidewalk, or the front or side yard, except for 24 hours immediately before and after trash collection. 
(20)  Any furniture, not originally designed or manufactured solely for outdoor use; or any furniture which was originally designed or manufactured for outdoor use, which is now dilapidated or deteriorated. 
(21)  Any vehicle including, but not limited to, trailers, automobiles, recreational vehicles, large passenger vehicles, and motorcycles, that is parked in a yard abutting a public street and not on a designated parking area that is paved, surfaced, or clearly marked. Dirt areas shall not be considered as parking areas. 
(22)  Any vehicle including, but not limited to, trailers, automobiles, recreational vehicles, large passenger vehicles, and motorcycles that is driven or ridden across curb, sidewalk or right-of-way that is not designated and designed as a graded drive approach or driveway that is paved, surfaced, or clearly marked. 
(Code 1985, § 94.15; Ord. No. 4134, 12-16-1996; Ord. No. 4771, 7-9-2003) 
Sec. 30-48. - Nuisance violation citation. 
    When a public nuisance is found to exist and after all persons known to have substantial interest in the property have been given reasonable opportunity to bring the property into compliance and have not done so, the board of public works or its designee may request that a code enforcement officer issue a city ordinance violation citation to the record owner of the property or to the person shown to have right of exclusive possession of the property. Such citation shall impose a fine in conformance with section 1-7. In addition, the city will enforce the provisions provided for in the state unsafe building and property act. 
(Code 1985, § 94.16; Ord. No. 4134, 12-16-1996) 
Secs. 30-49-30-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 30-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Officer includes, in addition to the definitions set forth in IC 9-22-1-2, employees of the code enforcement department of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 90.02; Ord. No. 2537, 7-19-1982; Ord. No. 3941, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 30-71. - Adoption of state law by reference. 
(a)  The city adopts and incorporates by reference the applicable provisions concerning the removal and disposal of abandoned vehicles as set forth in IC 9-22-1-1 et seq. except that the provisions of IC 9-13-2-1 shall be modified to read as follows: 
    Abandoned vehicle means a vehicle that is mechanically inoperable or not currently licensed to operate on the public streets and highways of the state and which is left on private property continuously, not fully enclosed by a fully closed and weatherproof structure which is in compliance with all codes of the city, for the storage of vehicles, for more than three days, except that this provision shall not be applicable to motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts not fully enclosed by such a building upon real estate which is properly zoned under the Code of the city for motor vehicle manufacture, sales, service or salvage. 
(b)  Two copies of IC 9-22-1-1 et seq., are on file in the office of the city clerk as required by IC 36-1-5-4. 
(Code 1985, § 90.01; Ord. No. 2537, 7-19-1982; Ord. No. 3397, 7-16-1990) 
Sec. 30-72. - Towing, storage, and removal charges. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety is authorized to enter into towing agreements as may be necessary for the purpose of removal, storage and disposition of abandoned vehicles and vehicle parts. Such contracts shall set forth the charge payable by the owner or lienholder on said abandoned vehicle for the towing, storage, or removal of an abandoned vehicle and charges for clean-up of any parts or debris therefrom. 
(b)  Towing, storage and removal charges shall be reviewed and determined as deemed necessary by the board of public works and safety, and shall be based on current prevailing costs. 
(c)  An administrative fee of $5.00 shall be collected from the owner or lienholder of all impounded, abandoned, or inoperative vehicles and placed in the city's abandoned vehicle fund as set forth in IC 9-22-1-27. This fee shall be paid to the city controller by the towing company to help defer the expenses of enforcement of this section. 
(d)  Copies of all then-current towing contracts shall be on file for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  No towing service contract will be issued by the board of public works and safety unless there is on file in the office of the controller, and in full force and effect, a current insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property as a result of any one occurrence and a public liability policy covering accidental bodily injury, including death, to any member of the public in an amount of not less than the current state legal limits for all public liability from any one occurrence. The policy shall be updated annually and on file with the office of the controller before any issuance or reissuance of a towing contract. 
(Code 1985, § 90.03; Ord. No. 2537, 7-19-1982; Ord. No. 3397, 7-16-1990; Ord. No. 3941, 5-15-1995; Ord. No. 4577, 4-17-2001) 
Sec. 30-73. - Inspections. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this chapter or state law, a code enforcement officer is authorized at all reasonable times to enter upon the premises to inspect the same for compliance with the provisions of this article or of applicable state law. 
(b)  If requested by the owner or occupant of the property, proper credentials and a copy of this article shall be presented by the code enforcement officer to the owner or occupier of the subject real estate in connection with any such inspection. 
(Code 1985, § 90.04; Ord. No. 3947, 7-5-1995) 
Secs. 30-74-30-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of introduction of substance, order or sound in air, IC 36-8-2-8. 

Sec. 30-104. - Penalty. 
    Any person found in violation of any provisions of this article who does not choose the violations bureau option shall be fined not less than $50.00 for the first offense, and not less than $75.00 for the second offense, and not less than $150.00 for the third and subsequent offense. 
(Code 1985, § 97.99; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-105. - Loud noises prohibited. 
    No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, raucous or unusual noise which disturbs, injures or endangers the health, peace or safety of others within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 97.01; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-106. - Prohibited noises enumerated. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, raucous or unusual noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public place except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud and raucous sound; and any such signaling device sounded for an unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to violate the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall violate the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary engine noise, grating, grinding, rattling or other noise in excess of the noise limit measured in decibels as prescribed by state standards. The noise limit applies to total noise from a motor vehicle or motorcycle including that noise of other vehicles attached thereto. 
(9)  The operation of any motor vehicle or motorcycle in such a manner as to create excessive noise such as the squealing of tires or other noise unrelated to engine noise and noise caused by unnecessary grinding, rattling or other vehicle disrepair need not be measured in decibels to violate this section. 
(10)  The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building commissioner. The permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building commissioner shall determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(12)  The creation of any loud or raucous noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which unduly disturbs patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(13)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(14)  The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(15)  The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other materials over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner, loaded so as to cause loud and raucous noises so as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(16)  The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(17)  The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes loud and raucous noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1985, § 97.02; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-107. - Sound levels in industrial zones. 
    Sound levels within an industrial zone shall be measured by sound pressure level not to exceed the limits listed below at any point on the boundary of the property of the complainant. The sound pressure level (SPL) of a sound is measured through an A-weighting filter network. The level read is designated DB(A) or DBA. Sixty-four DBA at all times; or the octave-band breakdown of the DBA limits shall be: 
Octave-Band Center 
Frequency Maximum Boundary SPL 
(db) 31.5 79 63 78 125 73 250 67 500 61 1,000 55 2,000 50 4,000 46 8,000 43  
(Code 1985, § 97.03; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-108. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of work to prevent or alleviate physical or property damage threatened or caused by a public calamity or other emergency, or to outside school activities sponsored by a school located within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 97.04; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-109. - Permits for special exceptions. 
(a)  The office of the city controller shall have the authority to issue permits for: 
(1)  Holidays, celebrations, concerts, parades, or other special events, public or personal. 
(2)  Persons who demonstrate that bringing the source of sound or activity for which the permit is sought into compliance with the provisions of this article would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, the community, or other persons; and that the adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons affected by the permit has been outweighed by the hardship. Permits may contain any conditions, including a time limit, that are necessary to limit the adverse impact of the activity. 
(3)  Noncompliance with any condition of the permit shall terminate the permit and subject the person holding it to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The board of public works and safety shall issue guidelines defining the procedures to be followed in applying for a permit and the specific criteria to be considered in deciding whether to issue a permit. The board shall also determine fees for those permits to be issued. 
(Code 1985, § 97.05; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Sec. 30-110. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any person charged with a violation of this article, whether by ticket, citation, or affidavit, shall have the option of paying a fine imposed within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the ordinance violations bureau upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court. 
(b)  The payment of a fine to the bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense, and the bureau, upon accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging payment thereof. 
(c)  Each day that a violation is in effect shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In addition to any and all other remedies, the city may, at its discretion, file suit in civil action in any court having jurisdiction thereof for an injunction against any person to prohibit the violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 97.06; Ord. No. 3533, 10-21-1991) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire safety inspections, arson investigations, IC 36-8-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose and the intent of this chapter is to prescribe minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the use or occupancy of buildings, structures, sheds, tents, lots or premises. 
(Code 1985, § 93.02; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter and the building and fire safety rules and regulations of the state fire prevention and building safety commission shall apply equally to new and existing buildings and conditions existing within the city excepting: 
(1)  Conditions legally in existence at the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and not in strict compliance therewith shall be permitted to continue so long as they are maintained in a condition that is equivalent to the quality and fire-resistive characteristics that existed when the building was constructed, altered, added to or repaired. 
(2)  The transportation of any article or substance under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the military forces of the United States. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed, interpreted or applied to abrogate, nullify or abolish any law, ordinance or code adopted by the city governing the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings specifically provided herein. When any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any building, zoning, safety, health or other applicable law, ordinance or code of the city, existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or hereafter adopted, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the public shall prevail. 
(c)  The planning, design and construction of new buildings and structures to provide egress facilities, fire protection, and built-in fire protection equipment shall be controlled by the building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission; and any alterations, additions or changes in buildings required by the provisions of this chapter which are within the scope of the building rules shall be made in accordance therewith. 
(d)  Buildings built under and in full compliance with the building and fire safety laws and rules in force at the time of construction or alteration thereof, and that have been properly maintained and used for such use as originally permitted, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter pertaining to any of the following matters: 
(1)  Fire protection of structural elements. 
(2)  Exits required, except as provided for existing buildings under this chapter. 
(3)  Isolation of hazardous operations and mixed uses; provided, however, that the fire chief shall require the installation of safety devices or systems (fire extinguishers, fire alarms, fire detection devices or similar systems) where they are necessary to provide safety to life. In lieu of requiring the installation of safety devices or systems or when necessary to secure safety in addition thereto, the fire chief shall prescribe limitations on the handling and storage of materials or substances or upon operations that are liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, or endanger life or property. Any orders issued by the fire chief to obtain compliance with this subsection (3) shall be governed by the provisions of IC 36-8-17-9(d). 
(Code 1985, § 93.03; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-3. - Violations; orders. 
(a)  Whenever the fire chief observes an apparent or actual violation of a provision of this chapter or other ordinances under the fire chief's jurisdiction, the fire chief shall prepare a written notice of violation and order describing the condition deemed unsafe and specifying a reasonable time for the required repairs or improvements to be made to correct such violation. The written notice of violation of this chapter shall be served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or other person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice of violation shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such person by ordinary mail to the last known post office address delivered in person or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the premises or in case such person is not found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or avenue of access; and such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(b)  If the notice of violation and order is not complied with within the time specified by the fire chief, and no review of such order has been initiated under state law, the fire chief shall request the legal counsel of the city to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(c)  When, in the opinion of the fire chief, there is actual and potential danger to the occupants or those in the proximity of any building, structure or premises because of unsafe structural conditions, or inadequacy of any means of egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, the fire chief may issue an emergency order for the immediate evacuation of said building, structure or premises. All of the occupants so notified shall immediately leave the building, structure or premises and persons shall not enter or reenter until authorized to do so by the fire chief. Any person who shall refuse to leave, interfere with the evacuation of other occupants or continue any operation after having been given an evacuation order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 93.96; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Review of order, IC 36-8-17-10. 
Sec. 34-4. - Appeals. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any person aggrieved by a decision of the fire chief, or his designee, or seeking to deviate from the fire prevention code standards described in this chapter, shall have the right to appeal to the board of public works and safety. Any person appealing a decision of the fire chief must petition the board of public works and safety within ten days from the date of the decision. 
(b)  All appeals and requests for a deviation from this chapter must be in writing and either state the exceptions to the grounds on which the fire chief based his decision or state the reasons why their request for a deviation should be approved based upon the factors described in subsection (d) of this section. A petitioner may request a public hearing, which shall be held within 15 days after the request is filed. At the hearing, the petitioner may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions. Any interested person may be allowed to participate in the hearing to present evidence in opposition to the application and exceptions. The board shall render a written decision within 30 calendar days of the hearing or of the date on which the petition was filed. 
(c)  In reviewing a decision made by the fire chief, the board shall look to determine whether the decision was arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion; unsupported by substantial evidence; or contrary to the law. The burden shall be on the aggrieved party to demonstrate the invalidity of the fire chief's decision. 
(d)  In determining whether to grant a request for a deviation from the fire prevention code, the board of public works and safety shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether approval will not be injurious to the public, health, safety, and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Whether the need for the exception to the fire prevention code arises from some condition peculiar to the property involved; 
(3)  Whether the strict application of the terms of this chapter will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property in question; and 
(4)  Whether the approval will not substantially affect the fire protection services to the property. 
(Code 1985, § 93.97; Ord. No. 4218, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 34-5. - Remedies. 
    The attorney for the city upon receipt of a written notice from the fire chief, that after having issued a lawful notice and order to abate a violation of this code, and after a reasonable time for compliance has expired, shall bring action in the circuit or superior courts of the county, for mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order made by the fire chief, and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the civil forfeitures provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 93.98; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Secs. 34-6-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 34-31. - Adoption of fire prevention codes. 
(a)  The fire safety rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set out in the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this Code and shall include later amendments to that article as the same are published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code. 
(b)  When a particular subject matter is not treated within the context of the rules of the state fire prevention and building safety commission, the national fire codes, as promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), along with any and all references and amendments thereto, as periodically revised, is hereby adopted for use. 
(Code 1985, § 93.04; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-32. - On-site protection facilities, fire apparatus access roads, and key boxes. 
(a)  Fire chief to require installation as necessary; expense of installation. The fire chief may require that any real estate development include the installation of such on-site fire protection facilities, fire hydrants and access roads as in his judgment are necessary to provide a water supply capable of supplying required fire flows for fire protection and for providing access on land to be developed. The installations shall be at the expense of the owner or developer. 
(b)  Approval; specifications; construction. All fire protection facilities and fire hydrants required to be installed hereunder shall be approved by and meet the specifications of the fire department and city water utility as to location, size and type of materials and manner of installation. Construction shall be carried out under the inspection of the fire prevention bureau and the city water utility. All such systems shall be designed and constructed in strict compliance with the city water utilities terms and conditions for water service on file with the state utility regulatory commission or its successor, as may be amended from time to time by the board of public works and safety for the city. 
(c)  Fire hydrant location and distribution. Fire hydrants shall be located at least 50 feet from buildings but no further than 100 feet from fire department connections located on buildings equipped with standpipe or automatic fire sprinkler systems. When land is developed in such a manner that all or part of any building or structure thereon is or becomes in excess of 300 feet distance from a fire hydrant, the developer shall provide hydrants on the land as shall be determined necessary by the fire chief. The guidelines listed in Table No. 34-32-A based on fire-flow requirements listed in Table No. 34-32-B, both tables located in the appendices following this chapter, may be used. Distances shall be determined by measuring the footage from the building to the fire hydrant using approved fire apparatus accessways. Existing hydrants located across streets from a project may not be considered as available, unless after review of existing hydrants, surrounding properties and traffic patterns the fire chief determines, in writing, that the location of said hydrants is acceptable. Existing hydrants on adjacent properties shall not be considered available unless fire access roadways extend between properties and easements are established to prevent their obstruction. No fire hydrant shall be located further than eight feet from the edge of an approved fire department access road or the curbline of a public or private street. 
(d)  Fire-flow requirements for buildings. 
(1)  The fire-flow requirement is the quantity of water in gallons per minute needed to control an anticipated fire in a building or group of buildings. The city water utility shall establish the minimum residual pressure and the flow duration to be used when determining fire-flow. 
(2)  The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family dwellings shall be 1,000 gallons per minute. 
(3)  The fire-flow requirements for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be not less than that specified in Table No. 34-32-B. 
(4)  Exception: The required fire-flow may be reduced up to 50 percent when the building is provided with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system, but in no case less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
(5)  In Types I and II-F.R. construction, as defined in the state building code (675 IAC 13-2.4), only the three largest successive floor areas shall be used. Refer to Table No. 34-32-B. 
(e)  Maintenance. All on-site fire protection facilities and fire hydrants, whether installed before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall at all times be maintained in good working order by the owner thereof. To this end, the fire chief is empowered to mandate that the owner conduct periodic tests and inspections of the facilities by a contractor trained to conduct such tests and inspections. Results of such tests shall be forwarded to the fire chief, and if the fire chief determines that the facilities are not being reasonably maintained as required by this section, he shall order that the owner or lessee of the land make the necessary repairs or changes within ten days or such longer time as in his judgment is reasonable. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any such order. 
(f)  Alteration or repair. No on-site fire protection facilities and fire hydrants whether installed before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived may be altered or repaired without the written approval of the fire chief and the superintendent of the water utility, provided that such alterations or repairs shall be carried out in conformity with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(g)  Fire facilities and hydrant installation. Whenever any on-site fire protection facilities or fire hydrants have been installed as provided in this section either pursuant hereto or prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the following provisions shall be applicable: 
(1)  Hydrants; parking prohibited. With respect to hydrants located along private accessways where curbs exist, the curbs shall be painted yellow or otherwise appropriately marked by the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of the premises to prohibit parking for a distance of ten feet in either direction from any such hydrant. In such cases where curbs do not exist, there shall be appropriate markings painted on the pavement, or signs erected or both, giving notice that parking is prohibited for a distance of ten feet from any hydrant. When the areas are signed or marked as provided herein, no person shall park or leave standing a vehicle within ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(2)  Obstructions prohibited; minimum clear space to be maintained. No person shall place or keep any post, fence, wall, trees, plantings or any obstruction of any kind near any fire hydrant, fire department connection or fire protection control valve that would prevent such equipment from being immediately discernible or in any other manner deter or hinder the fire department from gaining immediate access to said equipment. A minimum of three feet of clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of the equipment except as otherwise required or approved by the fire chief. 
(h)  Fire apparatus access roads. All fire apparatus access roads as hereinafter defined shall be approved by and meet the following specifications of the fire department: 
(1)  Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be required for every building hereafter constructed when any portion of an exterior wall of the first story is located more than 150 feet from fire department vehicle access. 
(2)  Permissible modifications. Clearances or widths required by this section may be increased when in the opinion of the fire chief minimum clearances or widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access. 
(3)  Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided with a surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
(4)  Width. The minimum unobstructed width of a fire apparatus access road shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(5)  Vertical clearance. All fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet six inches. 
(6)  Turning radius. The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(7)  Dead-ends. All dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with provisions for the turning around of fire apparatus. These provisions shall be approved by the fire chief and must comply with the Engineering Standards of the City of Mishawaka regarding culs-de-sac and/or turnabouts. 
(8)  Bridges. When a bridge is required to be used as access under this section it shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes using designed live loading sufficient to carry the imposed loads of fire apparatus. 
(9)  Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed the maximum approved by the fire chief. 
(10)  Number of access roads. When a fire apparatus access road exceeds 150 feet in length and serves multiple building complexes, additional fire apparatus access roads may be required if in the opinion of the fire chief a single access road may become blocked, endangering lives and buildings beyond the blockage. 
(11)  Signs. Approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided and maintained for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads and prohibit the obstruction thereof or both. 
(12)  Obstruction of access prohibited. No owner or lessee of the land or proprietor, partner, officer, director, manager or agent of any business or other activity carried on upon the land, shall, after receiving notice thereof, permit or otherwise allow and no person shall cause any activity, practice or condition to occur or exist or continue to exist upon the land which shall lessen, obstruct or impair the access required under this section. 
(13)  Access; snow clearance. When excessive snowfall warrants the clearance of snow from the sidewalks and parking areas of any business the owner, lessee or other person in charge of the premises shall be required at the same time to remove snow from all access required under this section. Such snow clearance shall not cause any fire hydrant or fire department connection to become obstructed in accordance with subsection (g)(2)of this section. 
(14)  Access; parking prohibited. If, in the judgment of the fire chief it is necessary to prohibit vehicular parking along private access roads in order to keep them clear and unobstructed, he may require the owner, lessee or other person in charge of the premises to paint the curbs yellow or install signs or give other appropriate notice to the effect that parking is prohibited by the fire department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the owner, lessee or other person in charge to fail to install and maintain in good condition the form of notice prescribed. When such areas are marked or signed as provided herein no person shall park or leave standing a vehicle adjacent to any such curb marking or contrary to such sign. 
(i)  Fire protection facilities and fire apparatus access roads that are provided during initial stages of construction. When it is deemed that fire protection facilities and fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed as required by this section by the developer, the facilities and roads, as may be required, shall be installed and made serviceable prior to or at the time any combustible construction begins on the land, unless, in the opinion of the fire chief, the nature of circumstances of the facilities and roads make it impractical. 
(j)  Key box. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the chief may require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved by the chief and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the chief. 
_____ 
Table No. 34-32-A Number and Distribution of Fire Hydrants Fire Flow Requirement 
(GPM) Minimum No. 
of 
Hydrants Average Spacing 
Between Hydrants 
(Ft.) Maximum Distance 
From Hydrant to Any 
Point on Street or 
Roadway Frontage 
(Ft.) 750-1,750 1 500 250 2,000-2,250 2 450 225 2,500 3 450 225 3,000 3 400 225 3,500-4,000 4 350 210 4,500-5,000 5 300 180 5,500 6 300 180 6,000 6 250 150 6,500-7,000 7 250 150 7,500 or more 8 200 120  
(Code 1985, ch. 93, app. A) 
  
Table 34-32B. Minimum Required Fire Flow and Flow Duration for Buildings FIRE AREA 

(square feet) FIRE FLOW 

(gallons per minute);sup\sup; FLOW 

DURATION 

(hours) Type IA and IB a Type IIA and IIIA a Type IV and I-A a Type IIB and IIIB a Type V-B a 0-22,700 0-12,700 0-8,200 0-5,900 0-3,600 1,500 2 22,701--30,200 12,701-17,000 8,201-10,900 5,901-7,900 3,601-4,800 1,750 30,201--38,700 17,001-21,800 10,901-12,900 7,901-9,800 4,801-6,200 2,000 38,701--48,300 21,801-24,200 12,901-17,400 9,801-12,600 6,201-7,700 2,250 48,301--59,000 24,201-33,200 17,401-21,300 12,601-15,400 7,701-9,400 2,500 59,001-70,900 33,201-39,700 21,301-25,500 15,401-18,400 9,401-11,300 2,750 70,901-83,700 39,701-47,100 25,501-30,100 18,401-21,800 11,301-13,400 3,000 3 83,701-97,700 47,101-54,900 30,101-35,200 21,801-25,900 13,401-15,600 3,250 97,701-112,700 54,901-63,400 35,201-40,600 25,901-29,300 15,601-18,000 3,500 112,701-128,700 63,401-72,400 40,601-46,400 29,301-33,500 18,001-20,600 3,750 128,701-145,900 72,401-82,100 46,401-52,500 33,501-37,900 20,601-23,300 4,000 4 145,901-164,200 82,101-92,400 52,501-59,100 37,901-42,700 23,301-26,300 4,250 164,201-183,400 92,401-103,100 59,101-66,000 42,701-47,700 26,301-29,300 4,500 183,401-203,700 103,101-114,600 66,001-73,300 47,701-53,000 29,301-32,600 4,750 203,701-225,200 114,601-126,700 73,301-81,100 53,001-58,600 32,601-36,000 5,000 225,201-247,700 126,701-139,400 81,101-89,200 58,601-65,400 36,001-39,600 5,250 247,701-271,200 139,401-152,600 89,201-97,700 65,401-70,600 39,601-43,400 5,500 271,201-295,900 152,601-166,500 97,701-106,500 70,601-77,000 43,401-47,400 5,750 295,901-Greater 166,501-Greater 106,501-115,800 77,001-83,700 47,401-51,500 6,000 - - 115,801-125,500 83,701-90,600 51,501-55,700 6,250 - - 125,501-135,500 90,601-97,900 55,701-60,200 6,500 - - 135,501-145,800 97,901-106,800 60,201-64,800 6,750 - - 145,801-156,700 106,801-113,200 64,801-69,600 7,000 - - 156,701-167,900 113,201-121,300 69,601-74,600 7,250 - - 167,901-179,400 121,301-129,600 74,601-79,800 7,500 - - 179,401-191,400 129,601-138,300 79,801-85,100 7,750 - - 191,401-Greater 138,301-Greater 85,101-Greater 8,000  
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m 2 , 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound per square inch = 6.895 kPa. 
(a) Types of construction are based on the International Building Code. 
(b) Measured at 20 psi. 
(Code 1985, § 93.09, ch. 93 apps. A, B; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 4772, 7-21-2003) 
_____
Sec. 34-33. - Bulk storage of combustible or flammable liquids, solids, gasses and chemicals. 
    Regulations governing the location of property within the city for the bulk storage of combustible or flammable liquids, solids, gasses, and chemicals shall be in accordance with chapter 137, zoning. Storage, handling and use of combustible or flammable liquids, solids, gasses and chemicals shall be governed by regulations consistent with state fire safety laws. 
(Code 1985, § 93.10; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-34. - Smoke detectors. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Mobile home means any mobile home or trailer occupied by an individual as a residence. 
    Single- and multiple-family dwelling unit means any building that contains living quarters and shall include but not be limited to hotels, motels, boardinghouses, sleeping room houses, buildings of mixed occupancy, having any residential units, nursing homes, convalescent homes, licensed half-way houses, or lodginghouses. 
    Sleeping area means the area of a unit in which bedrooms or sleeping rooms are located. Bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by another use area such as a kitchen or living room are separate "sleeping areas," but bedrooms or sleeping rooms separated by a bathroom are not separate "sleeping areas." 
    Smoke detector means a device which detects particles or products of combustion other than heat, approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or Factory Mutual. The smoke detector device shall be equipped with a test button. The smoke detector device may be either battery powered with a minimum nine volt or it may be powered by a 110-volt alternating current. 
(b)  Required. All single- and multiple-family dwelling units and all mobile homes available for rent shall be equipped with smoke detectors. Every owner, manager or agent of any single- or multiple-family rental unit or mobile home rental shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of all smoke detectors. This requirement applies to smoke detectors required by any state or federal law, as well as this section. 
(c)  Location; installation. Smoke detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to the rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where a common hallway is used, smoke detectors shall be placed not more than 25 feet apart in the hallway. All smoke detectors shall be located either on the ceiling, not less than six inches from any wall, or on a wall, not less than six nor more than 12 inches from the ceiling, and within 15 feet of all rooms used for sleeping. No smoke detectors shall be recessed into the ceiling. If a smoke detector is AC powered, it must be directly attached to a junction box not controlled by any switch other than the main power supply. The installation of AC powered smoke detectors shall conform to all standards adopted by the city. A smoke detector required under this section shall be installed in accordance with the directions and specifications of the manufacturer, but if in conflict with any city electrical standard, the city electrical standard shall take precedence. 
(d)  Maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person in any rental unit to tamper with or remove any smoke detector except when it is necessary for maintenance or inspection purposes. Any smoke detector removed for repair or replacement shall be reinstalled or replaced so that it is in place during normal sleeping hours. At every change of tenant in every rental dwelling unit or mobile home rental smoke detectors shall be tested to see that they are in operable condition. 
(e)  Certificates of compliance . Between January 1 and January 31 of each year the owner of each rental dwelling unit and mobile home rental, in which smoke detectors are required in accordance with this section, shall certify in writing, on forms prescribed by the city, that the required maintenance has been performed on all smoke detectors in the owner's units and that the smoke detectors are in good working condition as of the date of certification. Each owner shall certify to each new occupant of any rental dwelling unit and mobile home rental covered by this section that all smoke detectors required have been installed and are in proper working condition. 
(Code 1985, § 93.11; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-35. - Leaf-burning and other burning prohibited. 
(a)  Permit. 
(1)  Required. No person shall initiate, cause, or allow any form of leaf-burning or other burning on public or private property, during any time within the city, unless a permit is issued to the person as hereinafter authorized. 
(2)  Conditions of issuance. The fire department will investigate and decide regarding issuance of a burning permit to a person who desires to initiate, cause, or allow leaf-burning on property owned by this person if the following conditions are met: 
a.  The concepts in the county air pollution control ordinance. 
b.  The granting of this permit will not cause a danger or threat to health, safety or well-being of adjoining property owners. 
(3)  Dates permit is valid. This permit, if issued, shall only be valid from April 15 through May 15 or October 15 through November 15. 
(4)  Revocation. This permit if issued may be revoked if in the opinion of the fire chief, conditions warrant a threat to the health, safety, or well-being of neighbors or adjoining property. 
(b)  Burning on public property prohibited. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to burn or cause to be burned any leaves, grass, rubbish, paper or other combustible matter on any street, alley or public right-of-way or public property within the city limits. 
(Code 1985, § 93.14; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Secs. 34-36-34-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 34-60. - Enforcement authority. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief of the fire department, chief of the fire prevention bureau, or such officer or designee who is an ex-officio assistant to the state fire marshal under IC 36-8-17-5(a) to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The designated enforcement officer of this chapter is herein referred to as the fire chief. 
(Code 1985, § 93.06; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Compliance with order from division required, IC 36-8-17-5(a). 
Sec. 34-61. - Inspections. 
(a)  The fire chief shall cause to be inspected all structures and premises except the interiors of private single-family dwellings and dwelling units in two-family and multifamily dwellings for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations, or endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter affecting fire safety. 
(b)  Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of any provision of any law, ordinance or code of the city not within the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings to the official having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1985, § 93.07; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-62. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or whenever the fire chief or authorized fire inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any condition which makes such structure or premises unsafe, the fire chief or fire inspector shall is permitted to enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the fire chief by this Code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied, the fire chief or fire inspector shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such entry is refused, the fire chief may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order compelling such inspection, which order such court shall have authority hereunder to grant. 
(Code 1985, § 93.08; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-63. - Review of building site plans-Final inspection. 
(a)  Except as otherwise determined by the chief of the fire department, the site plans submitted to the city planning department in support of an application for a building permit to construct any building shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval. When any plans are submitted, the fire chief shall cause a review of them and determine whether any building or structure on the land to be developed is or will by virtue of the development become in excess of the requirements of sections 34-32(c) and 34-32(g)(1) for fire hydrants and fire apparatus access roads. If, on review it is determined either that the fire protection facilities or access roads are not required or that they are adequately provided for in the plans, the fire chief or his designee shall endorse his approval thereon. If adequate provision for such facilities or roads is not made, the fire chief or his designee shall either disapprove the plans and indicate to the city planning department, in writing, wherein they are deficient (in which case any revised plans shall be resubmitted to the fire department) or approve the plans subject to conditions. 
(b)  No final inspection under this Code as to all or any portion of the development shall be deemed completed unless and until the installation of the prescribed facilities and accessways has been completed and the final approval thereof by the fire department is given as provided therein. The final inspection shall be conducted solely to implement the enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall in no manner be deemed an assurance on the part of the city that these facilities and accessways are or will continue to be in good working order. 
(Code 1985, § 93.12; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-64. - Same-Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Except as otherwise determined by the chief of the fire department the plans submitted to the building department in support of an application for a building permit to construct any building shall also be submitted to the fire department for approval. Plans submitted must contain the official design release stamp of the state building commissioner. 
(b)  When any plans are submitted under subsection (a) of this section, the fire chief shall cause a review of them and determine whether such plans conform to the rules and regulations of the state fire prevention and building safety commission and this chapter. 
(c)  A certificate of occupancy must be obtained from the city building department. This certificate must be signed by both the building department and the fire department after a final inspection of the building or structure is made. No building or structure shall be used or occupied until this certificate of occupancy has been issued. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other ordinances of the city or rules and regulations of the state fire prevention and building safety commission. 
(Code 1985, § 93.13; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-65. - Operations at fires or other emergencies. 
(a)  The fire chief and his authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property or any part thereof, shall have the power and authority to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of his duty. In the exercise of such power, the chief may prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel or thing from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed or kept away from the scene any vehicle, vessel or thing, which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department, and in the opinion of the chief, any person not actually and usefully employed in the extinguishing of such fire or in the preservation of property in the vicinity thereof. 
(b)  Any person who obstructs the fire department in connection with extinguishing any fire or other emergency or disobeys any lawful command of the chief or officer of the fire department who may be in charge at such a scene or any part thereof, or any police officer assisting the fire department, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The chief or other officer of the fire department in charge at the scene of an emergency shall have the authority to place ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across any street, alley, place or private property in the vicinity of such operation, so as to prevent accidents or interference with the lawful efforts of the fire department to manage and control the situation and to handle fire apparatus. 
(Code 1985, § 93.15; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-66. - Investigation of fires. 
    The fire chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated every fire or explosion occurring within the city that is of a suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or causes destruction or damage to property. Such investigation shall be initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the fire chief shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, and in order to preserve any physical evidence relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, take means to prevent access by any person to such buildings, structure or premises until such evidence has been properly processed. 
(Code 1985, § 93.16; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 34-67. - Fire records; reports. 
    The fire chief shall keep a record of all fires and all facts concerning the same including investigation findings and statistics and information as to the cause, origin and the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby. 
(Code 1985, § 93.17; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
State Law reference- Fire investigations, IC 36-8-17-7. 
Secs. 34-68-34-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT HOME CARE FIRE SAFETY PROVISIONS 

Sec. 34-93. - Interior wall and ceiling finish. 
(a)  Interior finish materials shall be of a minimum class III flame-spread throughout the home. 
(b)  Class III flame-spread has a flame-spread index of 76-200 in accordance with the state building code, chapter 42 (675 IAC 13-2.2). 
(c)  Asphalt paper, cork, cardboard, carpeting, foam plastics, plastic materials, or other finish materials that will contribute to the rapid spread of fire or give off dense smoke or toxic gases shall not be permitted as interior finishes. 
(d)  The attaching of interior finish materials, other than dry wall, plaster or natural solid wood of three-fourths-inch minimum thickness, directly to wall studs or to floor or ceiling joists, is prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 93.41; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994) 
Sec. 34-94. - Smoke detection equipment. 
(a)  At least one single-station smoke detector shall be installed at the following locations: 
(1)  In each bedroom. 
(2)  Outside of but adjacent to bedroom areas. 
(3)  On each occupied floor, in the basement, and in areas of the home which contain flame- or heat-producing equipment. 
(b)  If batteries are used as a source of energy, they shall be replaced in accordance with the recommendations of the detector equipment manufacturer. 
(c)  Detectors shall be tested and examined as recommended by the equipment manufacturer. 
(d)  Heat detectors may be installed in the kitchen and in other areas of the home containing flame- or heat-producing equipment instead of smoke detectors. 
(e)  Detectors mounted on ceilings shall be spaced not less than six inches away from any walls. Detectors mounted on walls shall be spaced between six and 12 inches away from the ceiling. A smoke detector shall not be mounted where ventilation systems or other obstructions keep smoke away. 
(Code 1985, § 93.42; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994) 
Sec. 34-95. - Exits. 
(a)  An exit is a continuous and unobstructed means of egress to safe ground outside of a building. Doors which form a part of a required means of egress shall be equipped with positive-latching, nonlocking-against-egress hardware and shall be not less than 36 inches in width in new construction, and not less than 30 inches in width in existing facilities. 
(b)  The first floor of the home shall have at least two separate and independent means of egress leading to the outside. 
(c)  Occupied room and exterior door hardware shall be positive latching, and nonlocking-against-egress. 
(d)  Means of egress shall not pass through rooms containing furnaces or water heaters that produce an open flame. 
(Code 1985, § 93.43; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994) 
Sec. 34-96. - Emergency preparedness. 
(a)  Annual report. A licensee shall notify the fire prevention bureau annually, in writing, of the following: 
(1)  Address of the adult care home. 
(2)  Number of residents requiring special assistance. 
(3)  Total number of occupants in home. 
(b)  Evacuation plan. A licensee shall have an evacuation plan drawn showing the following: 
(1)  Exit doors. 
(2)  Evacuation routes to exits. 
(3)  Refuge areas in the home in case of severe weather. 
(4)  Location of fire extinguishers. 
(5)  Location of smoke or heat detectors. 
(c)  Written emergency plan. A licensee shall have a written emergency plan specifying the following: 
(1)  Emergency telephone numbers including 9-1-1 for fire, police, ambulance, physicians, hospitals and the like. These numbers shall also be conspicuously posted immediately adjacent to each telephone in the home. 
(2)  Procedures to be followed in case of fire, medical emergency, or severe weather emergency. 
(3)  Procedures for evacuating residents of limited mobility and visitors. 
(d)  Drills. Fire and severe weather drills shall be conducted four times a year. Two of the four required fire drills shall be conducted during sleeping hours. Different escape routes shall be used whenever possible. A record of the fire and severe weather drills shall be kept on file and available for review by the fire inspector. 
(e)  Familiarization with plan and procedures. A licensee shall ensure that residents and all occupants of the home are familiar, to the best of their ability, with the evacuation plan and emergency procedures. 
(f)  Levels of evacuation capability. Evacuation capability in the event of fire or severe weather is determined by the ability of the occupants, residents and staff as a group either to evacuate a building or to relocate from the point of occupancy to a point of safety within the building. The levels of evacuation capability covered by this rule for fire and severe weather drills are as follows: 
(1)  Prompt. Evacuation time of three minutes or less which is considered the equivalent to the evacuation capability of the general public. 
(2)  Slow. The capability of a group to move to a point of safety in a timely manner, with some of the residents requiring assistance from the staff. Evacuation time of more than three minutes but not over five minutes is acceptable. 
(3)  Impractical. The inability of a group that, even with staff assistance cannot reliably move to a point of safety within five minutes is not acceptable. 
If for any reason the facility falls under the impractical evacuation level (subsection (f)(3) of this section) the facility's license is no longer valid until such time as the facility is equipped with an automatic fire suppression system. 
(Code 1985, § 93.44; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994) 
Sec. 34-97. - Bedrooms. 
(a)  A living room, dining room, hallway, basement, or other room not ordinarily used for sleeping shall not be used for sleeping purposes by residents of the home. 
(b)  Bedrooms for residents shall be separated from halls, corridors, and other rooms by floor-to-ceiling walls. 
(c)  Interior doorways of bedrooms occupied by residents shall be equipped with a side-hinged, permanently mounted door equipped with positive-latching, nonlocking-against-egress hardware. 
(d)  Traffic to and from any room shall not be through a resident bedroom. 
(e)  Bedrooms shall have at least one window. 
(f)  A resident having impaired mobility, as determined by a licensed physician, shall not sleep in or be assigned a bedroom located above or below grade. 
(Code 1985, § 93.45; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 3917, 2-6-1995) 
Sec. 34-98. - Heat-producing equipment. 
(a)  Heating shall be from an approved central heating plant or Factory Mutual and Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., labeled or listed, permanently installed, fixed-type electrical heating, such as a recognized panel or baseboard electrical heating system. 
(b)  A furnace, water heater, heating appliances, pipes, wood stoves and furnaces, and other flame- or heat-producing equipment shall be installed in a fixed and permanent manner and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall be maintained in a safe condition. 
(c)  Wood burning fireplaces, stoves or furnaces shall have their chimneys inspected yearly and cleaned when needed by a chimney cleaning service. Inspection and cleaning records shall be kept on file for review by the fire inspector. 
(d)  Where conditions indicate a need for inspection, heat-producing equipment shall be inspected by a person familiar with installation and operations of the type of equipment in question. If there are violations, a copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the fire prevention bureau, together with a written plan of corrective action. 
(e)  Portable heating devices shall not be used. 
(f)  Heat-producing equipment located in a basement shall be separated from the remainder of the home by means of a floor separation. Standard building material shall be sufficient for the floor separation. Stairways leading to the first floor shall be protected either at the top or at the bottom with at least a 13/4-inch solid core door or equivalent which is installed in a tightfitting, fully stopped wood or steel frame, so constructed to effectively stop the spread of smoke and fire. The door shall be equipped with an automatic self-closing device and positive latching hardware. 
(g)  If the heating plant or gas-fired water heater is on the same level with the residents, the appliance room shall be separated from the remainder of the building with materials that will afford a minimum one-hour protected enclosure. A permanent outside vent which cannot be closed shall be incorporated in the design of heating plant rooms so that adequate air for proper combustion is assured. Flame-producing water heaters or incinerators shall be installed with the same protection as a heating plant. This room shall not be used for storage of any kind. 
(h)  Storage of combustible materials within 24 inches of the ceiling or 36 inches of the heating plant, water heaters or incinerators located in the basement is prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 93.46; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 3917, 2-6-1995) 
Sec. 34-99. - Electrical wiring and equipment. 
    Electrical wiring and equipment in the home shall be installed in accordance with the state electrical code (675 IAC 17). 
(Code 1985, § 93.47; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 3917, 2-6-1995) 
Sec. 34-100. - Fire extinguishers. 
    A minimum of one five-pound multipurpose fire extinguisher shall be provided for use on each occupied floor and basement and be located near, or in the path of travel to an exit stair or door. 
(Code 1985, § 93.48; Ord. No. 3845, 7-5-1994) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESTAURANTS; FOOD 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Definitions in this article are intended to be consistent with the county food ordinance and the state code. 
    Employee means any person who handles food during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room or other place in which food is stored, prepared, processed, displayed, or served; the term "employee" shall not include volunteer member personnel of charitable, religious, fraternal, or educational organizations or service clubs but shall include supervisors, managers, paid employees, family members, and contract employees. 
    Food means all articles used for food, drink, confectionery, or condiment, whether simple, mixed, or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the preparation of the above items (IC 16-18-2-135). 
    Health officer means the St. Joseph County Board of Health. 
    Itinerant restaurant (also temporary food establishment ) means a food market or food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time not more than seven consecutive days in conjunction with a single event including, but not limited to, a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other similar gathering. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, or municipality, or legal representative or agent. 
    Restaurant means a retail food service establishment, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, drive-in restaurant, drive-in theater restaurant, in-plant food service, commissary, snack bar, food catering, or food establishment, whether fixed or movable, where food for human consumption is prepared or served in such manner that it is ready for consumption on the premises, with or without charge. The term "restaurant" shall not include a food establishment that is known as a retail food market where food is not prepared and served for consumption on the premises or private homes where food is prepared or served for individual family, friends, or acquaintance consumption. The term "restaurant" shall include seasonal establishments. 
    Retail food market establishment means any market establishment including, but not limited to, a grocery, meat market, poultry market, fish market, fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionery, candy kitchen, nut store, retail bakery store, or any establishment, whether fixed or movable, where food intended for human consumption off the premises is manufactured, produced, stored, prepared, handled, sold or offered with or without charge. The term "retail food market establishment" does not include establishments that handle only prepackaged, nonpotentially hazardous foods, roadside markets that offer only fresh, whole fruits and vegetables for sale (farm-to-table), slaughterhouses, restaurants, or food and beverage vending machines. 
    Seasonal establishment means any fixed location that is open no more than eight consecutive months per year due to location, menu items, or weather. 
(Code 1968, tit. 440, § 1; Code 1985, § 100.01; Ord. No. 1264, 10-15-1962; Ord. No. 4566, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 38-20. - License required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant or itinerant restaurant in the city without possessing a valid license for the operation of such establishment. The license shall be for a term of one year beginning February 1 and expiring January 31 of the following year and shall be renewed annually. 
(b)  Such license shall be provided by the city controller, upon presentment of a valid permit issued by the health officer together with $20.00 if application for the license is made before expiration of the previous year's license. The late fee for an application made more than 30 days following expiration shall be $20.00, bringing the total fee to $40.00. 
(c)  If application is made for a new restaurant after July 1 but before the restaurant opens for business, the fee for the license will be $10.00. Applications made after a restaurant opens for business are subject to the late fee. 
(d)  Any person who desires to operate an itinerant restaurant in the city shall, after securing a permit from the health officer, obtain from the city controller, a license for an itinerant restaurant. Such license shall be provided by the city controller upon presentment of a valid permit from the health officer, together with $5.00 for each day of operation, not to exceed $20.00 (plus late fee if applicable) for any one continuous operation. 
(e)  A separate license shall be required for each restaurant or itinerant restaurant operated or to be operated by any person. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall apply to restaurants and itinerant restaurants operated by fraternal organizations, service clubs, and religious, educational, and charitable institutions; however, no license fee shall be required. 
(Code 1968, tit. 440, § 2; Code 1985, § 100.02; Ord. No. 1264, 10-15-1962; Ord. No. 4566, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 38-21. - Adoption of rules by reference; restaurant inspections; revocation, suspension, and reinstatement of permit. 
(a)  Rules of the state and county governing food preparation and service, as set forth in the Indiana Administrative Code, 410 IAC 7-24 et seq., and the county code, article 8.36, are hereby incorporated by reference in this article, and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same are published. Two copies of this material are on file in the office of the clerk of the city and are available there for public inspection. 
(b)  Any and all inspections by the health officer which result in action being taken on behalf of the state or the county shall be binding upon the validity of the city license issued in section 38-20. This shall include revocation or suspension as well as reinstatement. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the person operating a restaurant seeking reinstatement of a suspended or revoked license to present a reinstated permit and apply for reinstatement of a license in the city controller's office. There will be no application fee if the original license has not expired; however, the license must be reinstated to be valid. 
(Code 1968, tit. 440, § 6; Code 1985, § 100.03; Ord. No. 1264, 10-15-1962; Ord. No. 4566, 2-20-2001) 
State Law reference- Incorporation by reference, IC 36-1-5-4. 
Sec. 38-22. - Compliance with applicable codes. 
    All restaurants and itinerant restaurants must fully comply at all times with all local and state building, zoning, and fire codes. Compliance with building, zoning, and fire codes is a pre-condition to the issuance, reinstatement, or renewal of any license issued under this article and failure to comply will result in immediate suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Code 1985, § 100.04; Ord. No. 4566, 2-20-2001) 
Secs. 38-23-38-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 38-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, facility or enclosed area or for alerting others to the commission of an unlawful act or a fire within a building, structure, facility or enclosed area or both and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated; this definition shall include local alarm systems. 
    Alarm user means any natural person who is in control of any building structure or facility wherein an alarm system is installed operated or maintained. 
    Board means the board of public works and safety of the city. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by the police or fire department of the city, which is not in response to actual or threatened danger to persons or damage to property. The term "false alarm" also means the activation of any such alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or negligence of the alarm user or his employees or agents; but it does not include alarm activation caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by an alarm user or alarm system installer or service. 
    Local alarm system means a signaling system which when activated causes an audible and/or visible signaling device to be activated only in or on the premises in which the system is installed, operated or maintained. 
    Notice means written notice either by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service upon the addressee at his last known address. 
(Code 1985, § 93.51; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 38-49. - Response to alarm; determination of validity. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm system is activated in the city which results in an emergency response to the premises by its police or fire department, the officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area protected by the system and shall determine whether the emergency response was required or was a false alarm. 
(b)  If the officer at the scene of the activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, the officer shall make a report of the false alarm, notice of which shall be sent to the alarm user at the address of the premises or at the last known address of the alarm user, if different from the premises address. 
(c)  The police chief or fire chief or his designee shall have the right to inspect the premises to which a response has been made and may cause such inspection to be made at any reasonable time after the occurrence of a false alarm. 
(Code 1985, § 93.52; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 38-50. - False alarm. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm user issues, causes to be issued, or permits the issuance of a false alarm, this section shall apply; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to a residential alarm user who is a natural person aged 65 or older. 
(b)  The police and fire departments of the city shall maintain appropriate records of all false alarms to which each department responds. After a department responds to three false alarms at a location on or after January 1 and before December 31 of any calendar year, the department which responded to the scene of a false alarm shall issue fines in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Code 1985, § 93.53; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 38-51. - Automatic telephone dialing systems prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, install, maintain, lease, operate, or assist in the operation of an automatic telephone dialing alarm system over any telephone lines, exclusively used by the public, to directly request emergency service from the police department or the fire department of the city. 
(b)  The police chief or the fire chief or his designee upon receiving knowledge of an automatic telephone dialing system installed or operated in violation of this section shall order, in writing, the owner operator, or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of receipt of the order. 
(c)  Facilities which are owned or operated by the city or the city utilities are excluded from any prohibition contained in this section. 
(Code 1985, § 93.54; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990; Ord. No. 4115, 11-18-1997) 
Sec. 38-52. - Alarm silencer required. 
    No local alarm system and no alarm system shall be installed on any premises in the city which does not have an operable automatic resetting device to silence the alarm audible sounder within 30 minutes after activation and to prevent the alarm sounding again as a result of the same event that caused the original activator. 
(Code 1985, § 93.55; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 38-53. - Manual fire alarm signaling devices. 
    When manual fire alarm signaling devices are installed and are not directly connected to the fire department or monitored by a 24-hour security service, a permanent sign shall be installed at each actuating device. These signs shall read as follows: 
IN CASE OF FIRE 
Pull this alarm 
Telephone the fire department 9-1-1 
(Code 1985, § 93.56; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Sec. 38-54. - Abatement. 
    Any alarm system installed, operated or maintained in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated in the manner as nuisances are now or may hereafter be abated under existing law. 
(Code 1985, § 93.59; Ord. No. 3372, 5-7-1990) 
Chapter 42 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Indiana Fair Housing, IC 22-9.5-1-1 et seq.; Indiana civil rights enforcement, IC 22-9-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means any natural person or agent thereof, who, with or without a fee or other valuable consideration, offers, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or negotiates, for the sale, purchase, exchange, or rental of the real property of another, or holds himself or herself out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging, or renting the real property of another, or collects rental for the use of the real property of another. 
    Aggrieved person means any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or believes that he will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
    Board means the board of public works and safety of the city, or its designee. The use of the term "board of public works and safety" is also meant to include the designee of the board of public works and safety. 
    Complainant means any individual charging on his own behalf to have been personally aggrieved by a discriminatory practice in connection with a housing accommodation. 
    Discriminate or discrimination means the exclusion from, or failure or refusal to extend to a person, equal opportunities because of sex, race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or familial status, of the buyer, renter, or applicant, or to increase the selling price or rent of any housing accommodation because of the sex, race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry, handicap, or familial status, of the buyer, renter, or applicant. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residency by one or more families; or any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or part of a building or structure described by subdivision. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Financial institution means any bank, credit union, insurance company, or savings and loan association or other entity or organization that makes or purchases loans or provides other financial assistance that operates or has a place of business in the city. 
    Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the person's major life activities; a record of having an impairment as described above; or being regarded as having an impairment as described above. The term does not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 USC 802). The term does not include an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
(2)  In reference to housing under this chapter, the term "handicap" or "handicapped" also means the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial disability unrelated to the person's ability to acquire, rent, or maintain a housing accommodation. 
    Housing accommodation includes any building, structure, or portion thereof located within the territorial limits of the city, which is used or occupied, or is maintained, arranged or designed to be used or occupied as a home, residence, or sleeping place of one or more human beings; and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Loan includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds for consideration, which are sought for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a housing accommodation as that term is defined herein; or secured by residential real estate. 
    Owner means the person holding legal or equitable title to property, or his legal representative. 
    Owner/occupant means any individual who is a titleholder of record or contract purchaser of the real property in question and who, in addition, continues to occupy and reside in the property as his principal dwelling place at the time the alleged discriminatory act occurs. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, cooperatives, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, lending institutions, and other organized groups or persons. 
    Restrictive covenants includes every condition, restriction, or prohibition, including right of re-entry or possibility of reverter which, directly or indirectly, limits the use or occupancy of real property on the basis of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. A restrictive covenant shall not apply to the limitation of use on the basis of religion of real property held by a religious institution or organization or by a religious or charitable organization operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious institution or organization, and used for religious or charitable purposes. 
    Steering means the influencing or attempting to influence by words or acts the choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant, or tenant, in connection with viewing, buying, leasing, or occupying real estate based on sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status, so as to promote or maintain segregation. 
    Unlawful housing practice means the commission of any act prohibited by section 42-21. 
    Varying term includes, but is not limited to, the following practices: requiring a greater down payment than is usual for the particular type of loan involved; requiring a shorter period of amortization than is usual for the particular type of loan involved; charging a higher interest rate than is usual for the particular type of loan involved; and under-appraisal of real estate or other item of property offered as security. 
(Code 1985, § 103.02; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-20. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  In furthering the policy of the state as expressed in its constitution and other laws; to further the declared policy of the city to assure full and equal opportunity to all residents, regardless of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, handicap, age or familial status, to live in decent, sanitary, and healthful living quarters, in order that the peace, health, safety, and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city may be protected and ensured; it is declared that owners, or agents for owners, be regulated to the end to prohibit discrimination in housing by any owners or agents of owners. 
(b)  It is further declared to be the policy of the city that in the spirit of pursuing a common purpose, the common council and the board of public works and safety shall endeavor to work and cooperate with all owners or agents for owners who are, or may be, doing business in the city to implement the declared purpose of this article, to ensure the opportunity for all persons to live in decent housing facilities without discrimination because of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, age or familial status of such persons, and to accomplish the same in an orderly, lawful, proper, and responsible fashion. 
(Code 1985, § 103.01; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-21. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent for owner, or any other person to: 
(1)  Publish or circulate, or cause to be published or circulated, any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to adopt a policy or to use any form of application for the purchase, lease, rental or financing of a housing accommodation which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation or discrimination as to sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(2)  Discriminate in the sales price or rent of any housing accommodation, or to discriminate in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental in the provision of services or facilities for any housing accommodation. 
(3)  Discriminate or participate in discrimination in connection with lending, guaranteeing of loans, or the making available of funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, or improvement of any housing facility. 
(4)  Solicit for sale or lease any housing accommodation, or distribute, or cause to be distributed, written representation with the specific intent of inducing any owner of any housing accommodation to sell or lease his property because of the alleged loss of value of property because of the anticipated presence of persons of any particular sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status in any neighborhood. 
(5)  Refuse to sell or rent, to refuse in the showing or making available for inspection, sale or rent, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of any housing accommodation; or to falsely represent that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the housing accommodation is in fact available, to any prospective buyer or renter, because of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(6)  Deny a person access to or membership or participation in multiple-listing services, real estate brokers' organizations, or other similar services because of sex, race, color, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(7)  Delay the processing or denying of a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate in the fixing of that amount, interest rate, duration, or other financial assistance because of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(8)  Discriminate in appraising the value of real estate or in the sale of insurance in connection with a real estate transaction because of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(9)  Enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any person because of sex, race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(10)  Solicit with the intention of creating or maintaining a segregated environment by including or excluding a person because of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status, any owner to sell or rent or list residential property at any time after the person has notice that the owner does not desire to sell, rent, or list the residential property. For the purpose of this division, notice must be provided as follows: 
a.  The notice may be given by the owner personally or by a third party in the owner's name, either in the form of an individual notice or a list, provided it complies with the provisions subsection (a)(10)b of this section. 
b.  The notice shall be explicit as to whether each owner on the notice seeks to avoid both solicitation for listing and sale, or only for listing, or only for sale, as well as the period of time which any avoidance is desired. The notice shall be dated and either of the following shall apply: 
1.  Each owner shall have signed the notice; 
2.  The person or entity preparing the notice shall provide an accompanying affidavit to the effect that all the names on the notice are, in fact, genuine as to the identity of the person listed and that the persons have requested not to be solicited as indicated. 
c.  The individual notice in the form of a list with the accompanying affidavit shall be served personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(11)  Intentionally create alarm among residents of any community by transmitting communication in any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in this city to sell or lease his property because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any person of any particular sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(12)  Insert or include in a written instrument relating to housing accommodations any condition, restriction, or prohibition which would constitute a restrictive covenant within the meaning of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a bona fide prospective buyer or renter or his agent to offer purchase or lease, or to participate in the purchase or leasing of any housing accommodation because of sex, race, color, religion, handicap, familial status, national origin or ancestry for the purpose of including or provoking an owner or his agent to commit any of the other unlawful acts contained in this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any financial institution, on the grounds of unlawful discrimination, to: 
(1)  Deny any person any of the services normally offered by the institution; 
(2)  Provide any person with any service which is different from, or provided in a different manner than, that which is provided to other persons similarly situated; 
(3)  Deny or vary the terms of the loan; 
(4)  Deny or vary the terms of loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is located in a specific geographical area; 
(5)  Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all of the regular and dependable income of each person who would be liable for repayment of the loan; or 
(6)  Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis and which constitute unlawful discrimination. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, or for two or more persons, to conspire to: 
(1)  Retaliate against a person because he has opposed that which he reasonably and in good faith has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. 
(2)  Aid, abet, compel, or coerce a person to commit any violation of this chapter; 
(3)  Willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the board or its designee, or one of its members or representatives or the investigator, director, or one of its officers or employees; or 
(4)  Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter. 
(e)  As applied to any handicapped person, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the person if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when the accommodations may be necessary to afford the person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after the enactment of this chapter, to fail to design and construct those things in a manner that: 
a.  The public-use and common-use portions of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within the dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; 
c.  All premises within the dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical switches, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow the later installation of grab bars; 
4.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms in which an individual in a wheel chair can maneuver about the space. 
Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people satisfies the requirements of subsection (e)(3)c.3 of this section. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the commission of a discriminatory act because of familial status. Under this chapter, a discriminatory act is committed because of familial status if the act is committed because the person who is subject to discrimination is: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian; 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
(3)  In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger than 18 years of age. 
(Code 1985, § 103.03; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-22. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the following practices and transactions: 
(1)  Any real estate broker, real estate salesman, or owner from imposing any and all conditions and requirements relative to any of the transactions described in this chapter, provided the conditions do not concern sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status and provided the conditions are imposed uniformly, regardless of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap or familial status. 
(2)  The owner, lessor, or sublessor of real property of any real estate broker or real estate salesman or agent or corporation engaged in real estate transactions from exercising absolute discretion in establishing the terms and conditions of sale, exchange, lease, or rental of real property or in any transactions involving real property, providing the terms do not concern sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(3)  An owner, lessor, or sublessor of real property from selling or renting the same without first offering the property to the public at large. 
(4)  Any sale or rental of a single-family home by its owner so long as the following criteria are met: 
a.  The owner does not own or have beneficial interest in more than three single-family homes at the time of the sale or rental; 
b.  The owner or a member of his family was the last current resident of the home; 
c.  The home is sold or rented without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker or salesman, or of any employee or agent of any real estate broker or salesman; 
d.  The home is sold or rented without publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter; 
e.  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(5)  A religious organization, association, or society or a nonprofit institution or organization, operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to the persons, unless membership in the religion is restricted on account of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(6)  This article does not prohibit a private club not open to the public that, as an incident to the club's primary purpose, provides lodging that the club owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of that lodging to the members or from giving preference to the members, unless membership in the club is restricted because of race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(7)  A financial institution from considering sound underwriting practices and contemplation of any loan to any person. Such practices shall include: the willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan; the market value of any real estate or other property proposed as security for a loan; or diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio. 
(8)  This article shall not prohibit certain considerations for housing for older persons: 
a.  Pertaining to housing for older persons, the board shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of the older persons; 
2.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; 
3.  The publication of, or an adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
b.  As used in this section, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
1.  That the board determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons under a federal or state program; 
2.  That is intended for and solely occupied by persons at least 62 years of age; or 
3.  That is intended and operated for occupancy by persons at least 55 years of age in each unit as determined by board rules. 
c.  The provisions of this article relating to familial status do not apply to housing for older persons. 
d.  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
1.  Persons residing in the housing as of the date of enactment of this article who do not meet the age requirements described in subsection (8) of this section, provided that new occupants of the housing meet the age requirements of this division; 
2.  Unoccupied units, provided that the units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of this division. 
(9)  Appraisals of property do not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisal of real property from taking into consideration factors other than sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. 
(10)  Health and safety restrictions do not affect reasonable local or state restriction on the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or restriction relating to health or safety standards, nor affect a requirement of nondiscrimination in any other state or federal law. 
(Code 1985, § 103.04; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-23. - Limitations and permissible acts. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any real estate broker, real estate salesman, owner or agent for an owner, or any other person from imposing any and all conditions and requirements relative to any of the transactions described in this article provided the conditions do not concern sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status, and provided the conditions are imposed uniformly, regardless of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the owner, lessor, or sublessor of real property, or any real estate broker or real estate salesman or agent or corporation engaged in real estate transactions, from exercising absolute discretion in establishing the terms, and conditions of the sale, exchange, lease, or rental of real property or in any transactions involving real property, provided the terms and conditions do not concern sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, handicap, or familial status. Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring an owner, lessor, or sublessor of real property to offer the property to the public at large before selling or renting the same. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit conduct against a person because the person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the United States Controlled Substance Acts, 21 USC 802. 
(Code 1985, § 103.05; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-24. - Board of public works and safety to enforce. 
    The board of public works and safety or its designee is given the powers and duties to enforce this chapter. The board is empowered to carry out the functions and duties so designated under the provisions of this article and it shall be the duty of the board to: 
(1)  Receive, record and investigate complaints charging any unlawful housing practice. 
(2)  Seek conciliation of parties involved in the complaints by conciliation, conferences, hold hearings where necessary, make findings of fact, issue recommendations and orders, including orders rejecting any claims that may be, in the opinion of the board, without merit, and publish its findings in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Hold hearings, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take testimony of any person under oath and require the production for examination of all books and papers relating to any matter under investigation or in question before the board. 
(Code 1985, § 103.06; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Sec. 42-25. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety shall adopt the rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by any violation of any provision of this article may file with the board a written complaint under oath setting forth his grievance. The complaint shall state the name and address of the complainant and of the person against whom the complaint is brought and shall also state the alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter. Complaints must be filed alleging violations of this article to the board within 30 days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(c)  On receipt of any complaint involving a discriminatory practice, the board shall determine the facts, and if there appears to be probable cause for complaint the board shall use its office to attempt an adjustment by education, conciliation and conference. No more than 90 days shall be allowed for this purpose. 
(d)  If in the opinion of a majority of the board the efforts to settle any complaint by the means enumerated in subsection (c) of this section have not adjusted the specific complaint, the board shall cause a public hearing to be held. A notice of the hearing, including the particulars of the complaint, shall be sent to the respondent by registered mail not less than ten days prior to the day set for hearing. The hearing may be conducted before the board at a duly convened meeting, or the hearing may be conducted before a hearing officer appointed by the board, which hearing officer shall be a member of the county bar association. Hearings conducted before the board, or a hearing officer, shall be conducted in an informal manner and without recourse to the technical common-law rules of evidence required in proceedings in judicial courts, and such manner of proof and introduction of evidence shall be deemed sufficient and shall govern the proof and decision of all questions of fact, if substantial, reliable and probative evidence supports the board's determination. The board shall, as a matter of policy, provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. Every person who is a party to the proceedings shall have the right to appear in person or by counsel, to submit evidence in open hearing and shall have the right of cross-examination. The hearings shall be held in the city hall. 
(e)  In the event of such hearing before a hearing officer, as herein set forth, the recommendation of the hearing officer, together with the complete file, shall be submitted to and filed with the board. The board may hear additional evidence or refer it back to the hearing officer to hear additional evidence. The board may adopt the recommendation of the hearing officer, amend or modify the same, or may make the order or determination as is proper on the record. 
(f)  The respondent shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and appear at the hearing to testify in his own behalf, or to be represented by counsel or otherwise, and to examine and cross examine witnesses. 
(g)  If upon all the evidence taken, no unlawful practice is found to have been committed, the case shall be dismissed and the parties involved so notified. 
(h)  If upon all the evidence taken, the board by a majority vote shall determine that the respondent committed the discriminatory practice set forth in the complaint, the board may issue an order directing the respondent to cease and desist the discriminatory practice so found to be engaged in. 
(i)  The board is empowered to prevent any person from discharging, expelling, or otherwise discriminating against any other person because the person filed a complaint or testified in any hearing before the board or in any way assisted in any matter under investigation. 
(j)  The board is empowered to issue a temporary emergency order against any person requiring the person to do an act preserving the possibility of a remedy for a complaint or to refrain from doing an act damaging the possibility of a remedy during the investigation of the complaint; provided, however: 
(1)  That no emergency order shall be issued unless a time and place for hearing on the temporary order is designated in the order. 
(2)  That the hearing on the temporary emergency order shall be held within ten days following the issuance of the temporary order, unless continued by the board at the request of the respondent. At the hearing, the complainant shall show that a failure to continue the temporary order would damage a remedy. 
(k)  The board may certify the case and the entire record of its proceedings to the city department of law, which shall invoke the aid of an appropriate court to impose legal or equitable relief. 
(Code 1985, § 103.07; Ord. No. 3588, 5-4-1992) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Curfew. The custodial parent or legal guardian of any child who commits a curfew violation, as defined herein, shall be subject to the following fines: 
(1)  Twenty-five dollars for a first offense, plus court costs; 
(2)  One hundred dollars for a second offense within a one-year period, plus court costs; or 
(3)  Two hundred dollars for a third offense and every subsequent offense within a one-year period, plus court costs. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages. An officer of the city police department may issue a city ordinance violation citation to a person who violates sections 46-108 or 46-109. The first citation issued to an individual shall impose a $50.00 fine. Each subsequent citation issued to an individual shall impose a penalty not less than $100.00 and not more than $2,500.00. 
(c)  Provisions where no penalty specified. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is specified shall be subject to such penalties as are provided in section 1-7. 
(d)  Ultimate fighting. Any person found in violation of any provision of article VI of this chapter shall be fined not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00 for each violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 132.99; Ord. No. 4263, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 3578, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 4397, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 46-2. - Accosting persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, approach, or signal any person of the opposite sex unknown to that person and by any word, sign, or gesture, attempt to speak to or to become acquainted with that person against his will on any public street or in any public place or in any place in the city, except in the transaction of legitimate business or to extend greetings of the day to that person. 
(Code 1968, tit. 10, § 1; Code 1985, § 130.01; Ord. No. 1022, 10-16-1950) 
Sec. 46-3. - Loitering; loafing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble, except at a public meeting of the citizens, on any of the sidewalks, streets, street corners, or near the mouths of alleys of the city, to the obstruction thereof, or so as to hinder, delay, or annoy persons passing in, upon, or along them, or the owner or occupants or property adjacent thereto; or for any persons so assembled to make personal remarks to passersby for the purpose of annoying them. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any member of the police force to issue a citation to any person found to be in violation of this section. That citation shall carry a penalty of $25.00. 
(Code 1968, tit. 290, § 4; Code 1985, § 132.01; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 3977, 9-25-1995) 
Sec. 46-4. - Spitting on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 290, § 5; Code 1985, § 132.02; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 46-5. - Shooting within city limits prohibited. 
    No person shall throw or shoot missiles of any kind by means of a bow, sling, gun; or throw or shoot a projectile of any character whatever within the limits of the city, except as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1968, tit. 200, § 1; Code 1985, § 132.20; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 4171, 5-19-1997) 
Sec. 46-6. - Vile or indecent language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to utter or use vile or indecent language or language involving moral turpitude in the presence or hearing of any person on any public street, or in any public place. 
(Code 1968, tit. 10 § 2; Code 1985, § 133.01; Ord. No. 1022, 10-16-1950) 
Sec. 46-7. - Enticement to commit unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to entice or procure a person of the opposite sex to commit any unlawful act, or to accost, approach, or signal any person, and by word, sign, or gesture suggest or invite any person to any building, vehicle, conveyance, or premises, except in the transaction of legitimate business. 
(Code 1968, tit. 10, § 3; Code 1985, § 133.02; Ord. No. 1022, 10-16-1950) 
Secs. 46-8-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW 

Sec. 46-31. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age to be in or remain at a public place within the city: 
(1)  Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday; 
(2)  After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; or 
(3)  Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. 
(b)  It is a curfew violation for a child less than 15 years of age to be in a public place after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Code 1985, § 132.10; Ord. No. 4263, 4-6-1998) 
Sec. 46-32. - Exceptions to section 46-31. 
    Section 46-31 shall not apply to a child who is: 
(1)  Accompanied by a child's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
(2)  Accompanied by an adult specified by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
(3)  Performing an emergency errand at the written direction of the child's parent, guardian or custodian; or 
(4)  Participating in, going to, or returning home from: 
a.  Lawful employment; 
b.  School-sanctioned activity; 
c.  A religious event; or 
d.  An activity sponsored by a civic or public organization or an event which directly involves the child's rights of free speech or assembly protected by the United States Constitution. 
(5)  Engaged in interstate or intrastate vehicular travel; 
(6)  On the sidewalk of the place where such child resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer. 
(Code 1985, § 132.11; Ord. No. 4263, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 4508, 8-21-2000) 
Sec. 46-33. - Cemetery curfew for minors. 
(a)  It is a curfew violation for a child 15, 16 or 17 years of age to be on property used as a cemetery or on other property used to memorialize the dead: 
(1)  Between 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday; 
(2)  After 7:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday; or 
(3)  Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday. 
(b)  It is a curfew violation for a child under 15 years of age to be on property used as a cemetery or other property used to memorialize the dead after 7:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a child may be lawfully on cemetery property or other property used to memorialize the dead if accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian or an adult specified by the minor's parent, guardian or custodian. 
(Code 1985, § 132.12; Ord. No. 4263, 4-6-1998) 
Secs. 46-34-46-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS OR SIMILAR CONTAINERS 

Sec. 46-55. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airtight door or airtight lock means any door which is tight enough so as not to leave sufficient air to enter, making it possible for any person confined to suffocate. The fact that a person has suffocated after being confined in any such ice box, refrigerator, or other container shall be prima facie evidence that the door or lock was airtight. Any attachment to release a door from the inside must be of sufficient construction so as to be accessible and easily released by children. 
(Code 1968, tit. 240, § 3; Code 1985, § 132.30; Ord. No. 1073, 10-19-1953) 
Sec. 46-56. - Abandonment prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling, or in any uninhabited building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock, or other such device thereon, which may not be released for opening from the inside of the ice box, refrigerator, or container. 
(Code 1968, tit. 240, § 1; Code 1985, § 132.31; Ord. No. 1073, 10-19-1953) 
Sec. 46-57. - Locks, doors to be removed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building, dwelling, or in any uninhabited building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded ice box or any other container of any kind whatsoever which has an airtight door or snap-lock or other such device thereon, without first removing the snap-lock, doors, or other such device thereon from the ice box, refrigerator, or container. 
(Code 1968, tit. 240, § 2; Code 1985, § 132.32; Ord. No. 1073, 10-19-1953) 
Secs. 46-58-46-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of fireworks, IC 22-11-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-88. - Supervised public display. 
    Every fireworks display shall be handled by a qualified operator to be approved by the chief of the fire department and shall be so located, discharged, or fired as, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, after proper inspection, to not be hazardous to persons or property. 
(Code 1985, § 132.40) 
Sec. 46-89. - Certificates of insurance required for supervised public display; amount and conditions. 
    The common council shall require a certificate of insurance conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person in an amount of not less than $10,000.00 and to property in an amount of not less than $10,000.00, by reason of the licensed display, and arising from any acts of the licensee, his agents, employees, or subcontractors. The common council may, in its discretion, require additional amounts of insurance coverage not to exceed $100,000.00 for damages caused to a person, or $100,000.00 for damage to property. 
(Code 1985, § 132.41) 
Sec. 46-90. - Consumer fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer fireworks shall be defined as in IC 22-11-14-1. 
(b)  Prohibited with city limits; exceptions. No person may use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks within the city limits except during the following times: 
(1)  Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after sunset on June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7, July 8, and July 9. 
(2)  Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on July 4. 
(3)  Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(c)  Prohibited on public streets, parks, or other public lands. No person may use, ignite, or discharge consumer fireworks on any public street or alley, in any public park, or any other public land within the city limits at any time. 
(d)  Igniting or discharging on private property. Any person using, igniting, or discharging consumer fireworks from private property must have permission of the property's owner. 
(e)  Violations of section; penalty. Violations of this section shall be subject to fines issued through the ordinance violation bureau, except that in instances where a violation results in a fire and damage is determined to be caused by negligence or willful disregard of this section, a fine equal to the cost expended by the city to respond shall be assessed. In no case shall the fine exceed $2,500.00 for the first such incident or $7,500.00 for subsequent incidents. 
(Ord. No. 5111, § 1, 7-2-2007) 
Secs. 46-91-46-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public intoxication, IC 7.1-5-1-3; intoxication upon common carrier, IC 7.1-5-1-6. 

Sec. 46-107. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage has the meaning set forth in IC 7.1-1-3-5. 
    Container has the meaning set forth in IC 7.1-1-3-13. 
    Motor vehicle has the meaning set forth in IC 9-13-2-105, except that the term "motor vehicle," as used in this article, shall not include recreational vehicles, as defined in IC 9-13-2-150, and is designed to transport more than ten passengers including the operator, or any chartered passenger vehicle licensed to operate within the state. 
(Code 1985, § 132.50; Ord. No. 3578, 3-2-1992) 
Sec. 46-108. - Possession or consumption prohibited. 
    A person who knowingly: 
(1)  Consumes an alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  Possesses a container: 
a.  That has been opened; 
b.  That has a broken seal; or 
c.  From which some of the contents have been removed; 
while in a motor vehicle that is being operated on a public highway within the city limits commits a violation of this article constituting an ordinance violation. 
(Code 1985, § 132.51; Ord. No. 3578, 3-2-1992) 
Sec. 46-109. - Operator or owner of motor vehicle in violation. 
(a)  The operator or owner of a motor vehicle who, while the motor vehicle is in operation, knowingly keeps or allows to be kept in an area of the motor vehicle that is accessible to the operator or a passenger a container: 
(1)  That has been opened; 
(2)  That has a broken seal; or 
(3)  From which some of the contents have been removed; 
commits a violation of this article constituting an ordinance violation. 
(b)  The operator of a recreational vehicle or chartered passenger vehicle licensed to operate within the state, who, while the motor vehicle is in operation, knowingly keeps or allows to be kept in an area of the recreational vehicle or chartered passenger vehicle that is accessible to the operator a container: 
(1)  That has been opened; 
(2)  That has a broken seal; or 
(3)  From which some of the contents have been removed; 
commits a violation of this article constituting an ordinance violation. 
(Code 1985, § 132.52; Ord. No. 3578, 3-2-1992) 
Sec. 46-110. - Signs. 
    Signs giving notice of the prohibition of open alcoholic beverage containers shall be posted giving notice of the regulations at all locations deemed appropriate by the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 1985, § 132.53; Ord. No. 3578, 3-2-1992) 
Secs. 46-111-46-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ULTIMATE FIGHTING 

Sec. 46-134. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bodily injury means any impairment of physical condition, including physical pain. 
    Extreme fighting. See Ultimate fighting . 
    Full-contact fighting. See Ultimate fighting . 
    Ground 'n' pound challenge. See Ultimate fighting . 
    No-holds-barred fighting. See Ultimate fighting . 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or causes: 
(1)  Serious permanent disfigurement; 
(2)  Unconsciousness; 
(3)  Extreme pain; or 
(4)  Permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member or organ. 
    Tough-man contest. See Ultimate fighting . 
    Ultimate fighting means a live match in which: 
(1)  Participants compete for a cash purse in any amount or a noncash purse with more than nominal value; 
(2)  Participants are not licensed as professional contestants in any state; 
(3)  Audiences are charged an admission fee; and 
(4)  Match rules permit contestants to use a combination of boxing, kicking, wrestling, hitting, punching, or other combative contact techniques. Match rules do not: 
a.  Incorporate a formalized system of combative techniques against which a contestant's performance is judged to determine the prevailing contestant; 
b.  Divide a match into two or more equal and specified time periods for a match total of no more than 50 minutes; or 
c.  Prohibit contestants from: 
1.  Using anything that is not part of the human body, except for boxing gloves, to intentionally inflict serious bodily injury upon an opponent through direct contact or the expulsion of a projectile; 
2.  Striking a person who demonstrates an inability to protect himself from the advances of an opponent; or 
3.  Direct, intentional and forceful strikes to the eyes, groin area, Adam's apple area of the neck, and temple area of the head. 
(Code 1985, § 132.60; Ord. No. 4397, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 46-135. - Prohibited within city limits. 
    No person shall publicize, promote, conduct, or engage in an ultimate fighting match within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 132.61; Ord. No. 4397, 6-7-1999) 
Sec. 46-136. - Right of injunction. 
    The city attorney or his designated representative may institute a lawsuit in superior court or circuit court seeking injunctive relief against any individuals violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 132.62; Ord. No. 4397, 6-7-1999) 
Secs. 46-137-46-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DISORDERLY HOUSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisance actions, IC 32-30-6-1 et seq.; actions for indecent nuisances, IC 32-30-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Disorderly house means a building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place where prohibited conduct occurs. If the building, dwelling, establishment, premises or place is a multiple-unit dwelling or residence, hotel, or motel, or commercial or office building, this definition includes only the dwelling unit, room, or suite of rooms in the hotel or motel, office rooms, or suite, or store in which prohibited conduct occurs. 
    Occupant means any person over 16 years of age whose domicile is the property upon which the prohibited conduct has been found to have occurred. 
    Prohibited conduct means activities occurring in violation of the statutes or ordinances related to any of the following: 
(1)  Gambling, as defined in IC 35-45-5-1; 
(2)  Battery, as defined in IC 35-42-2-1; 
(3)  Contributing to the delinquency of a minor, as defined in IC 35-46-1-8; 
(4)  Resisting law enforcement, as defined in IC 35-44-3-3; 
(5)  Disorderly conduct, as defined in IC 35-45-1-3; 
(6)  Criminal recklessness, as defined in IC 35-42-2-2; 
(7)  Prostitution, as defined in IC 35-45-4-2; 
(8)  Patronizing a prostitute, as defined in IC 35-45-4-3; 
(9)  Discharge of firearms, as prohibited by section 46-5; 
(10)  Loud and raucous noise, as prohibited by chapter 30, article V, constitutes prohibited conduct whenever the city has obtained a judgment or judgments upon three or more citations for violations of chapter 30, article V against a particular person living within a building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place within a calendar year. Further, for purposes of this section, when the fine for a loud and raucous noise citation is paid, either in whole or in part, the person or entity paying the citation is deemed to have violated chapter 30, article V and such a payment constitutes a judgment with respect to that particular citation. 
(Code 1985, § 135.01; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 46-157. - Public nuisance. 
    Whenever prohibited conduct, as defined herein, occurs in or upon a building, dwelling establishment, premises, or place, the building, dwelling establishment, premises, or place is deemed to be a disorderly house and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Code 1985, § 135.02; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 46-158. - Notice to abate. 
(a)  Whenever the police department has probable cause to believe that prohibited conduct has occurred in or upon a building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place, the city shall notify the legal owner of the property as determined by the records of the assessor's office of the county; any party with an equitable interest in the property, provided that such equitable interest is recorded; and the occupants of the property that the building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place is a disorderly house and as such constitutes a public nuisance and that the public nuisance must be abated. 
(b)  The legal owner of the property, any party with an equitable interest in the property, and the occupants of the property are deemed responsible for any and all prohibited conduct occurring upon the premises. 
(Code 1985, § 135.03; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 46-159. - Manner of serving notice. 
    Notice shall be provided to the legal owner of the property, any party with an equitable interest in the property, and the occupants of the property in the following manner: 
(1)  Sending a copy of the notice to abate by registered or certified mail to the residence, or certified to the residence or place of business or employment of the person to be notified, with return receipt requested; 
(2)  Delivering a copy of the notice to abate personally to the person to be notified; or 
(3)  Leaving a copy of the notice to abate at the dwelling or usual place of abode of the person to be notified. 
(Code 1985, § 135.04; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 46-160. - Injunctive relief. 
    Whenever prohibited conduct occurs in or upon a building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place after notice to abate the nuisance has been provided pursuant to section 46-158, the city attorney may file a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance and to collect fines for violations of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 135.05; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 46-161. - Eviction proceedings as a defense. 
    No owner/landlord shall be charged with the violation of this article if the person: 
(1)  Has, within 30 days of receipt of a notice to abate as set forth in section 46-158, instituted an eviction proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction against the tenant or occupant in question; and 
(2)  Has completed the same within 90 days of commencement. 
(Code 1985, § 135.06; Ord. No. 4196, 8-4-1997) 
Secs. 46-162-46-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Actions for use of property constituting drug nuisance, IC 32-30-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-191. - Purpose. 
    The common council finds it to be in the best interests of the residents of the city and the general public to provide for the regulation of conduct it deems to be offensive; to prevent vice, disorder and immorality; and to promote public peace, health and safety, and to this end, the council enacts this article. 
(Code 1985, § 134.01; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-192. - Permitting use of real estate for illicit drug activity. 
    No person who has legal or equitable ownership of real estate located in the city shall knowingly allow that real estate to be used as a site for any use or sale of illicit narcotics or controlled dangerous substances, after having received written notice pursuant to IC 36-7-9-25 from the city or any agency or political subdivision thereof that a present occupant or tenant of that property has been using or selling illicit narcotics or controlled dangerous substances at that property. A legal or equitable owner of the real estate is deemed to have knowledge of the activity upon receipt of notice as set forth herein. 
(Code 1985, § 134.02; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-193. - Notice. 
    Notice is deemed to be given to the owner, upon receipt of notice, as indicated in section 46-192, by the owner of record pursuant to the county assessor's office records. 
(Code 1985, § 134.03; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-194. - Discrimination forbidden. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to encourage or authorize the discrimination by lessors against any person based upon race, creed, religion, sex, age or national origin. It is the intent of this article to hold persons accountable for acquiescing or participating in the continued use of their property as the location of illegal drug activity, after having received notice as set forth in section 46-192. 
(Code 1985, § 134.04; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-195. - Criteria for establishing violations. 
    The conviction for violation of this article will be determined by the appropriate judicial authority based upon the totality of the circumstances present; including, but not limited to, the owner having received notice as set forth in this article consisting of one of the following activities: 
(1)  Conduct of tenants and their visitors as observed by the lessor or officials, agencies or political subdivisions of the city; 
(2)  Information regarding suspected illegal activities on that property received by the owner or equitable owner as determined by the records of the county assessor's office from third parties, including other tenants of the property or persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property, and investigated by an agency or political subdivision of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 134.05; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-196. - Eviction proceedings as a defense. 
    No person shall be charged with the violation of this article if the person: 
(1)  Has, within 30 days of receipt of notice of criminal activities as set forth in section 46-192, instituted an eviction proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction against the tenant in question; and 
(2)  Has completed the same within 90 days of commencement. 
(Code 1985, § 134.06; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Sec. 46-197. - Multiple-unit dwellings. 
    In the case of a multiple-unit dwelling, the only person necessary to name in an eviction proceeding is the person occupying the actual unit involved with the activity suspected and/or the person suspected of the activity described herein. 
(Code 1985, § 134.07; Ord. No. 3554, 12-2-1991) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Recreation facilities and programs, IC 36-10-2-2; General Park and Recreation Law, IC 36-10-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Park hours. 
(a)  The hours of operation of each municipal park shall be established by the board of parks and recreation. The parks superintendent shall post the hours of operation in a conspicuous place in each park, and shall be authorized to enforce the closing of the parks by appropriate measures. He shall also be authorized to grant extensions of the closing time to the holders of park use permits for special functions as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The hours of operation of the municipal golf course shall be established by the board of parks and recreation, but the parks superintendent shall have the power and authority to close the municipal golf course, its grounds and roadways, to public usage after the closing hour of the municipal golf course, and to enforce such closing in the same manner as herein provided for other parks. 
(c)  Any person in a park after the park has closed will be asked to leave. Failure to do so will be considered a violation of this chapter and is subject to penalty. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. II, § 1; Code 1985, § 98.01; Ord. No. 1329, 6-7-1965; Ord. No. 1568, 5-4-1970; Ord. No. 4949, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 50-2. - Use of park facilities. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to use the park facilities for a particular purpose, such as a sporting show or event, picnic, party, reception, theatrical performance, or entertainment, such person shall make application for a permit to use the park facilities to the parks superintendent. Such application shall be on a form furnished by the parks superintendent. 
(b)  The parks superintendent shall be authorized to grant such application and issue the permit if it appears that such use will not interfere with the general usage of the park facilities by the public. An indemnity bond or proof of insurance to protect the city from any liability of any nature and to protect city property from damage may be required by the parks superintendent as a condition to issuing any park use permit. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. II, § 2; Code 1985, § 98.02; Ord. No. 1329, 6-7-1965; Ord. No. 1568, 5-4-1970) 
Sec. 50-3. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park to: 
(1)  Drive or park any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, other motor vehicle, or bicycle in any park except on properly designated and maintained roadways and parking areas, or to operate such vehicles through parks after closing hours, except on duly dedicated streets and avenues which extend through the parks and are not closed by the park director. 
(2)  Willfully or recklessly mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, receptacle, railing, fence, monument, waterline or fountain, electric light or fixture, sign, notice, or other structure, equipment, facilities, or park property of any nature. 
(3)  Throw, deposit, or cause or allow to be thrown or deposited on any park property any rubbish, garbage, trash, leaves, ashes, paper, debris, glass, metal, rubber, or other refuse of any nature; or to throw, deposit, discharge, or otherwise cause to be placed in the waters of any pool, pond, river fountain, or other body of water in or adjacent to any city park any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(4)  Bring in, deposit, dump, or otherwise leave on park property any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, refuse, or garbage. No refuse or trash generated by park users while in the parks shall be left on the park grounds in the open or placed in any water in or contiguous to the park grounds, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles whenever provided; and whenever proper receptacles are not provided, such trash and refuse shall be carried away from the park by the persons responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(5)  Pick, cut, break off, or otherwise disfigure any flower, tree, shrub, or plant growing in the parks. 
(6)  Launch boats into any waterway in or contiguous to park property except at properly designated boat launching ramps or areas. 
(7)  Bring any controlled substance as defined by the laws of the state, drugs, beer, ale, or any other alcoholic beverage, into any park or consume, or have in their possession, or sell, give away, or handle, any controlled substance, or intoxicating alcoholic beverages, except on written permission from the board of parks and recreation or its duly authorized agents. 
(8)  No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, or benches, or other areas including parking lots; or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language; or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace in the public parks. 
(b)  Any gift or donation to honor individuals or events must have written approval from the parks superintendent prior to installation. Any unapproved installation shall be removed by park personnel. 
(Code 1968, tit. 330, art. II, § 3; Code 1985, § 98.03; Ord. No. 1329, 6-7-1965; Ord. No. 1568, 5-4-1970; Ord. No. 3212, 10-17-1988; Ord. No. 5412, § 1, 8-19-2013) 
Sec. 50-4. - Swimming prohibited in nondesignated areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in a city park to swim, wade, or otherwise enter into the manmade waterways in city parks, except for those areas specifically designated for swimming. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, the Battell Park Rock Garden and the Robert C. Beutter Riverfront Park Raceway. 
(Ord. No. 4948, § 1, 7-5-2005) 
Chapter 54 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE DRIVES OR ENTRANCES 

Sec. 54-19. - Conformance to standards established by city engineer. 
(a)  The city engineer shall determine and establish the requirements, regulations, and restrictions for any private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches as may be necessary to provide for drainage to the highways, streets, and alleys, preservation of the highways, streets, and alleys and conservation and preservation of parking space thereon, and for the safety and convenience of traffic on the highways, streets, and alleys. 
(b)  All existing private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches connecting with any highway, street, or alley in the city, and all future construction, alteration, and changes of private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches shall be subject to, comply with, and conform to the plans, regulations, and specifications prepared by the city engineer, which are on file in his office for public inspection. 
(c)  Should any existing private entrances, driveways, curbs, or approaches connecting with any highway, street, or alley in the city, as they now exist not conform and comply with the plans, specifications, and regulations herein referred to, the owner or occupant of the abutting property shall remove, or move part or all, or relocate or conform the private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches to this article when requested to do so by the city engineer within 60 days from the date of the notification. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, §§ 2, 7; Code 1985, § 101.01; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Sec. 54-20. - Permit required. 
    No person shall construct any private entrance, driveway, or approach connecting with any highway, street, or alley in the city, nor shall any curb along such highway, street, or alley be cut or removed without the written permit of the city engineer, and then only in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the city engineer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, § 1; Code 1985, § 101.02; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Sec. 54-21. - Permit application; fee. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to construct, alter, or change any private entrance, driveway, curb, or approach as herein mentioned, he shall make application to the city engineer on a form to be furnished by the city engineer, giving such information as the form may require. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to make, or cause to be made, an inspection of the proposed work, to certify compliance with the plans, regulations, and specifications as set forth in this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer to issue to each applicant a permit to make the improvement. The permits shall be printed in a convenient book form, one detached and given to the person procuring it, and the other to be filed in the office of the city engineer. 
(c)  All permits shall be limited to and expire after 30 days from the date of the issuance thereof. 
(d)  The city engineer shall collect from the applicant a fee of $5.00 for each permit issued for a residential driveway and a fee of $25.00 for each permit issued for a commercial driveway. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, §§ 8, 9; Code 1985, § 101.03; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Sec. 54-22. - Construction; bond. 
    All work on private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches shall be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The entire expense of constructing the private entrance, driveway, curb, and approach shall be borne by the person to whom the permit is given. The city engineer is authorized to require before granting the permit that a sufficient bond be given or a cash deposit be made with the city engineer to insure the carrying out of the terms of the permit, which bond or deposit shall be returned when the requirements of the permit have been met. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, § 3; Code 1985, § 101.04; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Sec. 54-23. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The owners or occupants of the abutting property shall maintain and keep in repair all private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches thereto, but no private entrances, driveways, curbs, and approaches shall be constructed or maintained in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with the highway, the traffic thereon, or with any drain which has been constructed on or which serves the highway. 
(b)  When any highway, street, or alley in the city is constructed or reconstructed, the construction of public road approaches and existing private approaches, together with the drainage structures required for its protection, shall be included as a part of the improvement of the highway or city-maintained street. The city engineer may require the changing of the location of any existing driveway in the interest of the safety of the motoring public when the street or alley is constructed or reconstructed, and the person owning or occupying the abutting property shall make the changes in location under the direction of the city engineer. Upon the completion of the street or alley, the owner or occupant of adjoining lands shall keep in repair all private approaches or driveways from the street or alley. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, §§ 4, 5; Code 1985, § 101.05; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Sec. 54-24. - State highways excluded from regulations. 
    This article shall apply only to highways, streets, and alleys maintained by the city and shall not apply to state highways. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. I, § 6; Code 1985, § 101.06; Ord. No. 981, 7-19-1948) 
Secs. 54-25-54-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STREET BARRICADES 

Sec. 54-52. - Barricading streets for cleaning, maintenance and improvement. 
(a)  Streets and highways within the corporate limits of the city shall, if necessary for the efficient cleaning, maintenance, and improvement of the same, be at the direction of the city street commissioner barricaded and closed to public use as is hereinafter specified, until the completion of the cleaning, maintenance, and improvement operation. 
(b)  Barricades shall clearly announce to the public the intention of the city to clean, maintain, and improve the streets and highways, which shall be sufficient notice to the public to refrain from parking any automobiles, other mechanical units or objects about and along the thoroughfares and shall, further, be sufficient notice to the owners of any automobiles, mechanical units, or any objects of whatever description parked thereon to remove or cause the removal of them within 12 hours from the time of placement of the barricades. Traffic through and along the thoroughfares may be restricted and stopped entirely during the cleaning, maintaining, or improving operation when the restriction may, in the opinion of the street commissioner, be necessary to the proper and safe conduct of the street cleaning, maintaining, or improving in progress, all of which shall be clearly announced to the public on signs specifying the restrictions pertinent to the particular street being cleaned, maintained, or improved, attached, or placed in proximity to the barricade or other obstruction fixed along the street. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. II, § 1; Code 1985, § 101.15; Ord. No. 1209, 7-11-1960) 
Sec. 54-53. - Interference with barricade, continued use of street prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere with any barricade. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit the continued use of any street or highway barricaded pursuant to the terms of this article for the parking of any automobile, mechanical unit, or object of whatever description. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street or highway for the purpose of vehicular traffic when it is restricted against such use pursuant to the terms hereof. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting physicians or operators of emergency vehicles engaged in the conduct of their duties from parking within the barricaded areas. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. II, § 3; Code 1985, § 101.16; Ord. No. 1209, 7-11-1960) 
Sec. 54-54. - Impoundment of vehicles in violation. 
    Any automobile, mechanical unit, or other object parked or located on any street or highway that is barricaded, following the time limit in section 54-52, shall, upon the direction of the city street commissioner, be forcibly removed and impounded. The costs and charges incurred for removal and impoundment shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. II, § 2; Code 1985, § 101.17; Ord. No. 1209, 7-11-1960) 
Secs. 54-55-54-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 54-82. - Record of grades adopted by reference. 
    The record of grades and the record of widths of sidewalks and information heretofore collected by the city engineer and recorded in the records known as the record of grades are adopted. The schedule therein filed and the record of grades shall remain on file in the city engineer's office. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. III, § 1; Code 1985, § 101.25; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-83. - Grade datum for street grades. 
    The grade datum for all grades shall be at the intersection of curbs at the southeast corner of Main Street and Lincolnway in the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. III, § 3; Code 1985, § 101.26; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-84. - Interference with grade stakes or other guards prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, interfere with, or meddle with any grade stakes, fences, lights, or other guards placed by the city, its agents, or employees, or where the same is required to be placed by any person by any ordinance of the city in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city, or to destroy or deface, mutilate, change, modify, injure, or remove, or to in any manner interfere or meddle with street signs placed by the city on its streets, alleys, and public places, or to destroy, deface, or mutilate, remove, or injure any seats, benches, stands, signs, monuments, or other property erected in the streets or alleys, parks or buildings, or other public places of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. III, § 4; Code 1985, § 101.27; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-85. - Procedure for excavating in streets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person making an application for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    City means the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, and its authorized agents. 
    City engineer means the person serving as city engineer, his office or authorized representative. 
    Emergency means any unforeseen circumstances or occurrences, the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health and welfare of citizens, or which cause the interruption of services being furnished by a public utility when said interruption would cause a gross inconvenience or endanger the health and welfare of citizens. 
    Excavation means any opening, excavation, or tunnel in or under the surface of any street. 
    Excavation permit means the authorization issued by the engineer, in accordance with this section, to make an excavation in a street. The excavation permit shall consist of a placard, issued by the engineer, which shall be conspicuously displayed at the site of the excavation, such as in the window of a building or contractor's vehicle window located on the site. 
    Street means a public street, public highway, public alley, public easement, public right-of-way, public road, or all other public lands under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Requirements for a permit. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate in any street for the purpose of laying any gas, water or sewer mains, or connections, or to open the street for any other purpose without first filing his application with the city engineer. 
(2)  The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following items: 
a.  A drawing including at least the following information: 
1.  Location and purpose of the excavation. 
2.  North arrow and graphic scale. 
3.  Dimensions of opening. 
4.  Patching material and method. 
5.  Expected dates of commencing and completing work, including any pavement replacement. 
6.  Name of contractor, emergency telephone number, and name of contact person. 
7.  Any additional information that may be deemed necessary by the engineer to protect the city's right-of-way and the motoring public. 
b.  A bond issued by a surety company in an amount equal to the cost of the proposed excavation but not less than the penal sum of $5,000.00, payable to the city. The bond will be released upon completion and acceptance of the work by the engineer, but not before one year after completion of the work. 
c.  Proof that the following insurance will be in effect during the entire time required to perform and complete all the work for which the permit is to be issued: 
1.  Workman's compensation insurance to cover any and all of the applicant's employees working at the site of the excavation; 
2.  Public liability bodily injury insurance of not less than $100,000.00 for injuries, including accidental death, to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount of not less than $200,000.00 on account of one accident; 
3.  Public liability property damage insurance of not less than $25,000.00; and 
4.  Automobile public liability bodily injury with $100,000.00/$250,000.00 and property damage with $25,000.00 limits. 
(3)  A separate excavation permit will be required for every 50 linear feet or part thereof. 
(4)  A fee of $10.00 shall be assessed for each excavation permit for the review of plans, existing site conditions, and to perform construction inspection. 
(5)  An excavation permit shall be issued by the engineer within a maximum of three working days after the filing of an application and bond, to allow for the engineer to review plans and existing site conditions. 
(6)  An excavation permit will become null and void if work is not begun within 30 days from the date of issue and will expire on the date given in the application as the expected completion date. The applicant shall give the engineer one working day's notice before beginning the work, if work is not started within three working days of the date given in the application. 
(7)  In the event of an emergency, when an excavation permit cannot be obtained from the engineer, the excavation may proceed provided that the person who made the emergency excavation shall apply for an excavation permit immediately upon the first day of business of the city offices, as previously set forth herein, and additionally will submit a written explanation of the reason or nature of the emergency. 
(8)  It will not be necessary for the city water or electric departments to post a bond or pay the permit fee; however, all expenses of excavating, repairing, and replacing any and all pavement and other existing materials shall be paid for by the respective departments. An excavation permit, however, must be applied for by all departments as set forth herein, just as for any other individual. 
(9)  An applicant for an excavation permit shall agree to save the city harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue to any person as a result of work performed under an excavation permit issued as set forth herein. 
(c)  Restrictions and requirements. 
(1)  Except in the event of an emergency, excavation permits will not be issued between the dates of November 15 and April 1, inclusive. In the event of weather and ground conditions, particularly with respect to freezing, being favorable for excavation, the engineer may issue an excavation permit, with possible additional restrictions, for dates between November 15 and April 1. 
(2)  Excavations requiring complete transverse cuts of any street shall be bored or tunneled. Transverse open cuts, in specific cases, where reasonable due to the nature and volume of the traffic and existing site conditions, shall be on approval of the engineer. 
(3)  All work shall comply with the engineering standards of the city, as adopted by the board of public works and safety and all necessary traffic control, warning and protection devices shall be in accordance with the state manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways. 
(4)  The applicant will be required to obtain all existing utility locations and will be responsible for the protection of all utility lines, services and appurtenances. (Call 1-800-382-5544, within Indiana or 1-800-428-5200, from outside Indiana, for utility locations two working days before beginning excavation.) 
(d)  Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the following actions: 
(1)  If found guilty by the appropriate court having jurisdiction, shall be fined according to section 1-7. 
(2)  Repeat violations will be handled at the discretion of the engineer and may result in the refusal to issue any excavation permit to the applicant. 
(3)  Failure to complete work in the proper manner shall result in the engineer taking necessary steps to remedy the defects, and the costs thereof shall be recovered by an action on the bond before any court of competent jurisdiction. Also, the applicant may be subject to the suspension of applications for an excavation permit for a period of one year from the date of bond action. 
(Code 1985, § 101.28; Ord. No. 3302, 8-7-1989) 
Sec. 54-86. - Excavations, street obstructions to be lighted. 
(a)  Any person making any excavation as provided in this section, or any excavation made within the city limits in any street or sidewalk, or near to or adjoining any street or sidewalk, shall mark the excavation with a flashing light placed during each night of the existence of the excavation, at the point where the excavation approaches the nearest street or sidewalk. The flashing light shall be lighted at dark and kept burning until daylight to indicate the locality of the excavation. 
(b)  Any obstruction placed in any street or on any sidewalk within the limits of the city, including piles of dirt, lumber, or other material temporarily placed in the street during the construction or repairing of any building, or part of building, shall be marked during the night by a flashing light so placed as to indicate the obstruction to persons passing along the street or sidewalk. The flashing light shall be lighted at twilight and kept burning until dawn each night during the existence of the obstruction. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. III, §§ 6, 7; Code 1985, § 101.29; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Secs. 54-87-54-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK AND CURB IMPROVEMENT 

Sec. 54-116. - Improvement permit. 
(a)  Application; required information. Whenever any person desires to construct any cement sidewalks or curb within the corporate limits of the city, he shall apply to the city engineer stating the number of feet to be constructed together with the number of the lot and description of the tract of land or parcels of ground to be improved. 
(b)  Issuance. It shall be the duty of the engineer to issue to each applicant a permit to make the improvements. The permits shall be printed in a convenient book form, one copy to be retained by the city engineer in the book, and one detached and given to the person procuring the same. No permit shall be issued on any street, alley, or other public place after the board of public works and safety has passed a resolution advertising for bids for the improvement. 
(c)  Time limit; renewal. All permits shall be limited to 30 days from the date of the application, and permits on streets, alleys, and other public places covered by any improvement resolution shall be limited to the date of the resolution advertising for bids. Permits may be renewed if the board of public works and safety has not passed a resolution covering the improvement. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. IV, § 1; Code 1985, § 101.40; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-117. - Permit fee. 
    The city engineer shall collect from the applicant a permit fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. IV, § 2; Code 1985, § 101.41; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-118. - Bond. 
(a)  Any person desiring to construct a cement walk and curb shall give a bond in the sum of $1,000.00 signed by two freeholders or a surety company satisfactory to the board of public works and safety, to secure the faithful performance of the contract and to guarantee the work for a period of one year from the date of the completion of the work. Thirty days after the date of the application shall be considered the date of completion unless otherwise ordered by the common council. 
(b)  Any sidewalk showing cracks and other defects due either to defective material or bad workmanship shall be removed and replaced by entirely new blocks at any time during the guarantee period, if so ordered by the board of public works and safety or city engineer. 
(c)  If at any time during the guarantee period, the contractor fails or refuses to make the necessary repairs or reconstruction after ten days' notice has been given by mail by the board of public works and safety or city engineer to do so, the board of public works and safety shall proceed to have the repairs or reconstruction done in a correct manner and by whosoever they may desire and charge the cost of the work, together with 20 percent additional to cover the cost of supervision and inspection of the work, the whole sum to be recovered by suit on the bond of the contractor or the party taking out the permit for the improvement. However, in case of entire reconstruction, the work may be let by contract. The cost of the reconstruction shall be paid by the city and recovered by suit from the party or firm in whose name the permit was taken out, or from the bondsmen. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. IV, § 4; Code 1985, § 101.42; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-119. - Sidewalk specifications. 
    Unless otherwise ordered by the board of public works and safety, the width of the sidewalk shall be four feet, eight inches, and when the walk and curb are together, the width shall be five feet, two inches. Prior to construction, the plans shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer, and the sidewalk shall be constructed in conformance with the specifications set forth at section 604 of the state highway standard specifications, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 101.43) 
Sec. 54-120. - Curb specifications. 
    Prior to any construction of cement curb, plans therefor shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer, and the curb shall be constructed in conformance with section 605 of the state highway standard specifications, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 101.44) 
Sec. 54-121. - Preliminary and primary assessment roll to be prepared after completion of improvement. 
(a)  As soon as any contract for the improvement of any street or alley has been completed, it shall be the duty of the committee on streets and alleys together with the city civil engineer to prepare a final estimate and a preliminary or primary assessment roll with the names of property owners and a description of the property abutting on and adjacent to the improvement which is liable to assessment. They shall set opposite each name and description the total assessment, if any, against each piece of property, and file the final estimate and preliminary or primary assessment roll with the city clerk on or before the first regular or special meeting after the contract is completed. If it is impossible for the committee and engineer to complete the final estimate and preliminary or primary assessment for the first regular or special meeting, the common council at the meeting may grant the committee and engineer such further time as in the opinion of the common council may be necessary. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the final estimate and preliminary or primary assessment roll with the city clerk, the clerk shall present it to the common council for its consideration as a preliminary or primary assessment roll and final estimate, and the common council shall consider it and pass a resolution adopting a final estimate and preliminary or primary assessment roll. The resolution shall also authorize and instruct the city clerk to give the necessary notice to the property owners of a hearing of special benefits on the improvements. 
(Code 1968, tit. 480, art. IV, §§ 7, 8; Code 1985, § 101.45; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Secs. 54-122-54-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 54-141. - Installation procedure when street or public way is improved. 
    Whenever the board of public works desires to improve any street, alley, or other public place by paving it, and further desires to adopt an improvement resolution to that effect, the board is authorized to include in the improvement resolution the installation of sewer, water, gas, wire, and other connections as may be deemed necessary to accommodate the abutting property along the street, alley, or public place. In addition, the improvement resolution shall have affixed thereto the necessary plans and specifications designating the material to be used in the sewer, water, gas, wire, and other connections, the number and location thereof, and the manner of paying for them from the main to a point inside the curbline. However, this article shall not prevent any owner of any abutting property from making the connections and installations if he makes and completes them in accordance with the plans and specifications for such connections and installations as designated by the board within 20 days from the date of the confirmation of the resolution. 
(Code 1968, tit. 400, § 1; Code 1985, § 101.55; Ord. No. 597, 5-19-1926) 
Sec. 54-142. - Cost of connections; assessment. 
    The cost of making the connections by the board of public works shall be considered part of the cost of the permanent improvement project and shall be so assessed against the abutting properties that are benefited. 
(Code 1968, tit. 400, § 2; Code 1985, § 101.56; Ord. No. 597, 5-19-1926) 
Secs. 54-143-54-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ACTIONS RELATED TO BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-167. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    When any person or entity holding a permit issued pursuant to section 54-188 shall violate any provision of this article, such permit shall be subject to revocation by the city building commissioner and such person or entity shall be liable to the city in an amount as prescribed in section 2-2(b) pertaining to ordinance violations, or section 1-7 pertaining to the general penalty 
(Code 1985, § 96.99; Ord. No. 3436, 11-19-1990) 
Secs. 54-168-54-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 54-188. - Permit required. 
    Before any building or other structure is or shall be moved along any route within the corporate limits of the city, a permit for that purpose shall be issued by the building commissioner in accordance with the provisions hereinafter recited. 
(Code 1968, tit. 210, § 1; Code 1985, § 96.01; Ord. No. 1203, 2-15-1960) 
Sec. 54-189. - Application; fee. 
(a)  Before a permit is issued, application therefor shall be filed with the building commissioner. The application shall include dimensions defining the extreme height, width, and length of the structure, when mounted; the route over which it will be moved; a plot plan showing the structure in its proposed new location; and affidavits from all public utility companies, railroads, service companies, and municipal departments having facilities along the proposed route, certifying that the owner of the structure proposed for removal has deposited with the company, agency, or department satisfactory surety to cover the cost of any damage or changes in facilities resulting from the moving of the structure over the intended route. The application shall also have attached detailed plans and specifications representing the final plans of the owner for the structure once deposited in its proposed new location, which shall conform in all things with the requirements of article V of chapter 101, pertaining to property maintenance and all ordinances amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto. 
(b)  Before the application shall be processed by the building commissioner, the applicant shall pay an application fee of $25.00 to the office of the commissioner simultaneously with its filing, together with whatever expenses may be chargeable for abstracting costs incurred in connection with the investigation by the building commissioner of the proposed new location, for restrictions, or other covenants running with the land which may affect the general welfare. These expenses shall be paid by the applicant prior to the public hearing described in section 54-190. 
(Code 1968, tit. 210, §§ 2, 3; Code 1985, § 96.02; Ord. No. 1203, 2-15-1960) 
Sec. 54-190. - Public hearing required; exceptions. 
(a)  A hearing before the board of public works and safety upon the merits of the application for a permit shall be had and held within ten days after its filing with the building commissioner for the purpose of hearing evidence relating to the movement of the structure proposed for removal insofar as it may affect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Following due notice via ordinary United States mail by the office of the commissioner to the title-owners, as they appear of record in the offices of the Penn Township, St. Joseph County Assessor, of not less than two-thirds of the land fronting on both sides of the street for a distance of 500 feet in each direction from the proposed new location, advising of the time, place, and purpose of such hearing, the board shall enter into a determination concerning the issuance of such permit. The decision shall in all things bind the building commissioner in connection with the issuance or refusal of the permit. 
(b)  In the event of the issuance of the permit, the building commissioner shall inspect or cause the inspection of the structure at its new location to be made within 90 days from the date of the issuance to determine the qualifications under the requirements of article V of chapter 101, or any ordinances amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto; whereupon a report of his findings shall be made to the board of public works and safety for further notice, if necessary, pursuant to the conditions of law in such cases. 
(c)  The building commissioner may, upon proper application, issue permits without the necessity of a public hearing and the affidavits aforesaid when the structure to be moved is proposed for removal on the bed of a truck or trailer; provided the extreme dimensions of the structure, when mounted for moving, shall not exceed 14 feet in height, 14 feet in width, and 20 feet in length. The building commissioner may, further, issue permits without the necessity of a public hearing when the structure to be moved shall be proposed for removal to a location outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 210, §§ 4, 5; Code 1985, § 96.03; Ord. No. 1203, 2-15-1960) 
Sec. 54-191. - Filing of bond required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved, any structure upon or along any street within the limits of the city, without having first filed with the building commissioner a bond approved by the city controller in the sum of $5,000.00, indemnifying the city against any and all loss, cost, or damage to its streets caused by the moving of the structure. It shall be further conditioned that the person will indemnify and pay all damages to any person or property caused by any negligent act or omission in the moving of the structure. 
(Code 1968, tit. 210, § 6; Code 1985, § 96.04; Ord. No. 1203, 2-15-1960) 
Sec. 54-192. - Safety procedures. 
    In the event that any building is moved pursuant to the provisions of this division, the holder of the permit obtained pursuant to section 54-188 shall be required to: 
(1)  Within 48 hours after the time that the building being moved has been lifted from its old foundation from which it is being moved, completely fill in with suitable fill material subject to the approval of the city building commissioner the old foundation or excavation from which the building being moved has been removed; 
(2)  Until said old foundation or excavation shall be so filled in, erect around such old foundation or excavation a sturdy fence of sufficient materials, size and construction, subject to the approval of the city building commissioner, suitable to prevent any person, particularly children, from falling into the foundation hole or excavation, or from otherwise being injured there. Such fence must fully enclose the foundation hole or excavation from the time that the building being moved has been lifted from its former foundation until the time that the foundation hole or excavation has been completely filled in as required in subsection (1) of this section, excepting for such time or times when the holder of the permit, his contractor, employees or agents is or are personally present at the site of the foundation hole or excavation; and 
(3)  Maintain a fence of sufficient materials, size and construction, subject to approval of the city building commissioner, around the base of the building being moved after it has been lifted from its foundation and until it is permanently installed upon its new foundation in the location to which it is being moved, sufficient to keep any person, particularly children, from gaining access under the building being moved. Such fence shall completely enclose the base of the building being moved whenever it is not permanently mounted on a foundation except during any time when the holder of the permit or his contractor, employees or agents are personally present at the site of the building being moved; and 
(4)  Complete the moving of the building in question by permanently placing the building on its new foundation in the location to which it is being moved within ten days after the date of issuance of the permit pursuant to section 54-188. 
(Code 1985, § 96.19; Ord. No. 3436, 11-19-1990) 
Secs. 54-193-54-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 54-221. - Numbering system of city. 
(a)  All blocks and lots in the city shall be numbered north and south from Lincolnway, and east and west from Main Street, beginning with the number 100 for blocks, and designating the successive blocks by successive hundreds. On all streets each 22 feet front shall have one number. The lots shall be numbered north and south from Lincolnway, and east and west from Main Street south side, the number of the lot corresponding with the number of the blocks, the first lot in block 100 to be numbered 101, and so on; the design being that the hundreds shall indicate the blocks, and the units the house numbers in the block. One hundred numbers are reserved for each block, and even numbers on north-south streets are to be on the east side of the streets. On east-west streets the even numbers shall be on the north side. 
(b)  The city engineer shall assign a number to each lot or part of a lot fronting on any street, avenue, or public place, according to the plan, assigning odd numbers to one side and even numbers to the other side of the street, avenue, or public place; and assigning a number to each 22 feet of land fronting north and south, or as near to that number of feet as practicable. He shall keep a record of all such numbers so assigned. 
(Code 1968, tit. 220, § 1; Code 1985, § 96.15; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-222. - Owner to place numbers; when city to number. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of every house or business place in the city shall place the number assigned to his lot or part thereof, by the city engineer in a conspicuous place on the side of or above the front door of that house or building. The number shall consist of figures not less than three inches in length, and be so made or marked as to be distinctly or easily read. 
(b)  After the time limited in this division for placing numbers on houses or buildings, the city shall place a number upon any house or building not numbered as aforesaid and recover the cost from the owner or occupant in a civil action. 
(Code 1968, tit. 220, §§ 2, 4; Code 1985, § 96.16; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-223. - Numbering new buildings. 
    Every owner or occupant of any building hereafter erected in this city shall, within 30 days after the erection thereof, place a number thereon according to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1968, tit. 220, § 3; Code 1985, § 96.17; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Sec. 54-224. - Unlawful to alter or deface numbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take down, alter, deface, destroy, or cancel any number assigned to be placed upon any building; or to place, substitute, or permit to be placed or substituted an erroneous or improper number to be retained upon any building. 
(Code 1968, tit. 220, § 5; Code 1985, § 96.18; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906) 
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when at least 50 percent of the frontage of the territory for a distance of at least 500 feet is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
    Central traffic district means all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Lawrence Street on the north, Cedar Street on the east, the New York Central right-of-way on the south, and West Street and Liberty Drive on the west. 
    Commercial vehicle means every vehicle designed, maintained, or used primarily for the transportation of property or passengers for hire. 
    Private road or driveway means a way or place in private ownership that is used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on the highway for a distance of at least 500 feet is primarily improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and that is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times. 
    Sidewalk means the part of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Stand or standing means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. I, §§ 1, 2; Code 1985, § 70.01; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Similar state law definitions, IC 9-13-2 et seq. 
Sec. 58-2. - Traffic engineer. 
(a)  Office established. The office of city traffic engineer is established. The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Duties. It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents, and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. II, § 10; Code 1985, § 70.11; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-3. - Traffic accidents; investigations and reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest, and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents. 
(b)  Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police chief or his designee shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of the accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(c)  The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. The reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. II, §§ 4-6; Code 1985, § 70.14; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- City may require accident reports, IC 9-26-1-7. 
Sec. 58-4. - Drivers' files to be maintained. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions, and complaints reported for each driver. The reports shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(b)  The division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or who are involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps as may be lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the license of such persons suspended or revoked. 
(c)  The records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. II, § 7; Code 1985, § 70.15; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-5. - Temporary or experimental regulations. 
    The city traffic engineer, with the prior consent of the common council by its resolution, is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter by making and enforcing temporary or experimental regulations to cover traffic patterns, movements, or special traffic conditions. The resolution of the common council approving the temporary or experimental regulation shall be in effect for such period of time as the resolution designates. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. II, § 13; Code 1985, § 70.17; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2575, 12-6-1982) 
Sec. 58-6. - Obedience to traffic code required. 
    It is a punishable violation for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to perform any act required by this chapter or traffic provisions of state law. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. III, § 2; Code 1985, § 70.26; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1960, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-7. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, the county, or the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. III, § 6; Code 1985, § 70.27; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Public employees to obey regulations, IC 9-21-1-6. 
Sec. 58-8. - Vehicle impoundment. 
(a)  Members of the police department are authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department, or otherwise maintained by this city under the circumstances enumerated as follows: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended on any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When a vehicle on a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of the vehicle is by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(3)  When any vehicle is left unattended on a street and is parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic. 
(4)  When any vehicle is parked in a "no parking" zone as set forth in article IX of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of removal and the reasons therefor, and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. In the event any vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. 
(c)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give notice to the owner as provided in subsection (b) of this section, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of three days, the officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for the removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored. 
(d)  The owner of the impounded vehicle shall be liable to the city, to the extent of the market value of the vehicle, for all of the costs incidental to the removal, storage, and disposal of the vehicle. This amount shall be recoverable in an action at law by the city against the vehicle owner. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVII, § 14; Code 1985, § 70.28; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3084, 8-18-1988) 
State Law reference- Officer authorized to remove certain vehicles, IC 9-21-16-4. 
Sec. 58-9. - Motor vehicle inspection fee. 
(a)  The police department is empowered to and shall collect a fee of $5.00 for services associated with the inspection of motor vehicles made under IC 9-17-2-12 pursuant to IC 9-29-4-2. 
(b)  The revenue generated by virtue of this section shall be delivered in a timely fashion to the city controller, who shall then deposit said revenue in a separate vehicle inspection fund. 
(c)  All revenue generated by virtue of this section shall be from time to time appropriated by the common council only for local law enforcement continuing education purposes. 
(Code 1985, § 70.29; Ord. No. 3249, 2-21-1989) 
Sec. 58-10. - Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this traffic code shall be punished by a fine as prescribed in section 1-7. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVII, § 1; Code 1985, § 70.99; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2823, 10-21-1985) 
Secs. 58-11-58-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC RULES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-39. - Use of coasters, roller skates, and the like. 
    No person shall operate or ride a scooter, skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device on any city street except while crossing a street at a crosswalk. When so crossing, the person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. III, § 5; Code 1985, § 71.002; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 4223, 10-20-1997) 
State Law reference- Rights and duties of pedestrians, IC 9-21-17-1 et seq. 
Sec. 58-40. - Unlawful riding on vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall ride on any vehicle or any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. III, § 4; Code 1985, § 71.003; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-41. - Opening, closing vehicle doors. 
    No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers or freight. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 9; Code 1985, § 71.005; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-42. - Use of streets by certain vehicles. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets on which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horsedrawn vehicles, or other nonmotorized traffic, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on the signs. 
(c)  No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any road engine, traction engine, tractor, or other heavy vehicle having lugs or spikes attached to the tread or wheels thereof on any asphalt-paved street or alley in the city limits. However, the engine or vehicle may be operated on such streets and alleys if guards or protectors are used to prevent damage to the pavement by the lugs or spikes. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 21, tit. 510, art. XV, § 3; Code 1985, §§ 71.00, 71.006; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to limit use by certain vehicles, see IC 9-20-1-3(a)(1). 
Sec. 58-43. - Backing of vehicles. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 8; Code 1985, § 71.008; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-44. - Obstructing intersections and crosswalks prohibited. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VII, § 8; Code 1985, § 71.009; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-45. - Parades. 
    No procession or parade except one of the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and fire departments shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the board of public works and safety and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 6; Code 1985, § 71.043; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate procession, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(3). 
Secs. 58-46-58-61. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUSES 

Sec. 58-62. - Buses not to block streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bus to stop within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 15(b); Code 1985, § 71.035; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-63. - Bus stops. 
(a)  Authority is vested in the city traffic engineer to designate bus stops at such locations and in such number as may be necessary and of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop the bus at any place for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers other than at a bus stop so designated as provided herein, except in case of emergency. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle at an authorized bus stop so designated as provided herein, or between the right curb and any such stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop thereat for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the discharge of passengers or the pick up of passengers then in readiness at the curb. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 17; Code 1985, § 71.036; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-64. - Buses not to pass on city streets. 
    No driver of a bus traveling on and over any city street shall overtake and pass any motor vehicle traveling on four or more wheels when such vehicle is in motion and moving in the same direction. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XV, § 4; Code 1985, § 71.037; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-65-58-117. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 58-118. - Conformance to state specifications. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state department of highways or resolution adopted by the common council of this city. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this division shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 2; Code 1985, § 71.050; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- City's authority to maintain traffic control devices, IC 9-21-4-3. 
Sec. 58-119. - Authority of city to install. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under the traffic code of this city to make effective the provisions of the traffic code, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic code of this city or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(b)  A permanent written record of the traffic control devices as so authorized shall be kept by the city traffic engineer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 1; Code 1985, § 71.051; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Local traffic control devices, IC 9-21-4-3. 
Sec. 58-120. - Presumption of legality. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, such devices shall be presumed to have been placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this traffic code and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 4; Code 1985, § 71.052; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-121. - Crosswalks. 
    The city engineer is hereby authorized to do the following: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines on the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 13; Code 1985, § 71.058; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish crosswalks, IC 9-21-17-4. 
Sec. 58-122. - Quiet zones. 
    Whenever signs are posted indicating a quiet zone, no person driving or operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound a horn or other audible warning device on the vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 20; Code 1985, § 71.059; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-123. - Traffic lanes. 
    The city engineer is authorized to mark traffic lanes on the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is deemed necessary. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 14; Code 1985, § 71.060; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-124. - Interference with official traffic control devices. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. IV, § 10; Code 1985, § 71.062; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-125-58-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TURNING MOVEMENTS 

Sec. 58-147. - Turning markers or signals at intersections. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to place pavement markers or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at the intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(b)  When authorized pavement markings, or other indicators are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indicators. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. V, § 2; Code 1985, § 71.071; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic via control signals, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(2); turns at intersections, IC 9-21-8-21. 
Sec. 58-148. - Restricted turn signals. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right-turn, left-turn, or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. 
(b)  The making of those turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or the signs may be removed at the times the turns are permitted. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. V, § 3; Code 1985, § 71.072; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate traffic at intersections, IC 9-21-8-21. 
Secs. 58-149-58-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 

Sec. 58-180. - Official traffic control device required. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VI, § 1; Code 1985, § 71.080; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-181. - Authority to restrict traffic direction during certain periods. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes on which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers, or other devices placed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VI, § 3; Code 1985, § 71.081; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish one-way streets, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(4). 
Secs. 58-182-58-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INTERSECTIONS 

Sec. 58-201. - Through streets. 
(a)  Those streets and parts of streets described in section 58-553 are declared to be through streets for the purpose of this division. 
(b)  Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to place and maintain a stop sign or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting the through street unless traffic at the intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. At the intersection of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets as may be determined by the city engineer on the basis of an engineering and traffic study. A permanent written record of all such signs as placed shall be kept by the city engineer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VII, §§ 1, 2; Code 1985, § 71.093; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-202. - Hazardous intersections. 
    The city engineer is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist on other than through streets and to determine the following: 
(1)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required; or 
(2)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. A permanent written record of all such signs as placed shall be kept by the city engineer. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VII, § 3; Code 1985, § 71.094; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-203. - All-way stop intersections. 
    Whenever an intersection is designated in section 58-554 as an all-way stop intersection, stop signs shall be erected at each entrance to the intersection, and for the purpose of this designation, it shall be immaterial that one or more of the intersecting streets may elsewhere be declared to be a through street. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VII, § 3; Code 1985, § 71.095; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-204-58-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-230. - Application of parking provisions. 
    The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIV, § 1; Code 1985, § 72.01; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-231. - Regulations imposing time limits. 
    The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIV, § 2; Code 1985, § 72.02; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-232-58-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-256. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle on a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(b)  All vehicles shall be parked within 12 inches of a curb or the edge of the roadway, and the front of the parked vehicle shall face in the direction of the flow of the adjoining lane of traffic. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 2, art. XIV, § 6; Code 1985, § 72.13; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-257. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 3; Code 1985, § 72.14; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-258. - Parking for sale or maintenance of vehicle prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale or hire or greasing or repairing it, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 5; Code 1985, § 72.15; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-259. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking on either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when the parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking on either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 6; Code 1985, § 72.16; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-260. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking on any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or on one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected on narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle on any such street in violation of any sign. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 7; Code 1985, § 72.17; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-261. - Parking on one-way streets and roadways. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized to erect signs on the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when the signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction on any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted on the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, §§ 8, 9; Code 1985, § 72.18; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-262. - Parking in hazardous or congested areas. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate by proper sign places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine and designate, by proper sign, places not exceeding 250 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles at signalized intersections would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 10; Code 1985, § 72.19; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3680, 4-19-1993) 
Sec. 58-263. - Parking vehicles used for transporting flammable liquids. 
(a)  No tank vehicle which is used for the transportation of flammable liquids shall be left unattended on any street or alley in the city. This shall not prevent a driver from the necessary absence from the truck in connection with the delivery of his load, except that during actual discharge of the liquid some responsible person shall be present at the vehicle, nor shall it prevent stops for meals during the day or at night if the street is well lighted at the parking place. 
(b)  Tank vehicles containing flammable liquids shall not be parked out of doors in the city at any one point for more than one hour, except off the streets, and at least 25 feet from any building used for assembly, institutional, or recreational occupancy. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 11; Code 1985, § 72.21; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-264. - All-night parking prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls on any city street when signs are posted advising of the parking limitation. 
(b)  No trailers or commercial vehicles shall park overnight on any city street. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XII, § 4; Code 1985, § 72.22; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-265. - Angle parking. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall determine on what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets. Nonetheless, angle parking shall not be indicated on any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the state department of highways has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive on the left side of the street. 
(c)  On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XI, §§ 2, 3; Code 1985, § 72.23; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(1). 
Sec. 58-266. - Parking fines. 
(a)  In the case of any violation of any section or provision of this chapter prohibiting or restricting parking on any public street or in any municipal parking lot, the fine for each violation shall be $10.00 if the fine is paid within five days of the date of the issuance of the parking citation, and the fine shall be $25.00 if paid more than five days after the date of issuance of the parking citation. The fine shall be paid to the city police department at the city police station, accompanied by the original or a copy of the written citation issued for the improper parking violation. 
(b)  In the case of any parking violation for vehicles parked in a designated fire lane, the fine for each violation shall be $50.00 if the fine is paid within ten days of the date of the issuance of the parking citation, and the fine shall be $75.00 if paid more than ten days after the issuance of the parking citation. The fine shall be paid to the city police department at the city police station, accompanied by the original or a copy of the written citation issued for the improper parking violation. 
(Ord. No. 5242, § 1, 12-7-2009) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 5242, adopted Dec. 7, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 58-266 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 58-267-58-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 58-294. - Designation of loading zones. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating them and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIII, § 1; Code 1985, § 72.30; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-295. - Permits for loading zones. 
(a)  Required. The city traffic engineer shall not hereafter designate or sign any loading zone on special request of any person unless the person applies for a permit for the zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of each zone. 
(b)  Annual fee; conditions on use of signs. The city traffic engineer on granting a permit and issuing the signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee of $10.00 per year or fraction thereof. In addition, he may by general regulations impose conditions on the use of the signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage, and their return in the event of misuse or on expiration of permit. 
(c)  Expiration. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIII, § 2; Code 1985, § 72.31; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-296. - Standing in loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to the loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. The stop for loading and unloading of materials shall not exceed 30 minutes unless the freight loading zone is designated herein in section 58-576. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIII, §§ 3, 4; Code 1985, § 72.32; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-297. - Designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on public streets in places and in numbers as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIII, § 5; Code 1985, § 72.33; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-298. - Buses, taxicab stands regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle on any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated. 
(b)  The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle on any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of the vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(e)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIII, §§ 6, 7; Code 1985, § 72.34; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-299-58-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH PHYSICAL DISABILITIES 

Sec. 58-330. - Persons who qualify as physically disabled. 
    The following persons qualify as being physically disabled for purposes of this division, and shall be entitled to all of the parking privileges authorized by this division: 
(1)  A person who has been issued disabled veteran registration plates by this state or any other state, and who displays the plates. 
(2)  A person who has been issued a special registration place or placard bearing the international wheelchair symbol by this state or any other state, or any political subdivision of this state, and who displays the plate or placard. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XX, § 1; Code 1985, § 72.40; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2647, 12-5-1983) 
State Law reference- Disabled veterans' parking, IC 9-18-18-1 et seq.; parking facilities for persons with physical disabilities, IC 5-16-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 58-331. - Designation of handicapped parking spaces. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety is authorized to designate spaces for handicapped parking which is reserved for persons with physical disabilities. 
(b)  Upon designation of a space for handicapped parking, the curb shall be painted blue and a vertical sign measuring at least 48 inches from the base of the sign shall be installed bearing the international wheel chair symbol and the words as follow: 
"HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY 
DISABLED PLATE OR PLACARD REQUIRED 
ALL OTHERS WILL BE TOWED AWAY AT 
OWNER'S EXPENSE" 
(c)  All angle parking spaces so designated shall be at least 13 feet wide. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XX, § 2; Code 1985, § 72.41; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2647, 12-5-1983) 
State Law reference- Reserved parking spaces to bear international symbol of accessibility, IC 5-16-9-2(e). 
Sec. 58-332. - Parking limits. 
    The provisions of this division shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe any parking time limit imposed by any ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XX, § 3; Code 1985, § 72.42; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2647, 12-5-1983) 
Sec. 58-333. - Use of designated parking spaces by nonhandicapped persons. 
    Any motor vehicle found parking in a space designated for handicapped parking which does not display a disabled veteran registration place or a special registration plate or placard bearing the international wheelchair symbol shall be fined $50.00 for the first 30-minute violation, and $50.00 for the second 30-minute violation. The vehicle shall be towed at the owner's expense if found to be in violation longer than one hour. If the fine issued pursuant to this section is not paid within ten days, the fine shall be increased to $75.00 for each violation not paid within ten days of its issuance. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XX, § 4; Code 1985, § 72.43; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2647, 12-5-1983; Ord. No. 3413, 9-4-1990; Ord. No. 5242, § 2, 12-7-2009) 
Secs. 58-334-58-354. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PARKING PERMITS 

Sec. 58-355. - Issuance of municipal parking lot permit. 
    A municipal parking lot permit shall be issued under the authority of the city board of public works on an annual basis for an annual fee and upon such other terms and conditions as the board of public works may from time to time determine, and shall be issued through such city agency or department as the board of public works may designate from time to time. The holder of such a municipal parking lot permit shall be entitled to park his vehicle to which the municipal parking lot permit was issued in any unused parking space which is not specifically reserved by posted sign, indicating an exclusive reserved parking space, in any of the municipal lots listed in section 58-575(6) in which parking by municipal parking permit is allowed as indicated above. The holder of such a municipal parking lot permit shall not be entitled to the exclusive use of any particular parking place or to the exclusive use of any space in any particular parking lot. 
(Code 1985, § 72.55; Ord. No. 2858, 2-18-1986) 
Sec. 58-356. - Issuance of exclusive reserved parking space permits. 
    The city board of public works is hereby authorized, from time to time, to issue one or more exclusive reserved parking space permits and to designate one or more parking spaces in municipal off-street parking lot number three as an exclusive reserved parking space. Each such exclusive reserved parking space shall be designated by a prominent sign, which shall state the person or entity for whom or for which said space is exclusively reserved. No person other than the holder of such exclusive reserved parking space permit shall be entitled to the use of such space for the parking of any vehicle which such exclusive permit holder may designate from time to time, in writing, to the city agency or department authorized by the board of public works and safety to issue municipal parking lot permits. The board of public works is authorized to issue such exclusive reserved parking space permits in consideration of the lease or sale of real estate to the city for use as a municipal off-street parking lot or for any other municipal purpose, such exclusive reserved parking space permit to be issued under such terms and conditions as the board of public works may negotiate pursuant to such lease or purchase agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 72.56; Ord. No. 2858, 2-18-1986) 
Secs. 58-357-58-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate bicycles, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(9); operation of bicycles and motorized bicycles, IC 9-21-11-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-386-58-413. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BICYCLE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-414. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means any vehicle coming within the common definition of the term, having one or more wheels, including, but not limited to, unicycles and tricycles. 
    Downtown business district means the real estate within the city, described as follows: commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Grove Street and Elizabeth Street; thence east, along the centerline of Grove Street to the centerline of Sarah Street; thence South along the centerline of Sarah Street to the south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue; thence west along the south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue to the east right-of-way line of Main Street; thence south along the east right-of-way line of Main Street to the north bank line of the St. Joseph River; thence south and east along the north bank line of the St. Joseph River to the center-line of Race Street (if projected north to the river's south bank); thence south along the (extended) centerline of Race Street to the centerline of Lincolnway East; thence west along the centerline of Lincolnway East/US 33 to the centerline of Church Street; thence south along the centerline of Church Street to the centerline of Third Street; thence east along the centerline of Third Street to the centerline of Race Street; thence south along the centerline of Race Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence west along the centerline of Fourth Street to the east right-of-way line of Church Street; thence south and east of along the east right-of-way line of Church Street to the south right-of-way line of the Conrail Railroad; thence west along the south right-of-way line of the Conrail Railroad to the centerline of Spring Street; thence north along the centerline of Spring Street to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence west along the centerline of Fourth Street to the centerline of West Street; thence north along the centerline of West Street to the south right-of-way line of Lincolnway West; thence west and southwest along the south right-of-way line of Lincolnway West to the east right-of-way line of Logan Avenue; thence north along the east right-of-way line of Logan Avenue to the north bank line of the St. Joseph River; thence east and north east along the north bank line of the St. Joseph River to the east right-of-way line of Forest Avenue; thence north along the east right-of-way line of Forest Avenue to the south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue; thence east along the south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue to the centerline of Elizabeth Street; thence north along the centerline of Elizabeth Street to the point of beginning. 
    Public property means any real estate in which any governmental entity or subdivision has any right, title or interest, whether by ownership, lease or otherwise. This shall include, but not be limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, municipal parking lots and the riverwalk. 
    Public right-of-way means any real estate dedicated for or over which the public has a general right of passage. 
    Rollerskate/rollerblade means a shoe, boot, or mechanism designed to attached to a shoe, boot or a person's foot, which is mounted upon one or more wheels. 
    Scooter means any wheeled vehicle which is propelled by motor or by its operator by resting a portion of his body weight upon the vehicle while pushing against the ground with another portion of the operator's body. The term shall not include a wheelchair or wheelchair-like device used primarily to aid disabled individuals' mobility. 
    Skateboard means a board consisting of manmade or natural material which is mounted upon wheels. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, §§ 14(a), (c), 19; Code 1985, § 73.02; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3389, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 4950, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 58-415. - Riding on roadways, bicycle paths, and sidewalks. 
(a)  Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway. 
(c)  No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk or on any public right-of-way within the downtown business district, except in such places as are marked as bicycle paths. Bicycle paths shall consist substantially of the public streets and the riverwalk. Bicycles must be walked through nonriverwalk sections of the parks. 
(d)  No person shall operate or ride a scooter, motorized scooter, or skateboard on any public right-of-way within the downtown business district. 
(e)  This section shall at no time prohibit disabled individuals using mobility assistance devices from the use of any public sidewalk or space. Nor shall police officers patrolling the district on bicycles be prohibited from the use of any public sidewalk or space. 
(f)  The chief of police is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon and/or requiring bicycles to be parked and secured or walked by any person, and when the signs are in place, no person shall disobey them. 
(g)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle on a sidewalk, he shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, §§ 14(a), (c), 19; Code 1985, § 73.02; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3389, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 4950, §§ 1, 2, 7-5-2005) 
State Law reference- Audible signals, IC 9-21-11-8. 
Sec. 58-416. - Traffic rules. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right-turn, left-turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, §§ 11, 12; Code 1985, § 73.07; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- Bicyclists to obey traffic laws, IC 9-21-11-2. 
Sec. 58-417. - Speed. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, § 15; Code 1985, § 73.08; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-418. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, on approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, § 16; Code 1985, § 73.09; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-419. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle on a street other than on the roadway against the curb or on the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, § 18; Code 1985, § 73.10; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-420. - Registration and licensing. 
(a)  License required. No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street or on any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless the bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein. 
(b)  Application form. Application for a bicycle license and license plate shall be made on a form provided by the city and shall be made to the chief of police. 
(c)  Issuance of license; records. 
(1)  The chief of police on receiving proper application therefor is authorized to issue a bicycle license which shall be effective for the calendar year. 
(2)  The chief of police shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner of or entitled to the possession of the bicycle. 
(3)  The chief of police shall keep a record of the number of each license, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle license fees collected by him. 
(d)  License plate. 
(1)  The chief of police on issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle, the name of the city, and the calendar year for which issued. 
(2)  The chief of police shall cause the license plate to be firmly attached to the rear mudguard or frame of the bicycle for which issued in a position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(3)  No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle during the period for which issued except on a transfer of ownership or in the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated on any street in this city. 
(e)  Expiration; renewal. Upon the expiration of any bicycle license, it may be renewed on application and payment of the same fee as on an original application. 
(f)  Sale of bicycle. Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate and shall either surrender it to the chief of police or may on proper application but without payment of additional fee have the plate assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, §§ 2-5, 7, 8; Code 1985, § 73.11; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- City's authority to require registration and licensing of bicycles, IC 9-21-1-3(a)(9). 
Sec. 58-421. - Rental agencies; dealers. 
(a)  License and license plate required. A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein and the bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this division. 
(b)  Quarterly report to chief of police. Every person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a quarterly report to the chief of police of every bicycle purchased or sold by the dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of the bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of license plate, if any, found thereon. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, §§ 9, 10; Code 1985, § 73.12; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-422. - Inspection. 
    The chief of police, or an officer assigned such responsibility, shall inspect each bicycle before licensing it and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. X, § 6; Code 1985, § 73.13; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-423-58-442. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOTORCYCLE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 58-443. - Limitations as to where motorcycle may be operated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a motorcycle in the city any where except on a public street or alley or designated driveway or parking place on private property. 
(b)  No motorcycle shall be operated on a railroad right-of-way or private property, unless the express written consent has been obtained from the owner of the real estate. 
(c)  No motorcycle shall be operated on any sidewalk. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. VIII, § 10(c); Code 1985, § 73.21; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2083, 9-6-1977) 
Secs. 58-444-58-469. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRUCKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- City's authority to restrict use of highways, IC 9-20-1-3. 

Sec. 58-470. - Truck routes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Truck means a vehicle with an overall length of 20 feet or more, or over one-ton capacity, and includes semitrailer trucks and either the tractor pulling the same, or the trailer itself. The term "truck" includes every self-propelled commercial vehicle used for the transport of goods or property described as follows: 
(1)  From a point outside the city through the city to a point outside the city; 
(2)  From a point outside the city to a point within the city limits; 
(3)  From a point within the city limits to a point outside the city limits; or 
(4)  From a point within the city limits to a point within the city limits. 
(b)  Truck routes. Neither the driver nor the owner or lessee of a truck shall allow any of the following: 
(1)  No truck as previously defined herein shall be operated in the corporate limits of the city except upon the following streets and parts of streets shown upon a map entitled "Schedule VI," incorporated herein by reference. At least two copies of said map shall be on file in the office of the clerk for public inspection. Such streets and parts of streets are hereby designated as official truck routes: 
Street From To Bittersweet Road US-33 Northerly city limit Capital Avenue Twelfth Street Northerly city limit Grape Road US-20 SR-23 SR-23 City limit City limit SR-331 Southerly city limit US-20 McKinley Avenue (Business 20) City limit City limit Twelfth Street SR-331 Capital Avenue US-20 City limit City limit US-33 City limit City limit Logan Street US-20 US-33  
(2)  Trucks traveling from a point outside the city through the city to a point outside the city shall enter the city and proceed to the point within the city which is their destination in accordance with the shortest combination of state or federal highways and city truck routes as shown upon a map entitled Schedule VI. 
(3)  Trucks traveling from a point outside the city to a point within the city limits shall follow state or federal highways or city truck routes as shown on Schedule VI from the point upon such routes which is nearest to their point of beginning. They shall not travel upon any other public streets of the city, except as provided in this section. 
(4)  Trucks traveling from a point within the city limits to a point outside the city limits shall proceed from the point within the city which is their starting point to the city limits by the shortest combination of state and federal highways and city truck routes shown upon Schedule VI. 
(5)  Trucks traveling from a point within the city limits to another point within the city limits shall proceed from the point within the city which is their starting point to the nearest truck route or state and federal highway, as shown upon Schedule VI. 
(c)  Restrictions. Neither the driver nor the owner or lessee of a truck shall allow any of the following: 
(1)  No truck shall be operated upon any public streets not designated as a truck route in Schedule VI of the city at any time; provided that such trucks may be permitted upon such other public streets of the city, upon the direction of a city or state police officer, to follow a marked and established city detour, or to obtain necessary emergency mechanical repairs. 
(2)  All trucks as defined in this section shall proceed by the shortest combination of state and federal highways and city truck routes shown upon Schedule VI, and shall be prohibited from driving upon other city streets unless said trucks are in the process of delivering or picking up goods, in which event, said trucks shall utilize only the most direct truck routes, which will allow said trucks to arrive as close to their pickup and delivery point as possible and only then shall said trucks be permitted to utilize nontruck routes. A driver must produce a written bill of lading or similar document if stopped while driving on a city street which is not designated as a city truck route as shown in Schedule VI or detour route to verify compliance with these restrictions. 
(3)  All trucks within the city as defined in this section when finished delivering or picking up goods shall return to the nearest truck route by the most direct route. This includes such trucks which have additional destinations within the city. Shortcuts on non-truck-routes are expressly prohibited. 
(4)  No truck shall stop, stand, or park on any street in this city other than for the immediate loading or unloading of freight, except in cases of emergency when such truck is broken down and unable to move, and except also in the event a moving van is loading or unloading furniture and household goods, or the furniture, equipment, goods, wares, and merchandise of a business. In either of these events the operator of such truck will have a reasonable time in which to complete his loading or unloading and move his truck. Any truck so stopped, standing, or parked may be impounded and towed at the direction of a city police officer at the expense of the owner or lessee in order to promote the safe and free flow operation or traffic in the city. 
(d)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to vehicles operating upon tracks, common carriers of public passengers, service vehicles operated by a public utility, or vehicles operated by the city or its contractors. 
(e)  Signs. The traffic department is hereby authorized to cause all streets and portions thereof established and designated by this section as truck routes to be clearly marked or signposted at their intersections with other truck routes or boundary lines of the city with appropriate signs displaying in letters not less than four inches in height the words "truck route." 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XV, § 2; Code 1985, § 74.01; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3055, 6-16-1987; Ord. No. 3303, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 4192, 7-21-1997; Ord. No. 4405, 6-21-1999) 
Editor's note- The map referred to in subsection (b) of this section is not set out herein but can be found on file in the city's offices. 
State Law reference- City's authority to establish truck routes, IC 9-20-1-3(c). 
Sec. 58-471. - Weight restrictions on certain streets. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any commercial vehicle exceeding 12,000 pounds gross weight at any time on any of the streets or parts thereof, except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise and then only by entering the street at the intersection nearest the designation of the vehicle and proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter. 
(b)  This restriction shall not apply to passenger buses operating on regular schedules and routes in the city, if the schedules and routes include passage over and on the restricted streets. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XV, § 1; Code 1985, § 74.02; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
State Law reference- City's authority to impose weight restrictions, IC 9-20-1-3(c). 
Sec. 58-472. - Passing on city streets. 
    No driver of a motor truck having a rated load capacity in excess of 11/2 tons, or driver of a tractor-trailer or tractor-semitrailer combination traveling on and over any city street shall overtake and pass any motor vehicle traveling on four or more wheels when the vehicle is in motion and moving in the same direction. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XV, § 4; Code 1985, § 74.03; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Secs. 58-473-58-497. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Use of highways restricted due to inclement weather, IC 9-20-1-3(a). 

Sec. 58-498. - Limitations on use of certain warning devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or the engineer or fireman or other person in charge of a locomotive engine, being operated within the corporate limits of the city, to sound the whistle or ring the bell on the locomotive engine at any highway crossing or at any approach thereof where the crossing is protected by a watchman or automatic device, except in cases where it is apparent that a vehicle or a pedestrian is in a place of danger. 
(Code 1968, tit. 430, § 2; Code 1985, § 75.02; Ord. No. 988, 10-4-1948) 
State Law reference- Signals at crossings, IC 8-6-4-1. 
Sec. 58-499. - Limitations on use of whistles. 
(a)  No person operating or controlling any locomotive engine shall sound the whistle or horn thereof, or allow it to be sounded, on approaching or crossing the Grand Trunk Western Railroad Company crossings at the following streets in the city: 
(1)  Clay Street. 
(2)  Division Street. 
(3)  Fir Road. 
(4)  Jefferson Boulevard. 
(5)  Liberty Drive. 
(6)  Logan Street. 
(7)  Main Street. 
(8)  McKinley Highway. 
(b)  No person operating or controlling any locomotive engine shall sound the whistle or horn thereof, or allow it to be sounded, on approaching or crossing the Conrail crossings at the following streets in the city: 
(1)  Beiger Street. 
(2)  Byrkit Street. 
(3)  Capital Avenue. 
(4)  Carlton Street. 
(5)  Delorenzi Street. 
(6)  Elder Street. 
(7)  Hendricks Street. 
(8)  Ironwood Drive. 
(9)  Kline Street. 
(10)  Laurel Street. 
(11)  Logan Street. 
(12)  Main Street. 
(13)  Merrifield Avenue. 
(14)  Oakside Street. 
(15)  Russell Avenue. 
(16)  Smith Street. 
(17)  Spring Street. 
(18)  Wells Street. 
(19)  West Street. 
(Code 1968, tit. 430, §§ 3, 4; Code 1985, § 75.03; Ord. of 12-16-1974) 
State Law reference- When city may limit whistle-sounding, IC 8-6-4-1(c). 
Secs. 58-500-58-521. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SNOW EMERGENCIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Use of highways restricted due to inclement weather, IC 9-20-1-3(a). 

Sec. 58-522. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pushing snow means the moving of an amount of snow that may impede or unnecessarily hamper traffic flow or utilization of sidewalks or other public rights-of-way. 
    Residential emergency means a snow removal condition which applies to all streets that are not snow routes. 
    Snow means any precipitation depositing any accumulation on the streets and sidewalks, including snow, sleet, hail, ice, and freezing rain. 
    Snow emergency means a snow removal condition which applies to all streets designated as snow routes. 
    Snow removal condition means a formal declaration by the snow removal coordinator that in his opinion the actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous or dangerous street and sidewalk conditions. This declaration shall take one of the following forms: 
(1)  Snow emergency; 
(2)  Residential emergency; or 
(3)  Weather disaster. 
    Snow removal coordinator means the mayor, or in his absence the following succession of people shall qualify: street commissioner, city engineer, or such other person as may be designated by the mayor. 
    Snow routes means all streets in the city so designated and marked. 
    Vehicles means all self-propelled motorized vehicles using city streets and highways, excluding public transportation conveyances. 
    Weather disaster means a formal declaration by the snow removal coordinator that the occurrence or eminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a snowstorm requires emergency action to avert danger, damage, or distress. 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. I, § 1; Code 1985, § 76.01; Ord. No. 1354, 2-8-1966; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-523. - Designation of snow routes. 
(a)  The board of public works and safety shall designate certain streets which are heavily traveled and which provide a network of thoroughfares for the movement in the city of vehicular traffic as snow routes. 
(b)  All such streets designated as snow routes shall be posted with suitable signs or markers. 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. I, § 2; Code 1985, § 76.02; Ord. No. 1354, 2-8-1966; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-524. - Snow removal conditions. 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the snow removal coordinator, the actual or expected precipitation of snow will create hazardous or dangerous highway conditions for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, he shall have the authority to declare a snow removal condition. 
(b)  When declaring a snow removal condition, the snow removal coordinator shall designate one of the following conditions to be in effect: 
(1)  Snow emergency; 
(2)  Residential emergency; or 
(3)  Weather disaster. 
(c)  A snow removal condition shall be declared by the snow removal coordinator by issuing a media release to the local radio, television, and news services. 
(d)  The snow removal condition shall continue in force and effect until the snow removal coordinator declares it to be over in the same manner as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. I, § 3; Code 1985, § 76.03; Ord. No. 1354, 2-8-1966; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-525. - Traffic regulations during snow emergency, weather disaster. 
(a)  When the snow removal coordinator has declared a snow emergency, the following traffic regulations shall be in effect: 
(1)  No vehicle shall be parked on a snow route. 
(2)  Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own power, or left unattended on any street designated as a snow route shall be ticketed, towed, or impounded. 
(3)  Parking prohibitions on snow routes shall remain in effect until the snow emergency is cancelled or modified by the snow removal coordinator as provided in section 58-524(c). 
(b)  When the snow removal coordinator has declared a residential emergency, the following traffic regulations shall be in effect: 
(1)  Parking shall be allowed on all snow routes unless otherwise prohibited. 
(2)  Parking shall be banned on all streets not designated as snow routes between the hours of 9:00 a.m. of each day of the emergency and 8:59 a.m. of the following day in sequence in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  Even-numbered days: No parking on that side of the street with odd numbered addresses; 
b.  Odd-numbered days: No parking on that side of the street with even numbered addresses. 
This subsection (2) shall not apply to streets which have prohibited parking on one side. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own power, or left unattended on any street in violation of subsection (b) of this section shall be ticketed, towed, or impounded. 
(d)  Parking bans as established under subsection (b) of this section shall remain in force and effect on a rotating basis until the entire street has been cleared to the curbline, or until the residential emergency has been cancelled by the snow removal coordinator as provided in section 58-524(c). 
(e)  When the snow removal coordinator has declared a weather disaster, the following traffic regulations shall be in effect: 
(1)  The snow removal coordinator shall have the power to limit all traffic within the city. Anyone traveling on city streets without a valid emergency reason shall be subject to the penalties of this article. 
(2)  The snow removal coordinator shall have the power to establish any or all parking restrictions which, in his opinion, are necessary to ensure the health and safety of the citizens. Any vehicle parked, stalled, incapable of moving under its own power, or left unattended on any street in violation of these restrictions shall be ticketed, towed, or impounded. 
(3)  The snow removal coordinator shall have the power to designate vehicles such as street department vehicles, or other city vehicles, four-wheel drive vehicles, and snowmobiles as temporary emergency vehicles if in his opinion the designation is necessary to ensure the health and safety of the citizens of the community. Any individual abusing the services of these or other emergency vehicles shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this article and shall be liable to and shall reimburse the city for all costs expended in responding to any false call. 
(4)  The snow removal coordinator shall have the power to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens during a weather disaster. 
(5)  All traffic restrictions, parking bans, and any other action taken during a weather disaster by the snow removal coordinator shall remain in effect until the weather disaster has been cancelled by the snow removal coordinator as provided in section 58-524(c). 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. I, § 4; Code 1985, § 76.04; Ord. No. 1354, 2-8-1966; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-526. - Restrictions on depositing snow and ice. 
(a)  No person shall push, deposit, or cause or allow to be pushed or deposited any snow or ice on or against any fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, street, roadway, or loading and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be windrowed on public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any premises who employs or hires a third person to remove snow from his premises shall be responsible and liable in the event that the third person pushes, deposits, or causes to be pushed or deposited any snow or ice on or against any fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, street, roadway, or loading or unloading areas of a public transportation system. 
(Code 1985, § 76.05; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-527. - Owner/occupant to remove snow. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land lying within the city shall keep all sidewalks adjacent to the lot or parcel of land free from any leaves, grass, snow, ice, sand, gravel, dirt, or other debris during all seasons of the year. In addition, after any snowfall, the owner or occupant shall remove the snow or cause it to be removed from all sidewalks adjacent to the lot or parcel of land within 24 hours after the snowfall. 
(b)  Where dwellings contain more than one occupant, the person occupying the front lower floor, commonly called the ground floor, shall be liable for the removal of the snow, and where premises are unoccupied or where for any reason the occupant fails or refuses to remove the snow, it shall be the duty of the owner of the lot or parcel of land to remove the snow. 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. II, § 1; Code 1985, § 76.06; Ord. No. 300, 8-6-1906; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982; Ord. No. 4252, 3-2-1998) 
Sec. 58-528. - Payment of fine to constitute guilty plea. 
(a)  Any person charged with violation of this article whether by ticket, citation, or affidavit, shall have the option of paying the fine imposed within the time specified in the notice of arrest at the traffic violations bureau on entering a plea of guilty and on waiving appearance in court. 
(b)  The payment of a fine to the traffic violations bureau shall be deemed an acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the traffic violations bureau, on accepting the prescribed fine, shall issue a receipt to the violator as acknowledging payment thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 76.07; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 58-529. - Other remedies. 
    In addition to all other remedies, the city may at its discretion file suit in a civil action in any court having jurisdiction thereof for an injunction against any person to prohibit the continual violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, tit. 470, art. I, § 5; Code 1985, § 76.99; Ord. No. 1354, 2-8-1966; Ord. No. 2539, 7-19-1982) 
Secs. 58-530-58-551. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 58-552. - Schedule I, speed limits. 
(a)  The speed limits for the following streets shall be as set forth below: 
Street Description Speed Limit
(mph) Beacon Parkway From Fir Road to Capital Avenue 35 mph Bremen Highway From Dragoon to Chandler 35 mph Bremen Highway From Walter St. to U.S. 20 Bypass 40 mph Day Road From Filbert Road to the Eastern City Limits 40 mph Day Road From Grape Road to Filbert Road 35 Douglas Road From Eastern City Limits to Western City Limits 40 mph Dragoon From the Eastern City Limits to the Western City Limits 35 mph East Eleventh Street From Laurel Street to Union Street 20 Edison Road From Logan to Main Street 35 mph Fir Road From McKinley Avenue to Day Road 35 mph Grape Road From McKinley Avenue to Edison Road 35 mph Grape Road From Edison Road to North City Limits 40 mph Ireland Road From the Western City Limits to Bremen Highway 35 mph John Street From Park Avenue to Edgewater Drive 20 Main Street From McKinley Ave to Catalpa Ave 30 mph Main Street From Catalpa to Day Road 35 mph Main Street From Day Road to North City Limits 40 mph Marion Street From Main Street to Division Street 20 McKinley Avenue From Logan to Fir Road 35 mph McKinley Avenue From Fir Road to the Eastern City Limits 45 mph Niles Avenue From Lincolnway East to Mishawaka Avenue 20 Park Avenue From Cedar Street to John Street 20 Shanower Court From E. Jefferson Boulevard to the Golf Course 20 mph Tenth Street From Laurel Street to Union Street 20 Twelfth Street/Harrison Rd. From Eastern City Limits to Capital Ave 35 mph Twelfth Street/Harrison Rd. From Capital Avenue to Merrifield Ave. 35 mph Union Street From Twelfth Street to Dragoon 35 mph University Drive From Grape Road to Fir Road 35 mph  
(b)  There is hereby established a 20-mile per hour speed limit in school zones, which school zones shall be defined by the city traffic engineer in written designations thereof which shall be kept on file in the office of the city traffic engineer for public inspection and which school speed zones shall be prominently posted by appropriate signs erected adjacent to the curbs of streets in said school speed zones. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XIX, § 1; Code 1985, ch. 77, sched. I; Ord 1360, 5-22-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2939, 9-22-1986; Ord. No. 2961, 11-3-1986; Ord. No. 3241, 1-3-1989; Ord. No. 3762, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 3806, 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 3846, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 5253, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 5553 , § 1, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 58-553. - Schedule II, through streets. 
    The streets designated below shall be through streets in accordance with section 58-201(a). 
Beiger Street. 
Broadway. 
Byrkit Street. 
Capital Avenue. 
Cedar Street. 
Church Street. 
Division Street. 
Eighth Street. 
Ironwood Drive. 
Jefferson Boulevard. 
Laurel Street. 
Liberty Drive. 
Lincolnway East. 
Lincolnway West. 
Logan Street. 
Main Street. 
McKinley Highway. 
Merrifield Avenue. 
Milburn Boulevard. 
Mishawaka Avenue. 
Spring Street. 
Twelfth Street. 
Vistula Road. 
West Street. 
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 2; Code 1985, ch. 77, sched. II; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Sec. 58-554. - Schedule III, all-way stop intersections. 
    Four-way stops are mandatory at the following intersections: 
Description Ord. No. Battell and Sarah Battell and Willow Beiger Street and Third Street 3433 Beiger Street and Fourth Street 3433 Bennington Drive and Beacon Drive/Court 4165 Benton and Lawrence Blackberry Road and Harrison Road 4477 Broadway and Division Street Broadway and Liberty Drive Cedar and Merrifield Clay and Battell Clay and Lawrence Clover and LaSalle 4054 Cottage Avenue and Behney Dale and Delaware Street 5103 Delaware and Somerset Delaware and Hendricks 3993 Delaware Street at Alabama Street 5261 Delaware Street at Middleboro Avenue 5261 Division and Pregel Drive Donaldson and Webster Edgewater Drive and John Street 5263 Eighth and Smith Street 3820 Eighth and Spring Eighth and West East Eleventh Street at Michigan Avenue 5253 East Eleventh Street at Iowa Street 5253 Eleventh and Spring Eleventh Street and West Street 3513 Forest and Wilson Boulevard Fourth and Byrkit Fourth and Delorenzi Fourth and Laurel Fourth and Merrifield Fourth and Smith Fourth and Spring Fourth and Wenger Street 3810 Fourth and West Front and West Gernhart Avenue and Linden Avenue 3974 Grove Street and Ann Street 5235 Hampton Road and Kensington Place 3974 Home and LaSalle 4054 Homewood Avenue and Niles Avenue 2938 Indiana Avenue and Homewood Avenue 3810 Jackson Street and Delaware Street 3525 Jefferson and Merrifield Marion and Sarah Marion and Willow Merrifield Avenue, Wood Lane, and Blair Hills Avenue 2327 Merrifield Avenue and Fifth Street Merrifield Avenue and Twelfth Street 2962 Ninth and West Panama Street at Meridian Street 5261 Pine and Comfort Place River Avenue and Russell Avenue 2555 Russell and Delaware Seventh and Smith 2377 Seventh and West Seventeenth and Conner Drive/Lovechio Drive 4054 Sixth and Spring Sixth and West Sixteenth Street at Main Spring Street and Fourteenth Street Spring Street and Seventh 2462 Studebaker Street and Linden Avenue 4512 Tenth and Laurel Tenth and Iowa Street 3806 Tenth and Michigan Street 3806 Tenth and Taylor Street 2567 Third and Delorenzi Street 2567 Third and Merrifield Third and Mill Third and Race Third and Spring Third and Union Third and Virgil Street 2412 Third and Wenger 3132 Third and West Thirteenth and Main Thirteenth and Spring Thirteenth and Taylor Street 2567 Thirteenth and Union Webster Avenue and Battell Street West and Thirteenth Wilson Boulevard and Clay Street 4851  
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 2(a); Code 1985, ch. 77, sched. III; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2500, 1-4-1982; Ord. No. 3433, 11-5-1990; Ord. No. 3513, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 3525, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 3806, 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 3810, 2-7-1994; Ord. No. 3820, 3-7-1994; Ord. No. 3974, 9-5-1995; Ord. No. 3993, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 4054, 6-3-1996; Ord. No. 4165, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 4477, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 4512, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 4851, § 1, 6-7-2004; Ord. No. 5103, § 1, 5-10-2007; Ord. No. 5235, § 1, 11-2-2009; Ord. No. 5253, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 5261, 6-21-2010; Ord. No. 5263, § 2, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 5553 , § 2, 12-5-2016) 
Sec. 58-555. - Schedule IV, one-way streets and alleys. 
    The following streets and alleys and portions of streets and alleys are hereby declared to be one-way streets and alleys, the traffic to move thereon in the direction indicated: 
Street Location Direction Ord. No. Alley between Church Street and Race Street From Lincolnway East to First Street North Alley between Main Street and Church Street From Lincolnway East to Front Street North Alley between Main Street and Church Street From Lincolnway East to Third Street South Alley between Mill Street and Main Street From Lincolnway West to Front Street North Alley between Mill Street and Main Street From Lincolnway West to Fourth Street South Beall Court From Fourth Street to Castleman Court South Castleman Court From Beall Court East to Union Street Edgewater Drive Between Mishawaka Avenue and John Street South 5263 Gernhart Street From Lincolnway East to Mishawaka Avenue North Jackson Street From Milburn Boulevard to Delaware Street South Hendricks Street From Delaware Street to Milburn Boulevard North Mason Street From Lincolnway East to Third Street South Slick Court From Towle Avenue to West Street East State Street From Mishawaka Avenue to Lincolnway East South Union Street From Lincolnway East to Fourth Street South 3464 Wenger Street From Lincolnway East to Mishawaka Avenue North 3084  
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 1; Code 1985, ch. 77, sched. IV; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3037, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 3464, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3473, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 3761, 10-4-1993; Ord. No. 4264, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 4265, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 5263, § 3, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 5553 , § 3, 12-5-2016) 
Secs. 58-556-58-573. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING SCHEDULES 

Sec. 58-574. - Schedule I, parking prohibited at all times. 
    When properly posted, no person shall park a vehicle at any time on any of the following streets or portions of streets in any of the following zones: 
Street Location Side Ord. No. Beall Court South of Castleman Court Both Beiger Street From Lincolnway East south to the first east-west alley Both Bittersweet Road From Lincolnway East north to the St. Joseph River Both 3679 Blair Hills Avenue From Dragoon Trail to Bowdoin Drive Both 3679 Blair Hills Avenue From Merrifield Avenue east to Dragoon Trail Both 3759 Byrkit Street From Lincolnway East to Mishawaka Avenue East Castleman Court North Catalpa Drive From Main Street to Grape Road Both Cedar Street From Alice Street to Mishawaka Avenue East Cedar Street Between Battell and Broadway East 2472 Cedar Street From Fourth Street to Lincolnway East 4097 Cedar Street From Fourth Street to the first alley south of Lincolnway West except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 4097 Cedar Street From the Grand Trunk Western Railroad right-of-way to Jefferson Boulevard East Cedar Street From Lincolnway to McKinley Avenue Both 4097 Cedar Street From the first alley south of Lincolnway to Lincolnway West 4097 Center Street From Lincolnway west north to the One Hundred Center Parking lot Both 2536 Church Street From First Street to Seventh Street Both 2751 Day Road From Grape Road to the eastern city limits, as extended Both, and within 15 feet of the edge of the pavement 2873 Delorenzi Street From Lincolnway to Homewood West Division Street From Battell Street to Broadway West Division Street From Stanley Street to Jefferson Boulevard West Douglas Road From the western city limits, as extended, to the eastern city limits, as extended Both, and within 15 feet of the edge of the pavement 2873 Edgewater Drive From Cedar Street to Mishawaka Avenue River Edison Lakes Parkway All Both 3497 Edison Road From the western city limits, as extended, to Main Street Both, and within 15 feet of the edge of the pavement 2873 Eighth Street For the first 400 feet west of Cleveland Street North 2753 Eleventh Street From Laurel Street to Union Street North Elizabeth Street From Mishawaka Avenue to Grove Street East Fifth Street From Byrkit Street to Campbell Street Both Fisher Court From Fourth Street south to dead end Both 3899 A.A. Fourth Street The first 1/2 block west of Main Street North 2669 Fourth Street From Main Street to Church Street South 5179 Front Street From Hill Street to West Street South 2517 Front Street From the west side of Main Street to the west side of Spring Street North 2874 Gernhart Avenue From Lincolnway East to South line of Homewood Avenue West 3084 Gernhart Avenue From Mishawaka Avenue to Prospect Drive West 4733 Grape Road From McKinley Highway to the city limits (as extended) Both Grove Street 100 block east-20 feet on either side of access driveway of municipal parking lot South Grove Street 100 block west-20 feet on either side of access driveway of municipal parking lot South Home Street From US 20 north to Day Road Both 3679 Homewood Avenue From Gernhart to Virgil Street South Homewood Avenue From Studebaker Street to Wenger Avenue North 3084 Homewood Avenue From Niles Avenue to Wenger Avenue South 3084 Indian Ridge From Grape Road east to Main Street Both 3679 Indiana Avenue From Mishawaka Avenue to Prospect Drive West Industrial Drive 12th Street and Southern terminus Both 3187 Ironwood Drive From the St. Joseph River to Lincolnway West Both 3847 Ironwood Drive From Lincolnway West to Ewing Street East 3847 Jefferson Boulevard From Cedar Street to the Grand Trunk Railroad Company tracks North Jefferson Boulevard From Chestnut Street to Cedar Street South Jefferson Boulevard From Forest Avenue to Benton Street South Jefferson Boulevard From Main Street to Liberty Drive Both Jefferson Boulevard From Merrifield Avenue to Byrkit Street Both Laurel Street From Fourth Street to Fifth Street East Lauren Street First alley south of Lincolnway East and Norfolk and Southern Railroad East 4652 Liberty Drive From Broadway to Fairmont Both Liberty Drive From Fairmont Avenue to McKinley Highway Both Liberty Drive 100 feet north of north side of Mishawaka Avenue East 2964 Liberty Drive 60 feet north of north side of Mishawaka Avenue West 2964 Lincolnway East From Byrkit Street to Home Street South Lincolnway East From Capital Avenue to Bittersweet South Lincolnway East* From Church Street to Race Street 
*Except three spaces west of Race (north) Both 5179 Lincolnway East From Laurel Street to Byrkit Street Both Lincolnway East 240 feet west of the west side of Pine Street North 2104 Lincolnway East 50 feet east of the east side of Union Street South 3083 Lincolnway West From Towle Avenue to Baker Street South Lincolnway West 290 feet east of Ironwood Drive South 2634 Lincolnway West From West Street to Towle Avenue Both Linden Avenue Between Byrkit Street and Miami Club Drive North 4545 Linden Avenue From George Street to Home Street North 2410 Linden Avenue From Wenger Avenue to Gernhart Avenue North 3083 Logan Street (Hickory Road) From Jefferson Boulevard north to the city limits as extended East Logan Street From Lincolnway West to Dragoon Trail Both Logan Street From the St. Joseph River to Jefferson Boulevard East 3899 A.A. Main Street From the Grand Trunk Western Railroad tracks to Jefferson Boulevard West Main Street From Jefferson Boulevard north to city limits, as extended Both 3679 Main Street From Seventh Street south to Eighth Street East 3759 Main Street From the St. Joseph River to Grove Street Both McKinley Avenue City limit to city limit Both 4404 Merrifield Avenue From Lincolnway East to Third Street East Merrifield Avenue 297 feet north of Lincolnway East East 2500 Merrifield Avenue From Twelfth Street south to Blair Hills Avenue/Wood Lane Both 3759 Michigan Street From Twelfth Street to Thirteenth Street West 3994 Mishawaka Avenue From east line extended of Charlotte Street to west line extended of Ann Street South 2964 Mishawaka Avenue 100 feet east of east side of Liberty Drive North 2964 Mishawaka Avenue 220 feet west of Main Street South 3137 Mishawaka Avenue 130 feet west of Main Street North 3137 Mishawaka Avenue 280 feet east of Main Street North 3137 Mishawaka Avenue 260 feet east of Main Street South 3137 Park Avenue From Cedar Street to John Street Both sides of the center parkway Pine Street From Fourth Street south to railroad right-of-way West Prairie Avenue From Lincolnway East south 40 feet West (except Sundays and holidays) 3390 River Avenue From Strathmoor Avenue to Ironwood Drive North Sarah Street 500 block Both 2588 Sarah Street 600 block north - 20 feet on either side of access drive of municipal parking lot West Sixth Street From Hendricks Street to Meridian Street South Sixth Street From Main Street to Ironwood North (except Sundays and holidays) 2683; 3806 State Street From Mishawaka Avenue to Prospect Drive West Taylor Street From Lincolnway West to Fifth Street East 4663 Tenth Street From Laurel Street to Union Street North Third Street Church Street, west to the first north-south alley North 4848 Third Street From Union Street to Pine Street South Third Street From West Street to Spring Street North 5179 Thirteenth Street From Union Street to Michigan North Towle Avenue From Lincolnway West north to dead end West 2588 Twelfth Street From Laurel Street to Union Street North Union Street From Fourth Street south to railroad right-of-way East Union Street From Thirteenth Street north to Seventh Street Both 3679 Union Street From Thirteenth Street to Dragoon Trail Both 4478 Virgil Street From Lincolnway East to Third Street East Vistula Avenue From Lincolnway East to Bittersweet Road South Vistula Avenue From Lincolnway East to Oakley Avenue North Wells Street From Sixth Street to Seventh Street East Wells Street From Lincolnway West to Third Street West West Street From LWW to First half block north East 5179 Wood Lane From Dragoon Trail to southern end Both 3679 Wood Lane From Merrifield Avenue west to Dragoon Trail Both 3759 No parking zone consisting of Transportation Center consisting of the following described real estate: Lot numbered Seven on Mill Street as shown on the recorded additional plat of St. Joseph Ironworks, now within and a part of the city. 2245  
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 3; Code 1985, ch. 78, sched. I; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 3084, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 3390, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 3497, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 3679, 4-19-1993; Ord. No. 3759, 9-27-1993; Ord. No. 3806, 1-3-1994; Ord. No. 3847, 7-5-1994; Ord. No. 3899A.A., 11-21-1994; Ord. No. 3994, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 4097, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 4225, 10-20-1997; Ord. No. 4324, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 4404, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 4478, 2-21-2000; Ord. No. 4545, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 4652, 12-3-2001; Ord. No. 4663, 2-4-2002; Ord. No. 4733, 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 5179, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
_____
Sec. 58-575. - Schedule II, parking restrictions. 
    The following parking time limits are established for those streets in the city which are listed below. Unless otherwise specified in the accompanying schedule, all such time limits shall be in effect every day except Sundays and public holidays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except on Fridays, when the effective hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(1)  Fifteen-minute parking zones. 
Street Description Ord. No. East Mishawaka Avenue One space located at 426 E. Mishawaka Avenue 3082 Fourth Street One space east of Main Street, north side 5179 Lincolnway East One space east of Main Street, south side 2766 Lincolnway East First parking space east of Main Street on the north side 3995 Main Street First 40 feet south of Marion Street on the west side, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday 2688 Main Street, west side First two parking spaces south of Fourth Street 2104 Main Street 2nd parking space north of Third Street, west side 5179 Milburn Boulevard First parking space west of Russell Avenue, north side 2582 Mill Street One space south of Lincolnway West, east side 2766 Mishawaka Avenue One 20-foot space, from 220 feet to 240 feet west of Main Street, on the south side 3137 State Street First two spaces north of Lincolnway East on the west side. 8:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday 4056 Spring Street One space south of Lincolnway West, east side 5179 Third Street First two parking spaces east of entrance to municipal parking lot located on the northwest corner of Third Street and Race Street 3526 Third Street Main Street to Church Street, south side 5179 Third Street One space in front of 856 E. Third Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m., seven days per week 2872 West Broadway First parking space east of the west property line of 222 W. Broadway 2609 West 7th Street First parking space west of West Street on the north side of street, Monday through Friday only 3978  
_____ 
(2)  One-hour parking zones. 
Street From To Ord. No. Battell Street Main Street Sarah Street, south side Cleveland Street Seventh Street Eighth Street, east side Ironwood Drive Lincolnway West River Avenue, east side Lincolnway West Middleboro Avenue Ironwood Drive on either side except for 15 minute zone immediately east of Ironwood Drive on the south side of Lincolnway West Main Street Sixth Street Eighth Street, east side Main Street 140 feet to 190 feet north of First Street 4406 Merrifield Avenue Lincolnway East Third Street, west side Mishawaka Avenue Sarah Street Christyann Street, south side 4256 First 2 spaces east of Sarah Street on the north side  
  
Street Between Side Ord. No. Virgil Street Lincolnway East Third Street, east side  
_____ 
(3)  Two-hour parking zones. 
Street Between Side Ord. No. Alford Street Lincolnway East and the first east-west alley East 2053 Byrkit Street Railroad and Bradford Street Both 3084 Byrkit Street Third Street and the railroad East 3084 Castleman Court South Eighth Street Mill Street and Spring Street South Eighth Street Union Street and Main Street Both First Street Main Street and Mill Street North 5179 First Street Main Street to Race Street Both 4267 Fourth Street Alford Street and Virgil Street North Fourth Street Hill Street and Spring Street South 5179 Fourth Street Home Street and Virgil Street South Fourth Street Main Street and Church Street North 5179 Fourth Street Main Street and Spring Street Both 5179 Fourth Street Union Street and Church Street Both 5179 Fourth Street Union Street and Spring Street North 4747 Fourth Street Victoria Street and Byrkit Street North 3084 Front Street The west side of Main Street and the east side of Bridge Street South 2874 Hill Street First Street and Lincolnway West Both 5179 Liberty Drive East-west alley and Grove Street East 4105 Liberty Drive Sixty feet north of Mishawaka Avenue. and Grove Street West 4105 Lincolnway East Main Street and Church Street Both 2766 Lincolnway East Race Street and the first three parking spaces west North 5179 Lincolnway East Race Street and Union Street (except for 50 feet west of curbline at Union) South 3390 Lincolnway West Ironwood Drive and Middleboro Street North Lincolnway West Main Street and Spring Street Both 5179 Lincolnway West N-S Alley west of Spring and Hill Street South 5179 Lincolnway West Towle Avenue and Center Street North Main Street Eighth Street and Ninth Street East Main Street First Street and Front Street Both 5179 Main Street Fourth Street and Conrail tracks Both 5179 Main Street Grove Street and Lawrence Street Both Main Street New York Central Railroad right-of-way and Front Street Both Main Street South end of the St. Joseph River Bridge and Lawrence Street East Main Street Third Street and First Street Both 4406 Main Street Third Street and Fourth Street West 4406 Melville Street Third Street and Fourth Street West Mill Street Third Street and Fourth Street Both Mill Street Lincolnway West and Third Street Both, except for 15-minute zone immediately south of Lincolnway West on the east side of Mill Street 3169 Mishawaka Avenue Ann Street and a point 130 feet west of Main Street North 3137 Mishawaka Avenue Sarah Street and 250 feet east of Main Street North 3137 Mishawaka Sarah Street and 260 feet east of Main Street South 3137 North Race Street First 25 feet North of the drive at 118 N. Race Street East 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays 4747 Parking lots All public municipal lots Prairie Avenue From Lincolnway East, south 150 feet East 3419 Race Street First Street and River East 2766 Race Street Lincolnway East and River West 2766 Race Street Lincolnway East and Third Street Both Sixth Street Burdette Street and Jackson Street North Sixth Street Logan Street, east to the First north-south alley South 3746 Seventh Street West Street and 190 feet east North 4408 Seventh Street West Street and 150 feet west South Spring Street Lincolnway West and First Street East 5179 Spring Street Lincolnway West and Third Street Both State Street Lincolnway East, north to the first alley north of Lincolnway East Both 3133 Third Street Church Street and Race Street North 5179 Third Street Mill Street and Spring Street North 5179 Third Street Mill Street and Spring Street North Third Street Mill Street and the first north-south alley east of Main Street North Third Street Race Street and Church Street North 4848 Third Street Race Street and Union Street Both 5179 Thirteenth Street Union Street and Main Street North Two hundred block of Lincolnway West Both 2053 Union Street Fourth Street and New York Central Railroad right-of-way West Union Street First alley south of Sixth Street and Seventh Street East Union Street Lincolnway East and Third Street West 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays 3464 West Street Sixth Street and Eighth Street Both West Sixth Street Ironwood east and first alley South  
(4)  No parking between 3:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. 
Street From To Side Ord. No. First Street Race Street Mill Street Both Fourth Street Race Street Mill Street Both Lincolnway Race Street Mill Street Both Main Street Front Street Fourth Street Both Mill Street Front Street Fourth Street Both Third Street Race Street Mill Street Both  
(5)  No parking between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
Street From To Side Ord. No. Vistula Bittersweet Oakley North 3131  
_____ 
(6)  Municipal off-street parking lots. Parking in the below-listed municipal off-street parking lots shall be subject to the indicated limitations. 
Location of Lot Parking Limited to Lot No. 1 - Southwest corner of Third and Race Streets Parking by municipal parking lot permit and two-hour parking limitation for vehicles without municipal parking lot permit Lot No. 2 - Northwest corner of Third and Race Streets Two-hour parking limitation only Lot No. 3 - Southwest corner of First and Church Streets Two-hour parking only, except for exclusive reserved parking space permits Lot No. 4 - West side of Church Street - Main Street Connector Parking by municipal parking lot permit and two-hour parking limitation for vehicles without municipal parking lot permit Lot No. 5 - East side of Church Street - Main Street Connector Parking by municipal parking lot permit only Lot No. 6 - West side of Mill Street just south of First Street Parking by municipal parking lot permit and two hour parking limitation for vehicles without municipal parking lot permit Lot No. 7 - East side of Mill Street just south of First Street Parking by municipal parking lot permit and two hour parking limitation for vehicles without municipal parking lot permit Lots 1 through 9 plus six-foot west end lots 10,11,12,13, Lawrence and Battell Addition, block 27 (100 Block West Grove Street) Two-hour parking limitation Lot 5 and west 21-foot lot 6, block 28 Lawrence and Battell's Addition (100 Block East Grove Street) Two-hour parking limitation  
_____ 
(7)  Two-hour parking zones. Time limits shall be in effect every day except Sundays and public holidays between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except on Fridays, when the effective hours shall be from 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
Street Between Side Ord. Seventh Street West Street (175 feet east of west curb) North 3514 Seventh Street West Street (135 feet east of west curb) South 3514 Seventh Street West Street (395 feet west of east curb) South 3514  
(8)  Parking prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. except Sundays and holidays. 
From To Side Ord. No. Wenger Lincolnway East Third Both 4055 Pregel Drive Division Street Liberty School South 4825 Lowell Street Logan Street Clay Street South 5097 Webster Donaldson Street Lowell Street West Side 5097  
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 4; Code 1985, ch. 78, sched. II(B)-(H); Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976; Ord. No. 2778-2, 6-17-1985; Ord. No. 2858, 2-18-1986; Ord. No. 2874, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3084, 8-18-1987; Ord. No. 3088, 9-10-1987; Ord. No. 3131, 12-28-1987; Ord. No. 3137, 12-28-1987; Ord. No. 3205, 10-3-1988; Ord. No. 3248, 2-21-1989; Ord. No. 3390, 7-2-1990; Ord. No. 3419, 9-24-1990; Ord. No. 3464, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3514, 8-19-1991; Ord. No. 3526, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 3541, 11-18-1991; Ord. No. 3746, 9-7-1993; Ord. No. 3978, 10-2-1995; Ord. No. 3995, 12-4-1995; Ord. No. 4055, 6-3-1996; Ord. No. 4056, 6-3-1996; Ord. No. 4105, 10-21-1996; Ord. No. 4256, 3-16-1998; Ord. No. 4257, 3-16-1998; Ord. No. 4266, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 4267, 4-6-1998; Ord. No. 4324, 10-5-1998; Ord. No. 4398, 6-7-1999; Ord. No. 4406, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 4408, 7-8-1999; Ord. No. 4545, 12-4-2000; Ord. No. 4747, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 4825, 12-15-2003; Ord. No. 4848, § 1, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 5097, § 1, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 5179, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
_____
Sec. 58-576. - Schedule III, loading zones. 
    In accordance with the provisions of section 58-296, the following are designated as loading zones in which vehicles may stop during the indicated times for periods in excess of 30 minutes to load or unload freight. 
Street From To Spring Street First Front Street, 
east side  
(Code 1968, tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 6; Code 1985, ch. 78, sched. III; Ord. No. 1360, 5-2-1966; Ord. No. 1963, 6-7-1976; Ord. No. 1968, 7-6-1976; Ord. No. 1974, 8-2-1976) 
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5265, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, repealed the former art. II, §§ 62-19, 62-20, 62-44-62-48, 62-70-62-77, 62-98-62-115, 62-144-62-156, 62-181-62-197, 62-218-62-224, 62-242-62-250, 62-279-62-293, 62-320-62-331, 62-351-62-362, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1985; Ord. No. 4007, adopted Dec. 18, 1995; Ord. No. 4072, adopted July 15, 1996; Ord. No. 4546, adopted Dec. 4, 2000; Ord. No. 4857, adopted July 6, 2004; Ord. No. 5086, adopted Dec. 4, 2006; Ord. No. 5162, adopted June 16, 2008; and Ord. No. 5210, adopted Jan. 22, 2009. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-19. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect dischargers into the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) authority's wastewater collection and treatment systems, and enables the city to improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system to protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state and federal laws relating thereto and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  Accordingly, the wastewater treatment plant superintendent shall have the right to reject and eliminate any industrial or commercial discharge which would: 
(1)  Introduce pollutants into the city's wastewater collection system and POTW which may damage said system and its structures, interfere with wastewater flows or which may cause danger to the health of or jeopardize the safety of those who must maintain said system. 
(2)  Introduce pollutants into the POTW which interfere with the operation of the POTW treatment processes, inhibit or upset its biological processes, overload its treatment system, contaminate the POTW sewage sludge and, therefore, jeopardize or diminish its recyclability or be otherwise incompatible with the system. 
(3)  Introduce pollutants which would pass through the POTW into the receiving stream and which would in fact contribute to the pollution of said stream or cause the POTW to violate its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) discharge permit. 
(4)  No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of discharges into the wastewater system through the issuance of permits. 
(d)  This article provides for the recovery of operations, maintenance and replacement costs of the POTW, the costs associated with the construction of collection and treatment systems used by industrial dischargers in proportion to their use of the POTW, and the assessment of fines and penalties for abuses or violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), as amended. 
    Ammonia nitrogen means the concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) of nitrogen which is the form of ammonia. Determination of ammonia nitrogen shall conform to approved methodology as prescribed in 40 CFR 136. 
    Approval authority means the Regional Administrator of the US EPA, Region 5. 
    Authority means the utility board, as designated by ordinance and/or its authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function; 
(2)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and 
(3)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates; and the authorization is in writing and with the written authorization is submitted to the POTW. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/l. 
    Building commissioner means the building commissioner of the city, or authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building drain, sanitary, means a building drain which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only. 
    Building drain, storm, means a building drain which conveys stormwater or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater. 
    Building or house lateral sewer means the extension from the building drain to the sewage system or other place of disposal; also called a house connection. 
    Building sewer, sanitary, means a building sewer which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only. 
    Building sewer, storm, means a building sewer which conveys stormwater or other clean water drainage, but no wastewater. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    CBOD (carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of carbonaceous organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/l. 
    City engineer means the director of the department of engineering of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
    Categorical Industrial User means an Industrial User subject to a categorical Pretreatment or categorical Standard. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and wastewater. 
    Composite (proportional) sample means a collection and combination of individual samples obtained at regular intervals, usually every one or two hours during a 24-hour time span. Individual subsamples may be of equal volume or may be proportional to the flow at the time of sampling as required. The resulting mixture (composite sample) forms a representative sample and is analyzed to determine the average conditions during the sampling period. 
    Control authority means the City of Mishawaka, Indiana. 
    Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
    Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar year. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Discharger, industrial/commercial, means any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches, and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto regulated under the Act, state law or local ordinance. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    gpd means gallons per day. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Groundwater remediation discharge means wastewaters discharged to the POTW authority's wastewater collection and treatment system for the purpose of groundwater contamination remediation. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from a source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, into a POTW. 
    Industrial waste means solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting from any industrial, commercial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Infiltration means the quantity of groundwater that leaks into a pipe through joints, porous walls, or breaks. 
    Inflow means water discharged into a sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leader, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers, and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street washwaters or drainage. The term "inflow" does not include, and is distinguishable from infiltration. 
    Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or provisions and regulations or permits issued there under (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA) the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    l means liter. 
    Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the City of Mishawaka, Indiana upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
    mg means milligram. 
    mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
    Monthly average means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and C of the Act (33 USC 1317), which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    NPDES means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Program as administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1342). 
    New source means any building structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that the construction is a site at which no other source is located; or the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or the production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    O & M means operation and maintenance. 
    Other wastes means decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime, refuse, ashes, garbage, offal, oil, tar, chemicals, and all other substances excepting sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Pass through means the discharge of pollutants through the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). Refer to 40 CFR 403.3(n). 
    pH means the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. 
    Phosphorus or P means the concentration, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) of total phosphorus derived through acid hydrolysis of the wastewater sample. Determination shall be conducted using the methodology prescribed in 40 CFR 136. 
    Pollutant means any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system, listed in this article, or any substance which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will cause adverse effects such as cancer, genetic mutations or physiological manifestations as defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act. This may include any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural waste or any other contaminant. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. This can be accomplished by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes or other means except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard or standard means any local, state or federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits. This term includes local limits, prohibited discharge limits including those promulgated under 40 CFR 403.5, and categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Private sewage disposal system means any sewage disposal system not connected to a public sanitary or combined sewer and constructed for the purpose of treating residential, commercial and/or industrial wastes. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly-owned treatment works or (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act including any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage and industrial waste. The systems include sewers, pipes, and equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment facility. The term also includes the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. 
    Receiving stream means the watercourse, stream or body of water receiving the waters finally discharged from the wastewater POTW or authority sewers. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage, liquid and water-borne wastes to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage means the combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including polluted cooling water). The three most common types of sewage are: 
Combined sewage means wastes including sanitary sewage, industrial sewage, stormwater, infiltration and inflow carried to the wastewater treatment facilities by a combined sewer. 
Industrial sewage means a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment, and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water). 
Sanitary sewage means the combination of liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary pumping facilities. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit used to collect and transport sewage. 
    SIC means Standard Industrial Classification. 
    Significant industrial user or SIU. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this definition, the term significant industrial user means all industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the POTW on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(I)(6). 
(2)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance or SNC. 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as described by 40 CFR 403.3(1) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation or violations of a pretreatment standard or requirement or applicable BMP limit (daily maximum or longer term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slugload means any substance released suddenly in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer, not discharging to a sanitary sewer, for conveying water, groundwater or unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not admitted. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the city wastewater POTW (manager of the wastewater department of the city utilities) or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, expressed in mg/l; and which are removed by a defined filter medium as prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Toxic pollutants means those substances listed in subsection 62-147(10), or any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as toxic pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or other federal statutes or in regulations promulgated by the state under state law. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the wastewater POTW effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which a discharger is in an unintentional and temporary state of noncompliance with the standards set forth in this article due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the discharger, and excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof. 
    USC means the United States Code. 
    USEPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, or any other waste including that which may be combined with any groundwater, surface water, or stormwater that may be discharged to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Wastewater treatment system means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means: 
(1)  Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this state subject to its jurisdiction, including all ponds, lakes, rivers, streams, public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems within this state, other than those designed and used to collect, convey, or dispose of sanitary sewage; 
(2)  The floodplain free-flowing waters determined by the department of natural resources on the basis of 100-year flood frequency; and 
(3)  Any other waters specified by state law. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-21-62-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISON 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 62-44. - Prohibition of unlawful disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-45. - Disposal boundaries. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-46. - Forbidden sewage facilities. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-47. - Required waste facilities and sewer connections. 
    The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way is hereby required at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein which conform to city codes, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice from the city engineer to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-48. - Hauled liquid waste. 
    Generators and/or haulers of nonhazardous liquid waste may be allowed to discharge on a discretionary basis with the approval of the superintendent. Rates and charges for discharge of hauled liquid wastes shall be assessed in accordance with section 62-224. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-49-62-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 62-70. - Private connection requirements. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 62-47, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-71. - Building sewer, private sewer system and connection permit. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence construction of any building sewer, private sewer system, or sewer connection without first obtaining a construction permit from the city engineer. Any individual, business or industry desiring to make a connection to a sewer shall complete and file with the city engineer, a permit application on the form provided or approved by the city engineer. The application shall be filed at least five working days prior to desired date of connection. Additional permits may be necessary, including, but not limited to, excavation in a public right-of-way, industrial pretreatment, high volume roadway, or state department of transportation. All applicable permits shall be obtained from the appropriate department or agency prior to commencing any construction. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-72. - Permit procurement. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city engineer. See section 62-220 for permit and inspection fees. A construction permit must also be obtained from the state department of environmental management (IDEM) for all wastewater treatment systems with exception of subsurface absorption systems for the disposal of sanitary waste. In addition, a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES) must be obtained from the IDEM for any discharge of a point source to navigable waters (all waters of the United States). 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-73. - Construction inspection. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer, who shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction. In any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city engineer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two business days of the receipt of notice by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-74. - Construction compliance. 
    The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of environmental management (IDEM), the county health department and all ordinances of the city. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 12,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-75. - Governing authority. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of environmental management or the state board of health. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-76. - Maintenance responsibility. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-77. - Subsequent sewer availability. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 62-47, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private subsurface soil absorption sewage disposable facilities shall be abandoned, pumped out and filled with suitable approved material. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-78-62-97. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS, PRIVATE SYSTEMS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 62-98. - Permit-Required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-99. - Same-Application. 
    The owner or his agent shall make application on forms furnished by the city engineer. The permit application shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city engineer. The city engineer shall obtain the approval of the superintendent prior to issuing any commercial or industrial sewer permits. See division 7 of this article for connection, permit and inspection fees. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-100. - Financial responsibility. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-101. - Separate sewer provision. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-102. - Old building sewer use. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city engineer or an authorized representative, to meet all requirements of this article, at the time of issuance of a permit. Prior to making connection, a sewer cleaning blade of the same diameter as the building sewer shall be run through the building sewer to the sanitary sewer, subject to inspection by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-103. - Sewer materials. 
    The building sewer beginning two feet from any building or structure shall be of such materials as approved by the state fire prevention and building safety commission or other material as ordered by the city engineer. Joint types shall conform to the city building code. Any part of a building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe within that limiting distance. Ductile iron pipe may be required by the city engineer where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in fill or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of ductile iron pipe. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-104. - Sewer size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer, but in no event shall the pipe diameter be less than six inches. The slope of such piping shall be no less than one-eighth-inch per foot. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-105. - Sewer placement. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with proper pipe fittings. All buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged into the building sewer. All costs for installation, operation, and maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-106. - Sewer construction methods and testing requirements. 
    All construction methods shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards, as approved by the board of public works and safety. An infiltration/exfiltration test, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, shall be performed on all sewers, including buildings sewers. The city engineer's office shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of any testing, in order to be able to witness the tests. The maximum allowable infiltration rate is 100 gallons per inch diameter per mile of sewer per day, prorated to the length of the building sewer. In the event any manholes, or other structures are installed, they too shall be tested, with a maximum allowable infiltration rate of one-tenth-gallon per hour per foot of diameter per foot of head. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-107. - Sewer excavations. 
    All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with any applicable ASTM specification, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. All work shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-108. - Sewer joints and connections. 
    All joints and connections shall be made utilizing methods and materials approved by the state fire prevention and building safety commission and which have received the prior approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-109. - Location of sewer connection. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and a properly located "Y" or "T" branch is not available, the owner shall, at the owner's expense, install a "Y" or "T" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the city engineer. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be made at the top one-quarter of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by resilient gaskets and/or epoxy cements. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-110. - Notification for testing and inspection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city engineer when the building sewer is ready for testing, inspection, and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city engineer or authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-111. - Excavation on public property. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately protected with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. No work within the public right-of-way or street cuts shall be made without a permit from the city engineer conforming to city code. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-112. - Bonds required of sewer contractors. 
    Any person performing a contract for the construction of any sewer, shall submit a 100-percent performance bond for the faithful construction of the sewer. A further and separate bond in a principal sum equal to ten percent of the amount of the construction work shall be submitted for the maintenance of the sewer for a period of three years from the date of the acceptance and completion, thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-113. - Record drawings. 
    All work installed shall be accurately and carefully noted as to the location, type of materials, size length, elevation and other pertinent information including details of structures. This information shall be submitted to the city engineer in accordance with the City of Mishawaka Engineering standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-114. - Sewer construction and prohibited connections. 
(a)  The introduction of inflow sources to any sanitary sewer is prohibited. 
(b)  Construction of new combined sewers is prohibited. New construction tributary to the combined sewer shall be designed to minimize or delay the admission of unpolluted water to the existing combined sewer. 
(c)  For any new building, the inflow/clear water connection to a combined sewer shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-115. - Cleanouts. 
(a)  Cleanouts equal in size to the building sewer shall be required at the following locations: 
(1)  At the outside junction of the building drain and the building sewer. 
(2)  Change of direction greater than 45 degrees. 
(3)  At locations of not more than 100 linear feet intervals. 
(b)  The cleanout shall be installed to open in the direction of the flow of drainage pipe or at a right angle thereto. 
(c)  Each cleanout shall be adjusted flush with finished grade and sealed with a suitable cap or plug. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-116-62-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 62-144. - Prohibited discharge. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, foundation drain water, groundwater, roof runoff, surface drainage, or unpolluted water, unpolluted industrial process water, or cooling waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No new connection shall be made unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the POTW, including capacity for any pollutants discharged. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-145. - Unpolluted discharge. 
(a)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers designated as storm sewers or a natural outlet. Industrial or domestic cooling water or unpolluted industrial or domestic process waters may be discharged upon approval of the city engineer to a storm sewer, to a natural outlet or, when a storm sewer or a natural outlet is not available, to a combined sewer. All discharges to storm sewers or to natural outlets shall be in accordance with the NPDES permit program. 
(b)  Unpolluted water from air conditioners, cooling, condensing systems, or swimming pools shall be discharged to a storm sewer where it is available, or to a combined sewer, upon approval of the city engineer. Where a storm sewer is not available, discharge may be to a natural outlet approved by the city engineer and by the state. 
(c)  Industrial cooling water, which may be polluted with insoluble oils, grease or suspended solids, shall be pretreated for removal of pollutants and the resultant clear water shall be discharged in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, basement drains, sump pumps, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(e)  Any new construction tributary to an existing combined sewer shall be designed to minimize or delay the admission of unpolluted water to the existing combined sewer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-146. - Governing standards. 
    The national categorical pretreatment standards, located in 40 CFR 405-471, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this article and include amendments to those standards that occur hereafter as the same are published in the Code of Federal Regulations with effective dates as fixed therein. State and local requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all dischargers when such requirements and limitations are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-147. - Wastewater discharge limitations. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer at any time: 
(1)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no case, wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(2)  Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 mg/l fat, oil, or grease derived from a mineral or petroleum source as determined by test procedures approved by the EPA and the control authority, or the discharge of any such materials derived from any source which will cause interference, pass through, or excessive accumulations of the same in any part of the POTW. 
(3)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other combustible, flammable, or explosive liquid, solid or gas of whatsoever kind or nature having a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, dough, wood, paunch manure, garbage, or any other solid or viscous substance with particles greater than one-half-inch in any dimension or any material which can be disposed of as trash or is capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the POTW. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 11.0 or having any other corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW. 
(7)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW, or impair a wastewater treatment process, or that would create any hazard in the receiving waters of the POTW, any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent to fail to pass a toxicity test. 
(8)  All waters or wastes containing CBOD in concentrations greater than 176 mg/l, total suspended solids in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l, phosphorous in concentrations greater than five mg/l, or ammonia-nitrogen in concentrations greater than 25 mg/l on a 24-hour composite sample basis, (or grab sample basis where appropriate) shall be subject to a surcharge. See section 62-183 for surcharge fees. 
(9)  Any noxious, malodorous or toxic gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. Any substance which can cause acute or chronic worker health and safety problems, a hazard to human life, prevents entry into the sewers or POTW for maintenance or repairs or creates a public nuisance. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes containing metallic ions, or other toxic ions as determined and established from time to time by the board of public works and safety. Chemical constituents shall not exceed the following concentrations for grab or composite samples: 
Arsenic 0.25 mg/l Cadmium 1.0 mg/l Chromium total 2.5 mg/l Chromium (Hexavalent) 0.5 mg/l Copper 1.0 mg/l Cyanide 1.0 mg/l Lead 1.0 mg/l Mercury 0.0003 mg/l Nickel 1.5 mg/l Phenols 35.0 mg/l Selenium 1.0 mg/l Silver 4.0 mg/l Zinc 1.7 mg/l  
(11)  Any waters or wastes containing concentrated acid metallic pickling wastes or plating solution. 
(12)  Any toxic radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration which may exceed limits set by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(13)  Any waters or wastes containing TSS, phosphorus, ammonia-nitrogen, or BOD of such character and quantity that unusual operation, maintenance, supervision, attention and expenses would be required to handle such material by the POTW without prior approval of the authority. 
(14)  Any residuals defined as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. 
(15)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes, inks and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(16)  Any polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's), unless generated by a controlled waste manufacturing process as defined in 40 CFR 761.3(kk), in which case the limit shall be 0.1 mg/l. 
(17)  Surface active agents (surfactants) in concentrations which cause operational problems with the POTW or which pass through the POTW and cause nuisance foaming in the receiving stream. 
(18)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5568 , § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-148. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors or retainers shall be installed by the user at the user's expense when, in the opinion of the building commissioner or superintendent, such are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease, oils or sand in excessive amounts, or any inflammable wastes, or other such harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning by the user and for inspection by the authority. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the user, at his own expense, and shall be kept in continuous and efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-149. - Pretreatment requirements. 
    In the event that a user is exceeding the limitations as set forth in subsection 62-147(10), the superintendent shall direct the user causing the discharge of any such materials to, at his own expense, construct, install, and operate such pretreatment facilities as may be required in order to reduce the waste constituents which are in violation of this article to the limits set forth by this article or to cease and desist from those activities or operations which cause a violation of established discharge standards. The superintendent may use a grab sample to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-150. - Approval of treatment facilities. 
    No pretreatment facility shall be constructed or operated unless all plans, specifications, technical operating data, and other information pertinent to its proposed operation and maintenance conform to all city, United States Environmental Protection Agency, state department of environmental management and any other local, state or federal agency regulations, and unless written approval of the plans, specifications, technical operating data, and sludge disposal has been obtained from the state department of environmental management, and any other local, state or federal agency having regulatory authority with respect thereto. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities, operating procedures and documentation of compliance must be provided to the authority and must meet the approval of the POTW authority before construction of the facility. Pretreatment equipment may not be installed or modified without a valid construction permit issued by the state department of environmental management. The review and approval of plans and operating procedures does not relieve the industrial user from complying with the provisions of this article and permit conditions. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and approved by the POTW authority prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. Slug discharge notification requirement may be impacted by SIU process change. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-151. - Required treatment facilities maintenance. 
    All such pretreatment facilities as required by this article shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operating condition by the user or person operating and maintaining the facility served thereby, and at the user's expense. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-152. - Superintendent's authority. 
    The superintendent is vested with the authority to deny admission to the system any waste considered to be harmful. In addition to the initiation of permit revocation or of litigation proceedings, the superintendent may choose to exercise this authority in the form of a water shut-off and/or the installation of sewer plugs if a certain wastewater discharge (industrial) presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of persons or a danger to the environment, threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article or any wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-153. - City's right to amend. 
    The city reserves the right to amend this article to provide for changes in the limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 62-19, except as provided in section 62-146. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-154. - Prohibition of diluted discharge. 
    No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way, nor mix separate waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth in this article. The authority may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-155. - Responsibility for hazardous and accidental spills. 
(a)  Accidental spill prevention plans (ASPP). Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of hazardous or toxic material or materials prohibited or regulated by this article. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the discharger's cost and expense. Detailed ASPPs, showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be approved by the authority before construction of the facility. Each existing discharger shall complete his ASPP and submit same to the authority within the time specified by the control authority. No discharger who discharges to the POTW after the specified date shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until an ASPP has been approved by the authority. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the authority shall not relieve the discharger of the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article or of the responsibility to comply with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous substances. 
(b)  Employee training. The industrial user shall permanently post a notice in a prominent place advising all employees to call (258-1655, 258-1663 or 911) immediately in the event of a dangerous discharge for which notification is required. Employers shall advise all employees who may cause or be injured by such a discharge of the emergency notification procedure. 
(c)  Notification. Dischargers shall notify the superintendent immediately by telephone of the occurrence of a "slugload", or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Within five days following the discharge the user shall submit a written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges. Any discharger who discharges a slugload of prohibited materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under state or federal law and any fines, civil penalties or other liability. 
(d)  Spill prevention plans and slugload evaluation. The POTW shall evaluate each significant industrial user at least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug discharges. SIU's are required to notify the POTW immediately of changes that occur at the facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge, thereby allowing the POTW to reevaluate the need for a slug control plan or actions to prevent such discharges. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 62-147 with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-156. - Control of acceptable industrial wastes. 
(a)  Submission of data on industrial wastes. Any person (discharger) who discharges industrial wastes into the city's wastewater treatment system, either directly or indirectly, shall, within 30 days of a written request of the superintendent, fill out and file with the city an industrial waste questionnaire to be furnished by the city, in which he shall set out the quantity and characteristics of the wastes discharged into the city's wastewater treatment system. Each discharger requested to file an industrial waste questionnaire shall be financially responsible for the sampling and analyses which may be required to determine the characteristics of their discharge. Similarly, any person desiring to establish a new connection to a public sewer for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes shall be required to fill out and file such a questionnaire, which shall include actual or predicted data relating to the quantity and characteristics of the wastes to be discharged. When special circumstances such as the size or complexity of his sewage disposal problem would make complying with the time schedule cited in this section an unreasonable burden on the person, an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, may be granted by the superintendent upon presentation of proper written application. 
(b)  Control manholes. Any person discharging industrial wastes into a public sewer, either directly or indirectly, may be required by the superintendent to construct and maintain, at his own expense, one or more control manholes at a specified location to facilitate the observation, measurement and sampling of his wastes. Such manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. The superintendent may also require the person to install and maintain in any such manhole at said person's expense, an approved volume measuring device. Plans for the installation of control manholes and related equipment must be approved by the authority before construction begins. 
(c)  Waste sampling. Any industrial wastes discharged into the public sewers shall be subject to sampling and determination of characteristics. The sampling and analysis shall be made as often as the superintendent deems necessary and may include the use of suitable continuously monitoring instruments in appropriate cases. The sampling location must be approved by the superintendent. National categorical pretreatment standards are required to be met at the point of discharge from the industrial pretreatment system prior to mixing with any other waste stream. Except as indicated, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(d)  Waste analysis. Laboratory procedures used in the examination of industrial wastes shall be those set forth in 40 CFR 136 Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants or amendments thereto or, if 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, then in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. The POTW may make the initial analysis and perform periodic check analysis of the customer's wastes as well as other tests the superintendent may deem advisable. Analyses made by the POTW at the request of the discharger shall be charged to the customer according to the POTW's standard work order billing practices. All such analyses shall be binding in determining strength-of-wastes surcharges and other matters dependent upon the character and concentration of wastes. 
(e)  Use of representative analyses. Until an adequate analysis of a representative sample of customer's wastes has been obtained, the city may, for the purpose of this article, make a determination of character and concentration of his wastes by using data based on analyses of similar processes or data for his type of business that are available from industry-recognized authoritative sources. This method, if selected by the city, shall continue at the city's pleasure or until an adequate analysis has been made. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-157-62-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SEWER RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 62-181. - City's right to determine billing method. 
    The city reserves the right to bill residential, commercial and industrial users for their wastewater discharge on the basis of their actual wastewater flow volumes, as opposed to sewage rates based on water usage. This method of assessment, if employed, will be equivalent to the existing sewage rate structure. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-182. - Applicability of fees and sewer charges. 
    For the use of and the service rendered by the sewage disposal works, rates and charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate, or building that is connected with the city's sanitary sewerage system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids either directly or indirectly into the sanitary sewage system of the city. The rates and charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount determinable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-183. - Rates based on water usage, strength of discharge. 
(a)  The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to the rates and charges, as the same is measured by the water meter there in use, except as herein otherwise provided. Water meters and/or remote read heads shall be read once each month (or a period equaling one month), and sewage service bills shall be rendered once each month (or a period equaling one month). 
(b)  In order that the rates and charges may be justly and equitably adjusted to the service rendered, the city shall have the right to base its charges not only on volume but also on the strength and character of the wastewater which it is required to treat and wastes it is required to dispose of. The city shall have the right to measure and determine the strength and content of all wastewater discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the POTW, in such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable in the light of the conditions and attending circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge. 
(c)  If the character of the wastewater of any user as determined by the superintendent shall be such as to impose a burden upon the POTW, then an additional charge or surcharge as determined by the authority shall be charged such user over and above the regular service charge, or the superintendent shall require that such wastewater be treated by the user responsible before being emptied into the system. If necessary to protect the system, or any part thereof, the superintendent shall deny the right of the user to empty such wastewater into the system. (Surcharges required by this section shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual cost of the operation and maintenance, including replacement attributable to treating a substance multiplied by the ratio of the weight of the surchargeable excess of the discharged substances to the total weight of such substances that is treated in that year). 
(d)  The surcharges to be charged for the treatment of extra strength sewage shall be determined by the following table. The surcharge shall become effective should the concentration of Carbonaceous BOD5 (biochemical oxygen demand), TSS (total suspend solids), P (phosphorus) or N-NH3 (ammonia nitrogen) exceed the concentrations listed in [section] 62-147(8). The surcharge shall be charged for each pound of the particular pollutant in excess of these concentrations. 
Phase One effective upon passage of the amending rate ordinance; Phase Two effective January 1, 2018; Phase Three effective January 1, 2019; Phase Four effective January 1, 2020; Phase Five effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
_____ 
Pollutant Phase One Phase Two Phase Three Phase Four Phase Five cBOD5 $0.430 $0.443 $0.492 $0.536 $0.539 TSS 0.370 0.381 0.423 0.461 0.463 P 10.352 10.662 11.834 12.899 12.963 N-NH3 1.253 1.290 1.432 1.561 1.569  
_____
(e)  To determine the strength of the wastewater, grab or composite sampling and analysis may be made by the authority; billing adjustments with respect to the corresponding surcharges will then also be made. 
(f)  The determination of suspended solids, five-day carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand, phosphorus and ammonia nitrogen contained in the wastewater shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth in 40 CFR 136 Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5568 , § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-184. - Schedule of rates. 
(a)  Every person whose premises are served by the wastewater utility shall be charged for the service provided. Notwithstanding the provisions of [section] 62-181, the sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of water used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and charges as the same is measured by the water meter there in use plus a customer charge, and plus a base charge based on the size of water meter installed as adjusted by the meter equivalency factor, except as herein otherwise provided. For the purpose of billing and collecting the charges for sewage service, the water meters shall be read monthly and the users shall be billed each month (or period equaling a month). If for any reason the monthly meter reading is not available, a bill will be prepared, based on the estimated usage, and a correction will be made when meter readings are available. The water usage schedule on which the amount of said rates and charges shall be determined is as follows: 
_____ 
(1)  Flow charges. Phase One effective upon passage of the amending rate ordinance; Phase Two effective January 1, 2018; Phase Three effective January 1, 2019; Phase Four effective January 1, 2020; Phase Five effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Flow rate per month Phase 
One Phase 
Two Phase 
Three Phase 
Four Phase 
Five Rate per 100 cubic feet $1.72 $1.77 $1.96 $2.14 $2.15  
(2)  Customer charges. Phase One effective upon passage of the amending rate ordinance; Phase Two effective January 1, 2018; Phase Three effective January 1, 2019; Phase Four effective January 1, 2020; Phase Five effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Customer Charge Phase 
One Phase 
Two Phase 
Three Phase 
Four Phase 
Five Per month $1.93 $1.99 $2.21 $2.41 $2.42  
(3)  Base charges. Phase One effective upon passage of the amending rate ordinance; Phase Two effective January 1, 2018; Phase Three effective January 1, 2019; Phase Four effective January 1, 2020; Phase Five effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Meter Size Equivalency 
Factors Phase 
One Phase 
Two Phase 
Three Phase 
Four Phase 
Five Residential 1.0 $44.59 $45.93 $50.98 $55.57 $55.85 5/8 " 1.0 44.59 45.93 50.98 55.57 55.85 1" 2.5 111.48 114.82 127.45 138.92 139.61 11/4" 4.0 178.36 183.71 203.92 222.27 223.38 11/2" 5.8 258.62 266.38 295.68 322.29 323.90 2" 10.0 445.90 459.28 509.80 555.68 558.46 3" 23.0 1,025.56 1,056.33 1,172.53 1,278.06 1,284.45 4" 41.0 1,828.21 1,883.06 2,090.20 2,278.32 2,289.71 6" 92.0 4,102.32 4,225.39 4,690.18 5,112.30 5,137.86 8" 164.0 7,312.83 7,532.21 8,360.75 9,113.22 9,158.79 10" 256.0 11,415.14 11,757.59 13,050.92 14,225.50 14,296.63  
_____ 
(4)  Single-family residential properties served by a water meter smaller than one and one-quarter inches shall be billed based on a meter equivalency factor of one. 
(5)  The base charge shall be based on a meter size of not more than one size smaller than the service line in which the meter is installed. 
(6)  The monthly sewer bill for any service where the user is not a metered water customer shall be estimated and determined by means and methods satisfactory to the authority. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5568 , § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-185. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5210, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2009, repealed § 62-185, which pertained to schedule of rates, Mishawaka-Clay wastewater utility and derived from Code 1985, § 50.084; Ord. No. 4007, adopted Dec. 18, 1995; Ord. No. 4581, adopted April 17, 2001; and Ord. No. 4857, § 1(50.084), adopted July 6, 2004. 
Sec. 62-186. - Nonrecurring charges. 
    Nonrecurring charges are as follows: 
(1)  Dishonored negotiable instrument charge, $20.00. 
(2)  Late payment penalty, ten percent of current month balance. 
(3)  Credit agreement fee, ten percent of arrears amount, or $20.00, whichever is less. 
(4)  Deposit (sewer-only customers), two months' normal bill, per service location. 
(5)  New account service charges (sewer-only customers), one-time charge of $20.00 (nonrefundable). 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-187. - Exemption for lawn sprinkling. 
(a)  In order that there is no charge to residential water customers for water used in lawn sprinkling during the peak watering months of May, June, July, August, September and October, the customer's average water meter readings for the months of January, February, March, and April of each year shall be substituted for the readings for the months of May, June, July, August, September and October of the same year for purposes of calculating the wastewater charges. This summer rule shall not apply to customers who meter their lawn sprinkling water separately. 
(b)  If a customer's water bill is adjusted as the result of a faulty water meter or a slowed or stopped remote reading head, the authority shall adjust the customer's wastewater bill due accordingly. Unless the authority or the customer can determine the exact time period covered by faulty meters or remote reading heads, the assumption shall be that half the customer's water has been consumed during "summer rule" periods as described in this section. As such, in the event an adjusted consumption amount is added to the customer's water bill, then half that consumption volume shall be adjusted on the customer's wastewater bill, after first considering any sub-minimum consumption methods. This methodology shall be used consistently, regardless of the time of year when the discrepancy is discovered. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-188. - Adjustments for fire protection use. 
    Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as well as for other uses, the authority may, in its discretion, make adjustments in the minimum charge and in the use charge as may be equitable. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-189. - Charges in absence of meter; installation of meter. 
    In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into the city's sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly: 
(1)  Is not a user of water supplied by the city's water works, and the water used thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter; 
(2)  Is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the city; or 
(3)  Is a user of water supplied by the city's water works and in addition, uses water from another source which is not measured by a water meter or is measured by a water meter not acceptable to the authority, then the water used shall be otherwise measured or determined by the authority, in order to ascertain the rates and charges provided in this division. Or, the owner or other interested party, at his expense, may install and maintain a meter acceptable to the authority for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-190. - Portion of water not entering sewage system. 
(a)  In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or liquids into the city's sanitary sewage system, either directly or indirectly, uses water in excess of 1,000 cubic feet per month, and it can be shown, to the satisfaction of the authority, that a portion of the water as measured by the water meter does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, the authority may determine in such manner and by such method as it may deem practicable, the percentage of metered water entering the sanitary sewage system. The percentage, when so determined, shall then constitute the basis of sewage service (wastewater) charge. 
(b)  The authority may, at its discretion, require or permit the installation of additional meters at the expense of the owner or other interested party in such a manner as to determine the quantity of water actually entering the sewage system, in which case the quantity of water used to determine the sewage service charge shall be the quantity of water actually entering the sanitary sewage system as so determined. 
(c)  Plans for installation of additional meters pursuant to subsection (b) of this section including meter types, must be approved by the authority in advance of installation. The authority shall charge $50.00 per meter to inspect the metering system prior to initial activation. Additionally, the authority shall charge a monthly service fee of $35.00 per meter during each month of activation. The charge to reinstate meter activation shall be $50.00 per meter. 
(d)  Any costs associated with maintenance, adjustment, repair or replacement of such metering devices shall be the responsibility of the customer. As it is in the best interest of both the customer and the authority to ensure continued accuracy of such metering devices, an annual inspection shall be conducted on each meter by an independent testing firm selected by the authority. The costs for such annual inspections and any subsequent maintenance, adjustment, repair or replacement of such metering devices shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-191. - City subject to prevailing rates. 
    For services rendered to the city, the city shall be subject to the same rates and charges herein provided, or to rates and charges established in harmony therewith. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-192. - Tenants, owners responsible for payment. 
(a)  Rates and charges may be billed to a tenant occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the owner, but such billings shall in no way relieve the owner from liability in the event payment is not made as herein required. 
(b)  The owner of tenant-occupied properties shall have the right to examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining whether the rates and charges have been paid by the tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept and during the hours the office is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-193. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5210, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2009, repealed § 62-193, which pertained to rates to users outside city limits and derived from Code 1985, § 50.092; Ord. No. 4007, adopted Dec. 18, 1995; and Ord. No. 4072, adopted July 15, 1996. 
Sec. 62-194. - When rates become effective. 
    Except as herein otherwise provided, the rates and charges fixed by this division shall become effective at the time sewage is first directed to the sewage plant for treatment from the user. These rates and charges shall be extended to and cover any additional premises thereafter served, without the necessity of any hearing or notice. If a sewer user is discovered to have existed for more than one year prior to the date of discovery by the authority, the user shall be billed the appropriate monthly minimum for an amount up to the equivalent of one year's minimum. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-195. - Collection of rates. 
(a)  The rates and charges made to the city pursuant to this article shall be computed and billed by the authority, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law and ordinance. The first billing may be for a period of more or less than one full month in order to make the monthly collection period correspond with the water meter readings of the authority. 
(b)  The rates and charges established by this article shall be collected by the authority. The authority shall make and enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management of the city's sewage system, regulator chambers, pumping stations, and sewage treatment works, for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating, and refunding of related rates and charges. 
(c)  The authority shall require a service deposit from sewer-only customers to guarantee payment of bills from the customer at any time prior to or after the commencement of service. Such initial service deposit shall normally be an amount equal to one-sixth of the expected annual billings for the customer at the address at which sewer service is rendered. The authority may provide the customer with two monthly billing cycles (approximately 60 days) in which to pay any sewer-only deposit which exceeds $70.00. 
(d)  Service deposits shall bear simple interest, at the rate of five percent per annum, from the date of deposit until service is discontinued and the authority makes a refund of such deposit. The interest will be credited on the next bill for service after January 1 of each year, or later, at the option of the authority. The deposit, less any amount owed to the authority for service, will be refunded when service is discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-196. - Payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT). 
    The utility board is hereby authorized to transfer the amount of money sufficient to compensate the municipality for the property taxes that would be paid on the sewage works if the sewage works were privately owned, such amount to be determined by said utility board. The utility board may transfer payments in lieu of taxes to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-197. - Revocation of discharge permits. 
    The city reserves the right to revoke discharge permits and to disconnect service to any user whenever wastewater treatment bills become delinquent. All amounts charged under this article continue to be due hereunder, whether or not said sewer is disconnected until the city is paid in full for all amounts due it, and in addition, there shall be paid to the city a deposit equal to an estimated amount of such charge for the next succeeding year. Such a deposit shall be held by the city in escrow, and will be returned upon satisfactory payment of all bills for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-198-62-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CONNECTION, PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES 

Sec. 62-218. - Connection fees. 
(a)  The connection fees set out herein shall be over and above any or all costs or charges for the extension or construction of a sanitary sewer or making the physical connection from the lot to the sewer. If the fees have not been paid as required, the fees shall be collectable in the manner provided by appropriate law. 
(b)  In the event that a sewer connection is made from any lot, parcel of real estate, or building where there has been no previous direct assessment on the lot, parcel of real estate, or building for the sewer, then a connection fee shall be paid by the owner thereof to the city engineer at time of application, and there shall be a lien against the lot, parcel of real estate, or building until paid. 
(c)  If a direct assessment on the lot or parcel of real estate has been paid to the city for sanitary sewer main construction, then the connection charge portion of the connection fee may be waived. 
(d)  Where a property owner desires to connect to the city's wastewater system, the sum of the following fees shall apply and be the connection rate (these apply to taps, not sewer extensions): 
(1)  Sewer collection system fee (retained by city). 
Single-family residences are estimated at 315 gallons per day. Estimated daily flows contributed to the sewer collection system from the proposed connection shall be based upon those uses shown in Table No. 6 of the state board of health bulletin S.E. 13 dated 1988 or its successor. If an establishment is not included in the table, the estimated wastewater flows shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon water usage data from similar facilities and input from the developer. 
a.  The greater of: 
1.  $248.00 minimum; or 
2.  Area. 
(i)  First 10,000 square feet: $3.75 per 100 square feet; 
(ii)  Remainder: $1.00 per 100 square feet; or 
3.  Frontage: $3.75 per linear feet PLUS 
b.  $0.40 per estimated gallon per day usage. 
(2)  Treatment plant capacity fee (retained by POTW). The treatment plant capacity fee is $0.59 per estimated gallon per day usage. (Single-family residences are estimated at 315 gallons per day. Estimated daily flows contributed to the wastewater treatment plant from the proposed connection shall be based upon these uses as shown in Table No. 6 of the state board of health bulletin S.E. 13 dated 1988 or its successor. If an establishment is not included in the table, the estimated wastewater flows shall be determined by the city engineer, based upon water usage data from similar facilities and input from the developer.) 
(3)  Connection fee (retained by city). 
a.  $234.00 for standard six-inch sewer connection; 
b.  Large connections shall be calculated based on the ratio of the area of the connection to the area of a six-inch connection in accordance with following schedule: 
 8-inch = $416.00 10-inch =  650.00 12-inch =  936.00  
(e)  For residential buildings consisting of four or fewer dwelling units per building, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(1)  The sewer collection system fee in subsection (d) of this section shall be limited to $200.00 for each sewer connection, so long as said residential buildings were constructed prior to March 1, 1996. Said fee limit shall expire within one year of the availability of a sewer connection to said dwelling unit. 
(2)  The treatment plant capacity fee in subsection (d) of this section shall be waived, so long as said residential buildings were constructed prior to March 1, 1996. Said waiver of fee shall expire within one year of the availability of a sewer connection to said dwelling unit. 
(3)  The standard six-inch connection fee in subsection (d) of this section shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-219. - Permit and inspection fees. 
(a)  Administration and inspection charge for single tap. 
(1)  Tap without accessories, $50.00 per connection. 
a.  Administration (city), $15.00. 
b.  Inspection (POTW), $35.00. 
(2)  Tap with accessories (grease trap, sand interceptor, manhole, etc.), $85.00 per connection. 
a.  Administration (city), $15.00. 
b.  Inspection (POTW), $70.00. 
(b)  For all sanitary sewer construction, a construction inspection fee of $0.25 per linear foot shall be paid to the city engineering department at the time of permit application for deposit in the wastewater department of the city utilities. 
(c)  All newly constructed sanitary sewers eight inches or larger shall be video inspected by the city sewer maintenance department or its authorized agent. Fees for video inspection shall be paid to the city engineering department at the time of permit application for deposit in the wastewater department of the city utilities in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  1,000 linear foot minimum ..... $550.00 
(2)  1,000 linear foot and greater, per linear foot ..... 0.55 
Projects or services performed for governmental units may be exempt from these fees. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-220. - Private sewage treatment or disposal system construction application. 
(a)  A private sewage treatment system (septic system) shall not be permitted on any property within 300 linear feet of a sanitary sewer (section 62-47). If such a system is constructed beyond 300 feet from a sanitary sewer, a construction application shall be obtained from the city engineering department (section 62-71). At the time the application is filed, an administration fee shall be paid. These fees shall be over and above any or all costs for inspection and installation. 
(b)  Fees. 
(1)  Residential ..... $25.00 
(2)  Commercial/industrial ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-221. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees (POTW). 
(a)  Prior to connecting to or discharging to the POTW, all users discharging industrial waste shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit. Wastewater discharge permits must be renewed every five years. Any industry so required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall pay a wastewater discharge permit fee as shown in the table below every five years to the city wastewater utility. This fee includes all annual permit reviews, site inspections and industrial user self-monitoring report reviews. Industries which are required to monitor more than one point of discharge to the city's sewer system shall pay a discharge monitoring fee as shown in the table below for each additional point of discharge per five-year period. 
Prior to 
7/1/2006 7/1/2006 and 
Thereafter Five-year wastewater discharge permit fee $600.00 $738.00 Five-year wastewater discharge monitoring fee 450.00 553.50  
(b)  The following industrial wastewater discharge permit fees are in addition to the rates and charges set forth in division 6 of this article and shall be paid by all wastewater discharge permit holders in accordance with the following average monthly flow table: 
Charges Per 100 Cubic Feet of Flow Prior to 
7/1/2006 7/1/2006 and 
Thereafter First 80,000 cubic feet $0.2424 $0.2982 Next 120,000 cubic feet 0.1814 0.2231 Next 200,000 cubic feet 0.1218 0.1498 Over 400,000 cubic feet 0.0610 0.0750  
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-222. - Industrial wastewater discharge fees; nonpermit holders. 
    Any industrial or commercial user not required to obtain a discharge permit pursuant to section 62-221 who has an average flow of more than 1,000 gallons, or approximately 134 cubic feet per day flow (usage) shall be charged in accordance with the following schedule: 
Charges Per 100 Cubic Feet of Flow Prior to 
7/1/2006 7/1/2006 and Thereafter First 80,000 cubic feet $0.1218 $0.1498 Next 120,000 cubic feet 0.0920 0.1132 Next 200,000 cubic feet 0.0610 0.0750 Over 400,000 cubic feet 0.0311 0.0383  
These fees are in addition to the rates and charges set forth in division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-223. - Hauled liquid waste charges (POTW). 
    In order to discharge any domestic hauled liquid wastes to the POTW, a hauler shall obtain an annual permit for each vehicle from POTW at a fee of $120.00 per calendar year. Domestic hauled liquid waste and septic waste discharged to the POTW shall be governed by policies and procedures established by the authority and subject to a charge per discharge, based on the full capacity of the septic hauling vehicle, of $59.00 per 1,000 gallons, or $0.059 per gallon subject to standard rates plus any and all appropriate surcharges. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-224. - Groundwater remediation sewage treatment surcharges (POTW). 
    The authority, upon recommendation of the superintendent, may authorize the discharge of contaminated groundwater in accordance with the following pretreatment schedule of charges. In addition to all applicable connection fees: 
(1)  The treatment charge for treating the sewage discharged from authorized groundwater remediation connections shall be as set forth in sections 62-181 through 62-197. 
(2)  The pretreatment charge for authorized groundwater remediation connections shall be: 
a.  As set forth in section 62-222, where a pretreatment permit is not required. 
b.  As set forth in section 62-221, where a pretreatment permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-225-62-241. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SEWER INSURANCE FUND AND CHARGES 

Sec. 62-242. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private sewer connection includes the connection from the public sewer to the foundation wall of the structure located on private property. 
    Public sewer means that sewer owned and maintained by the city for the collection of sanitary sewer effluent. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-243. - Purpose, assessment, utilization. 
(a)  The sum of $2.20 per month shall be added as sewer insurance charges for all single-family residential use sewer customers within the corporate city limits of the city. (This program does not include commercial, industrial, or bulk water customers.) All of the sums of money so collected shall be deposited in a separate fund of the city's wastewater utility, entitled "Sewer Insurance Fund." 
(b)  All funds collected under section 62-246 shall also be deposited into this fund. 
(c)  All of the sums of money so collected shall be used solely to repair or replace failing private sewer connections, and for administrative and inspection costs associated with the program, including material, labor and equipment for sewer lateral repairs or inspection. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5649 , § 1, 3-4-2019) 
Sec. 62-244. - Application of funds. 
(a)  Funds collected under this division shall be used for: 
(1)  The payment of all costs in excess of the charges set forth in section 62-246 which the city engineer declares to be directly attributable to the repair of a private sewer connection. 
(2)  All costs associated with the removal or replacement of public streets, curbs, and sidewalks. 
(b)  Funds collected under this division shall not be used for: 
(1)  The payment of any costs associated with the removal or replacement of any shrubbery, plants, lawns, sprinkler systems, or other landscaping features on public or private property; any expenses incurred in tunneling under or replacing any surface improvements, such as bituminous or concrete driveways, patios, gas grills, utility lines, foundations, manholes and connections, and any other surface or subsurface improvements found on public or private property. 
(2)  All costs associated with the removal of a tree located in public right-of-way or on private property, if determined to be the cause of the private sewer connection problem. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5552 , § 1, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 62-245. - Limitation of funds. 
(a)  All costs associated with those items included in subsection 62-244(b)(1) shall not be insured under this division. 
(b)  Manholes, connections, sampling equipment, meter pits and the like required to be placed at the owner's expense to permit monitoring in accordance with ordinance or state or federal pretreatment statutes shall not be insured under this division. 
(c)  Lift stations, sewage grinder pumps, force mains, drop connections, casings bored under streets, private sewer connections affixed to bridges or structures, and river crossings shall not be insured under this division. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-246. - Charges to private sewer owner; payment. 
(a)  The owner of property on which the private sewer connection is located shall be responsible to pay the city engineer the first $250.00 of cost incurred for all work as allowed under section 62-244 in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling. 
(b)  The owner of property on which the private sewer connection is located shall be responsible to pay the city engineer the first $500.00 of cost incurred for all work as allowed under section 62-244 in a renter-occupied single-family dwelling. 
(c)  Payment from the single-family property owner shall be due to the sewer insurance fund prior to the initiation of any work. 
(d)  In cases of hardship or extreme emergency, the single-family owner occupied property may file an affidavit of hardship for review by the city engineer. If approved, payment will be due the city within 180 days of the date of invoice issued by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5552 , § 2, 11-21-2016) 
Sec. 62-247. - Responsibility of private sewer owner. 
(a)  All private sewer connections under public or private property shall remain the full and sole responsibility of the private owner with regard to reaming, cleaning, and any other related maintenance required for their normal operation. All costs for cleaning shall be the owner's responsibility. 
(b)  All private sewer lines which lie behind foundation walls or building lines and all private sewer lines which may run between foundations or buildings, shall remain the sole responsibility of the private sewer owner. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-248. - Application for utilization of funds; compliance with codes. 
(a)  Any private property owner who wishes to file a claim under this division shall: 
(1)  File a claim on the appropriate application form with the city engineer requesting an inspection of the private sewer connection to determine the need for repair or replacement; 
(2)  Sign a release furnished by the city engineer authorizing right of entry onto the affected private property for purposes of making repairs, and acknowledging the respective responsibilities of the city and the private owner in this matter; and 
(3)  Execute a payment agreement furnished by the city engineer, as approved by the board of public works and safety. 
(b)  All work performed on repair or replacement of a private sewer connection shall be in accordance with the provisions of article IV of chapter 101 and the miscellaneous standards as approved by the board of public works and safety. 
(c)  All reaming, cleaning, or rotorooter work used to determine the location of a break or obstruction in a private sewer connection shall be performed by a licensed plumber or a professional sewer cleaning firm. 
(d)  No claim for the repair of a private sewer connection will be honored unless the repair order has been authorized by the city and approved by the city engineer or his designated representative. The city will select a licensed, bonded sewer contractor for performance of private sewer connection repairs. The city engineer will be responsible for reviewing all unit charges for material and labor for each project prior to approval for payment. 
(e)  The city may elect to perform a video inspection of the building sewer lateral to determine the locations and extent of the blockage. If the structural integrity of the building sewer is determined to be acceptable, the cost for video inspection may be invoiced to property owner who shall clean the line in accordance with section 62-247. 
(f)  The city may elect to hire a sewer cleaning firm to attempt to verify the location and nature of the problem. If this firm is able to clean the sewer lateral with a blade and provide a one-year guarantee to the property owner, this cost will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-249. - Use of funds prohibited when account is delinquent. 
    The insurance for repair or replacement shall not be in force on any account if the charge for insurance is delinquent for more than 30 days when the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-250. - Financial statement and report required. 
(a)  The controller shall submit to the board of public works and safety and common council a financial statement of the affairs of this fund on a monthly basis, which statement shall show the receipts for the year, as well as all expenditures. 
(b)  In addition to the monthly report, the city engineer shall file an annual repair list with the board of public works and safety and common council, detailing the following: 
(1)  Name of property owner and location of sewer insurance repair (designated by the common address of the property); and 
(2)  Name of contractor who performed the sewer repair; and 
(3)  The amount of sewer repair with comments concerning the nature of repair. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-251-62-278. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ADMINISTRATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PERMIT PROGRAM 

Sec. 62-279. - Wastewater dischargers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to any sewer within the jurisdiction of the authority without first obtaining the proper permits from the city engineer and/or the authority. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-280. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  General permits. All dischargers deemed by the control authority to be significant industrial users (SIU) or which discharge any waste characteristic limited by section 62-147 shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging to the POTW. The superintendent may permit wastewater flows resulting from groundwater remediation discharges into the POTW authority wastewater collection and treatment system with approval by the utility board. Groundwater remediation discharges shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this article. Groundwater remediation discharges shall also be subject to all applicable sewer rates and charges found in division 6 of this article. 
(b)  Permit application. Industrial wastewater dischargers shall complete and file with the authority, a permit application in the form prescribed by the authority. Existing industrial/commercial dischargers shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after being requested to do so by the authority. Proposed new dischargers shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to the POTW. The authority will evaluate the complete application and data furnished by the discharger and may require additional information. Within 30 days after full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided herein. No discharge permit shall be issued unless and until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  Disclosure of name, address, and location of the discharger. 
(2)  Disclosure of standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended, and the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. 
(3)  Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, priority pollutants, and to those mentioned in this article as determined by categorical pretreatment standards as they apply to the discharger and pollutants requested by the authority. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(4)  Disclosure of time, duration and volume of each specific discharge at each specific discharge point. 
(5)  Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be measured unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the authority due to cost or nonfeasibility. 
(6)  Disclosure of site plans, mechanical and/or plumbing plans to show all connections of pollutant-generating processes, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, including measuring and sampling equipment. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials stored above or below ground which are or may be discharged to the sewers or works of the authority. 
(8)  Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this article in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this article on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the discharger to comply with this article. 
(9)  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article, the discharger shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. 
a.  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the discharger to comply with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, dates relating to hiring an engineer, hiring other appropriate personnel, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, and all other acts necessary to achieve compliance with this article. No increment referred to in this subsection shall exceed nine months. 
b.  Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the discharger shall submit a progress report to the authority, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the discharger to return the construction to the approved schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the authority. 
(10)  The discharger will also provide a certified operator to run the pretreatment system. The operator must hold wastewater treatment plant operation certification, issued by the state department of environmental management, that is required for that pretreatment system. 
(11)  Disclosure of each product produced by type, amount, process and rate of production. 
(12)  Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized (average and maximum per day). 
(13)  All permit applications for new or modified permits shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the discharger and certified by a qualified professional acceptable to the superintendent. All renewal applications for existing permits shall be signed by a principal executive officer of the discharger. All permit applications shall contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(14)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(15)  List of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(16)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-281. - Permit modifications. 
(a)  The authority reserves the right to amend any wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder in order to assure compliance by the authority with applicable laws and regulations. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of each discharger subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standards. All national categorical pretreatment standards adopted after the promulgation of this article shall be adopted by the authority as part of this article except as noted in sections 62-146 and 62-147. Where a discharger, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by this section, the discharger shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit from the authority within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. In addition, the discharger with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the authority within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, the information required by subsections 62-280(b)(8) and (9). Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(b)  National categorical pretreatment standards, as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act, shall be met by all dischargers of the regulated industrial categories. New source categorical dischargers must submit a baseline monitoring report (BMR), on a form provided by the authority, at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. BMR report requirements in the SUO contain facility identifying information, process description, other environmental permits, description of operations, schematic diagram, flow measurements, measurement of pollutants, sampling location, wastewater treatment description, spill prevention plan, certification, compliance schedule. New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. An application for modification of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be considered for submittal to the regional administrator by the authority, when the authority's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR 403.7. 
(c)  Any applicable best management practices (BMP) required by categorical standards, local limits, or state or local law are to be included in SIU wastewater discharge permits. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-283. - Permit conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall specify no less than the following: 
(1)  Fees and charges to be paid upon initial permit issuance; 
(2)  Limits on average and maximum wastewater constituent and characteristics regulated thereby; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Special conditions as the authority may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge including sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and report schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of special technical reports or discharge reports where same differ from those prescribed by this article; 
(8)  Requirement that the POTW be notified in advance of changes in wastewater processes, volumes and compositions; 
(9)  Effluent limitations including best management practices (BMP) based on the more stringent of categorical pretreatment standards, local limits as established by this article, or state and local law; 
(10)  General and specific discharge prohibitions as established by section 62-147; 
(11)  Requirements for collecting/retaining and providing access to plant records relating to the user's discharge and for providing entry for sampling and inspection; 
(12)  Requirements for notification of spills, potential problems to the POTW including slug loadings, upsets or violations; 
(13)  Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of pollution control equipment; 
(14)  Requirements to develop and implement spill and slug control plans; 
(15)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW to ensure compliance with this article, state and federal pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(16)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(17)  Statement of nontransferability; 
(18)  Conditions for modification or revocation of permit; and 
(19)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-283. - Permits duration. 
    All wastewater discharge permits shall be valid from the date of issue for five years and shall be renewed at the end of each five-year period, hereafter subject to amendment or revocation as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-284. - Limitations on permit transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-285. - Ninety-day compliance report. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the discharger with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or standards set forth in this article or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW by the discharger, any discharger subject to this article shall submit to the authority a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, the average and maximum daily flow in gallons, and rate of production if production-based standards apply. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger, and certified to by a qualified professional acceptable to the superintendent. The certification statement required in subsection 62-280(b)(13) shall be included in this report. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-286. - Periodic monitoring compliance reports. 
(a)  Any discharger subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this article, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the authority, shall submit to the authority a periodic monitoring report on a form supplied or approved by the authority based on sampling and flow analysis performed by said discharger or its representative. The frequency in which this monitoring compliance report is to be submitted to the authority shall be prescribed within the discharge permit procured by the discharger. Compliance reports shall be required within a time period of no more than one per week to no less than one per yearly quarter, depending on the discharger's potential waste discharge characteristics. Specific waste pollutants to be sampled and analyzed will be contingent on the substances listed in the discharger's compliance report as detailed in section 62-285 and any additional pollutant requested by the authority. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum dally flows during the reporting period reported in section 62-285. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement provided; however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the authority may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. Unless otherwise specified, all monitoring reports shall be due by the 28th day of the month following the period covered by the report. Reports not postmarked or received by the 28th shall be considered late. All self-monitoring reports must be signed by a principal executive officer of the company and shall contain the certification statement from subsection 62-280(b)(13). 
(b)  Reports of permittees shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where required by the authority. The POTW may convert production-based categorical standards to equivalent mass or concentration limits. If the POTW elects to calculate equivalent limits, the permittees subject to that standard will be required to comply with the equivalent limits in lieu of the production-based standards. Discharge representative samples shall be collected at an appropriate monitoring facility approved by the authority. Samples will be taken on a composite or grab sample basis and on varying days throughout the workweek as prescribed by the authority. Sampling may occur more frequently during the first few months in order for the authority to obtain an adequate data base of information. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the authority using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation. The user must notify the authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the authority within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if the authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-287. - Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the superintendent, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of; would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification shall include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms (220 lbs), of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimate of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. Notifications of changed discharges must be submitted as required by law. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements set out in section 62-286. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of the above division during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). A discharge of more than 15 kilograms (33 lbs) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the superintendent, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree that the user has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  All industries permitted by the city shall make a one-time notification to the superintendent on the city's hazardous waste notification form stating if the company is subject to the reporting conditions under this section. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-288. - Notification of discharge change. 
(a)  All industrial users shall notify the POTW in advance of any significant change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, or the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. Any discharger, who through addition or changes in operational processes, anticipates the discharge of wastes identified section 62-147, shall notify the authority of such anticipated change by written notice at least 30 days prior to the proposed effective date of such change. The discharger shall provide the following specific information: 
(1)  Description of waste constituent or characteristic; 
(2)  Method or process that will generate waste; 
(3)  Approximate amount of said waste to be discharged to the sewer by continuous or batch discharge method. Data verification by sample effluent analysis may be required by the authority; and 
(4)  Detailed plans for the elimination or treatment of waste must be described, along with compliance dates when such treatment, if necessary, will be initiated. All treatment plans and compliance dates shall be reviewed by the authority for final approval. 
(b)  The authority shall provide any necessary information to a discharger regarding established limits, if any, on proposed waste discharge changes. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-289. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Each discharger shall provide and operate at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the authority. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises, except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the authority may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the discharger. 
(c)  All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. All monitoring structures shall have an opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter and an internal diameter of no less than 48 inches. Construction shall be completed within 120 days of receipt of permit by discharger. The authority may grant extensions of time at its discretion. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-290. - Right of entry. 
    Representatives of the POTW, the state and EPA, upon showing proper identification shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises of any user who may be subject to the requirements of this article. Industrial users shall allow authorized representatives of the POTW, state and EPA access to all premises for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, examining records or copying records in the performance of their duties. Authorized representatives of the POTW, state and EPA shall have the right to place on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and monitoring. Where a user has security or safety measures in force which would require clearance, training, or wearing of special protective gear, the user shall make necessary arrangements, at the user's own expense, to enable authorized representatives of the POTW, state, and EPA to enter and inspect the premises as guaranteed by this section. The authority, at its discretion, shall have the right to inspect any nonregulated discharger to confirm the absence of wastes as described in section 62-147. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-291. - Search warrants. 
    If the superintendent and/or authorized representative has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and if the superintendent and/or authorized representative has probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application to the appropriate court, the superintendent may seek a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The request by the superintendent shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the superintendent in the company of a uniformed police officer. In the event of an extreme emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-292. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data furnished to the authority with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the authority that the release of such information would divulge process information or methods of production which are entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information. Any such request must be asserted at the time of the submission of the information or data. When such a confidentiality claim is asserted, the information shall be treated as such until a determination is made by the POTW. Effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(b)  When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the EPA, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or their pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-293. - Records retention. 
    All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, best management practice documentation and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge or any permit or order issued pursuant to this article. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of an administrative order or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the authority pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation, with respect to any and all appeals, have expired. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-294-62-319. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 62-320. - Emergency suspension of service and discharge permits. 
    The authority may, for good cause, suspend the wastewater treatment service and the wastewater discharge permit of a discharger when it appears to the authority that an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons or danger to the environment, interferes with the operation of the POTW, or violates any pretreatment limits imposed by this article or any wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the authority's wastewater treatment service and/or the discharger's wastewater discharger permit, shall, within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the authority, cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order within the specified time, the authority shall commence judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the discharger's compliance with such order. The authority shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service and terminate judicial proceedings pending proof by the discharger of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-321. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The authority may revoke the permit of any discharger who fails to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by representatives of the authority for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or violates the conditions of its permit, this article, or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto. Whenever the authority finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct which justifies revocation of a wastewater discharge permit pursuant to this section, the authority shall serve or cause to be served upon such discharger, a written notice either personally or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature of the alleged violation. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice, the discharger shall respond personally or in writing to the authority, advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and where necessary, establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-322. - Show cause hearing. 
    When violations of this article are not corrected by timely compliance by means of administrative order, the authority may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct prohibited by this article, to show cause before the authority or its duly authorized representative, why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the discharger by postal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the authority or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the discharger to show cause before the authority or its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer, or authorized representative of the discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the authority which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. Appeal of such orders may be taken by the discharger in accordance with applicable local or state law. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-323. - Notification of violation. 
    When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. The notice of violation may require a response due within ten days of receipt by the user to the authority. It may also require an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any other action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-324. - Administration fines. 
    When the authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the authority may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $2,500.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other longterm average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. The authority shall inform the discharger through written notice by postal service, certified or registered, return receipt requested, detailing the cause of the violation and the specific amount of fine to be paid per day of continued noncompliance. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or be a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-325. - Injunctive relief. 
    Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the superintendent may petition the circuit court of the state or the superior court of the county through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the authority. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-326. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this article, any order or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(b)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(c)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-327. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation of ruling by the authority of any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. In the event that such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this article or deals with a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, the authority's decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration and appeal. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this article may be sought in accordance with applicable local and state law. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-328. - Operating upsets. 
(a)  Any discharger who experiences an upset in operations which places the discharger in a temporary state of noncompliance with this article or a wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, shall inform the authority immediately (by telephone) upon first awareness of the commencement of the upset. The written follow-up report shall be completed within five days and shall specify: 
(1)  The description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on a discharger's compliance status; 
(2)  The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; and 
(3)  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other condition of noncompliance. Based on the information received by the authority regarding the nature and potential harmful effect of a discharger's upset to sewer or treatment plant systems, the authority may require the discharger to monitor waste discharge for a continued period of time specified by the authority. Waste samples and analysis may also be required to determine appropriate treatment compliance. 
(b)  A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the authority against a discharger for any noncompliance with this article or any wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant hereto, which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-329. - Bypassing prohibition. 
(a)  The bypassing of pretreatment facilities is prohibited unless it is the only feasible alternative to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. Bypasses which do not cause violations of pretreatment standards or requirements shall be allowed only if it is also for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. When possible, the authority shall be notified of such bypasses at least ten days in advance. Planned bypasses which violate pretreatment standards may be permitted if all of the conditions in this subsection are met. 
(b)  Unanticipated bypasses which cause violations of pretreatment standards must be reported by phone to the authority within 24 hours, followed within five days by a written submission containing a description of the bypass, its cause, duration, date, and time. If the bypass has not been corrected, the report shall include the anticipated time it is expected to continue and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-330. - Enforcement actions; annual publication. 
    A list of dischargers which are determined to be in significant noncompliance at any time during the 12 previous months, shall be published by the authority in the largest daily newspaper serving the municipality in which the authority is located. Publication shall occur no less than once annually; normally in the month of January. This list may summarize the enforcement actions which have been taken against each discharger and indicate each discharger's current compliance status. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-331. - Penalty. 
(a)  Recovery of costs incurred by the authority. Any discharger violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge-producing deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the authority's wastewater disposal system shall be liable to the authority for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The authority shall bill the discharger for costs incurred by the authority as a result of the violation or discharge. These charges may include, but shall not be limited to, costs for additional surveillance, sampling and analysis, as well as any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article enforceable under the provisions of sections 62-320 through 62-330. 
(b)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, or violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction be subject to the possibility of fine and imprisonment, or punishment by the imposition of a civil penalty of not more than $2,500.00 per violation. Each occurrence of falsification or day covered by said falsified record or report shall be considered a separate violation. 
(c)  Protection of property. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct and be liable for fines, penalties and liability for recovery of damages. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Secs. 62-332-62-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES 

Sec. 62-351. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division; and 
(5)  To ensure the proper installation, operation, and maintenance of construction site best management practices (BMPs) for silt, water quantity, and water quality control. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-352. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this division which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants, directly or indirectly, to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. Best management practices also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    City planner means the city planner or his designated representative. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means land disturbing activities subject to the city's construction site erosion control ordinance or NPDES general construction permits. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Department of engineering means the city department responsible for implementing the provisions of this division. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, manmade or natural whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 62-356. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
    MS4 coordinator means the MS4 coordinator or his designated representative. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater; including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, municipal streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works; and 
(4)  Located in an easement on any recorded subdivision/development plat. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state department of environmental management (IDEM) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this division, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: Paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind that may cause or contribute to pollution. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system means publicly-owned facilities or those facilities shown as stormwater drainage easements on plats for subdivisions or developments by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed; including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Waters of the state means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Indiana which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-353. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the department of engineering or the NPDES permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-354. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This division is not intended to modify or repeal any other division, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this division are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this division imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-355. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city's department of engineering, the department of city planning and MS4 coordinator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-356. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Illicit discharges. 
(1)  No person shall throw, drain, drip, leak, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under his control to throw, drain, drip, leak, or otherwise discharge onto surfaces that will allow them to be conveyed into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(2)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharges of the following, but not limited to, into the storm drain system is prohibited: 
a.  Automobile maintenance and operation sources such as untreated commercial car wash wastewaters, untreated radiator flushing wastewaters, untreated engine degreasing wastes, improper oil, gasoline, transmission fluid, and other automotive fluids disposal, leaking underground storage tanks, and untreated leaking of oils, gasoline and other automotive fluids. 
b.  Landscape irrigation sources such as direct spraying of fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides onto impervious surfaces and the over-spraying of fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides onto landscaping. 
(3)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (only if dechlorinated, typically less than one part per million chlorine), firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
b.  Discharges or flows specified in writing by the state department of environmental management (IDEM) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
c.  Dye-testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a notification to the department of engineering prior to the event, except as administered by the city utilities sewer maintenance department; 
d.  The prohibition provisions in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this division if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this division must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the department of engineering. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the department of engineering requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-357. - Industrial or construction or land disturbing activity discharges. 
(a)  Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES (or state) stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit shall be required in a form acceptable to the department of engineering prior to allowing discharges to the MS4. 
(b)  Projects subject to a city building permit, including single-family residential building permits, must develop and adhere to a sediment and erosion control plan. Submittal to and approval of this plan by the city's department of planning is required prior to obtaining a building permit. Failure to properly implement the approved plan constitutes a violation of this division. 
(c)  As a minimum, the city will require best management practice (BMP) implementation for any land disturbing activity, including land or individual lot clearing, grubbing, landscaping, etc., that may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-358. - Access and inspection/monitoring of properties and facilities. 
    The department of engineering and/or the MS4 coordinator shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(1)  City personnel shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities subject to regulation under this division as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this division. If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city personnel ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)  City personnel shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city personnel to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharges. 
(4)  City personnel may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to city personnel. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be allowed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of city personnel. Failure to provide safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled is a violation of this division. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to a facility is a violation of this division. 
(7)  If city personnel have been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and are able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city personnel may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction or refer the case to the NPDES permitting authority. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-359. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
(a)  The board of public works of the city has adopted construction standards identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(b)  Every property owner through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that could pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-360. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, waters of the state, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. In the event of such release, and in addition to other notification requirements, the facility shall notify the department of engineering in person, by phone, facsimile or by e-mail no later than the day following such discharge. Notification in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the department of engineering within three business days of the notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained and made available for inspection for at least three years. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate local and state agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(c)  For facilities that operate under existing NPDES permits for stormwater discharge, spill reporting shall be made to the permitting authority in accordance with the permit. The department of engineering shall be provided with copies of any written notification required by the NPDES permit. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-361. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, city personnel or their agents are authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city shall be entitled to compensation for any expenses involved in abating the violation and/or restoring the property. The city shall have the option of performing the work and placing a lien on the property for recovery of such documented expenses. 
(2)  Whenever city personnel finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this division, department of engineering may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs, attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this division, including sampling and monitoring expenses; 
f.  Payment of penalty determined in subsection (c) of this section; and 
g.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices (i.e., source control or treatment BMPs). 
(c)  Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this division that fails to comply with a compliance directive issued by the city and referenced in section 62-331 shall be punishable as provided in section 1-7. 
(d)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-362. - TIF credit. 
(a)  Wastewater utility customers whose premises are served by the utility and are located within the city limits shall receive a credit applied towards their monthly sewer bill in recognition of the portion of the principal and interest on wastewater utility bonds paid by the city from TIF revenues. 
(b)  The monthly credit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Flow rate credit: $0.232 per 100 cubic feet 
(2)  Base rate credit: 
Meter Size Equivalency 
Factors Monthly 
Credit Residential 1.0 $10.00 5/8 " 1.0 10.00 1" 2.5 25.00 11/4" 4.0 40.00 11/2" 5.8 58.00 2" 10.0 100.00 3" 23.0 230.00 4" 41.0 410.00 6" 92.0 920.00 8" 164.0 1,640.00 10" 256.0 2,560.00  
(c)  Single-family residential properties serviced by a water meter smaller than one and one-quarter inches shall receive a base charge TIF credit based on a meter equivalency factor of one. 
(d)  The TIF credit shall be in effect upon passage of the amending rate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010; Ord. No. 5568 , § 1, 3-6-2017) 
Secs. 62-363-62-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-381. - Connection with water main; permit. 
(a)  When any person desires to connect with any water main in the city, he shall first obtain a written permit from the building department to do so. The permit shall give the number of the lot, block and street number where the connection is to be made, and the size of the connection. 
(b)  The permit shall be filed with superintendent of the water works of the city 24 hours previous to the time it is desired to make such connection. The superintendent shall keep a record of all such permits and connections in a book to be kept for that purpose. 
(Code 1968, tit. 550, § 1; Code 1985, § 51.01; Ord. No. 334, 5-4-1908) 
Sec. 62-382. - Protection of water meters, curb boxes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee of the city water department or an authorized plumber, to use, handle, molest, interfere with, or disturb any meter or any curb box of the city water department within the city, or any street valve or appliance connected therewith or belonging thereto, or to turn on or to turn off water at the same time or by means thereof. It shall not be unlawful for any person to turn off the water at the valve of any curb box where the property supplied through the valve of the curb box is being injured by a flood of water caused by a burst pipe or from defective fittings. 
(Code 1968, tit. 550, § 2; Code 1985, § 51.02; Ord. No. 469, 4-1-1918) 
Sec. 62-383. - Approval and confirmation of the general rules, terms, and rates for the city utilities water department and the Clay Water Department. 
(a)  The general rules, terms, and rates, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance Number 3003 on file in the office of the city clerk, and which are incorporated herein by reference, by and between the city, by and through its board of public works and safety for and on behalf of the city utilities water department and the Clay Water Department be, and the same are hereby in all things approved, ratified, and confirmed. 
(b)  The board of public works and safety of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute the general rules, terms, and rates on behalf of the city. 
(c)  This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the common council and approval by the mayor; provided, however, that the schedule of rates and charges shall not become effective unless approved by the state public service commission, or until such time as the commission shall direct. 
(Code 1985, § 51.03; Ord. No. 3003, 1-5-1987; Ord. No. 3073, 7-23-1987) 
Sec. 62-384. - Wellhead protection. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the contents of the county wellhead protection Ordinance Number 103-98, as amended from time to time, and further requests and authorizes the county health department to administer the wellhead protection program for the benefit of the community public water system utilized by the city and the city utilities. 
(b)  The city utilities, which is the intended community public water system in the incorporated ordinance, shall designate and delineate the wellhead protection area (WHPA) in accordance with criteria established in 327 IAC 8-4-1-5 and as set forth in the incorporated ordinance. 
(c)  Property owners within the corporate limits of the city not exempted under the ordinance, utilities or local units of government with multiple facilities on several properties shall apply for and obtain a wellhead protection area permit issued by the county health department in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section, and shall comply with the requirements applicable to all wellhead protection area permit holders as described in the ordinance. In case of any conflict within the city, city ordinances and zoning laws will have absolute jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4899, §§ 1-3, 11-15-2004) 
Secs. 62-385-62-411. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES 

Sec. 62-412. - Schedule of rates and charges. 
(a)  Schedule of rates and charges-Inside city. For the use of and the service rendered by the water utility of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, the following rates and charges based upon the amount of water supplied by said water utility. 
(1)  Residential and multi-unit. 
a.  Metered rates. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Metered Rates per Month Phase One Phase Two Rate per 100 cubic feet $2.08 $2.52  
b.  Customer base charge. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Size of Meter* Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $6.83 $8.26 1" $6.83 $8.26  
*Meters over 1 inch are reclassified to commercial and industrial rates 
c.  Fire protection charge. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Customer Charge Phase One Phase Two Per month $5.03 $6.09  
(2)  Small Non-residential. 
a.  Metered rates per month. 
Phase One Phase Two All consumption per 100 cubic feet $2.12 $2.57  
b.  Customer base charge. Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in accordance with the following applicable size meter installed: 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $6.83 $8.26 1" 13.78 16.67 11/2" 25.34 30.66 2" 39.18 47.41 3" 71.52 86.54  
c.  Fire protection charge. 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $5.03 $6.09 1" 12.58 15.22 11/2" 25.15 30.43 2" 40.25 48.70 3" 75.46 91.31  
(3)  Large nonresidential. 
a.  Metered rates per month. 
Phase One Phase Two First 7,750 cubic feet $2.21 $2.67 Over 7,750 cubic feet 1.40 1.69  
b.  Customer base charge. Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in accordance with the following applicable size meter installed: 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 4" $117.71 $142.43 6" 233.27 282.26 8" 371.89 449.99 10" 533.64 645.70  
c.  Fire protection charge. 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 4" $125.74 $152.15 6" 251.54 304.36 8" 402.46 486.98 10" 578.53 700.02  
(4)  Hydrant rental. 
Phase One Phase Two Private hydrants - per annum $648.11 $784.21  
(5)  Private fire protection service. 
Phase One Phase Two Sprinkler connection - per annum 1" $18.01 $21.79 11/2" 40.59 49.11 2" 72.03 87.16 3" 162.06 196.09 4" 288.12 348.63 6" 648.11 784.21 8" 1,152.17 1,394.13 10" 1,800.28 2,178.34 12" 2,592.45 3,136.86  
(6)  Nonrecurring charges. Refer to subsection (c). Current rate effective March 5, 2013. 
(b)  Schedule of rates and charges-Outside city. For the use of and the service rendered by the water utility of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, the following rates and charges based upon the amount of water supplied by said water utility. 
(1)  Residential and multi-unit. 
a.  Metered rates. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Metered Rates per Month Phase One Phase Two Rate per 100 Cubic Feet $2.41 $2.92  
b.  Customer base charge. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Size of Meter* Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $8.06 $9.75 1" 8.06 9.75  
*Meters over 1 inch are reclassified to commercial and industrial rates. 
c.  Fire protection charge. Phase One effective January 1, 2018 and Phase Two effective January 1, 2021 in the amounts as follows: 
Customer Charge Phase One Phase Two Per month $5.03 $6.09  
(2)  Small nonresidential. 
a.  Metered rates per month. 
Phase One Phase Two All Consumption $2.42 $2.93  
b.  Customer base charge. Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in accordance with the following applicable size meter installed: 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $8.06 $9.75 1" 16.85 20.39 11/2" 31.49 38.10 2" 49.08 59.39 3" 90.10 109.02  
c.  Fire protection charge. 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 5/8 " to 3/4" $5.03 $6.09 1" 12.58 15.22 11/2" 25.15 30.43 2" 40.25 48.70 3" 75.46 91.31  
(3)  Large nonresidential. 
a.  Metered rates per month. 
Phase One Phase Two First 7,750 cubic feet $2.07 $2.50 Over 7,750 cubic feet 1.60 1.94  
b.  Customer base charge. Each user shall pay a monthly base charge in accordance with the following applicable size meter installed: 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 4" $148.71 $179.94 6" 295.20 357.19 8" 470.97 569.87 10" 676.07 818.04  
c.  Fire protection charge. 
Size of Meter Phase One Phase Two 4" $125.74 $152.15 6" 251.54 304.36 8" 402.46 486.98 10" 578.53 700.02  
(4)  Hydrant rental. 
Phase One Phase Two Private hydrants - per annum $648.11 $784.21  
(5)  Private fire protection service. 
Phase One Phase Two Sprinkler connection - per annum 1" $18.01 $21.79 11/2" 40.59 49.11 2" 72.03 87.16 3" 162.06 196.09 4" 288.12 348.63 6" 648.11 784.21 8" 1,152.17 1,394.13 10" 1,800.28 2,178.34 12" 2,592.45 3,136.86  
(6)  Nonrecurring charges. Refer to subsection (c). Current rate effective March 5, 2013. 
(c)  Nonrecurring charges. 
(1)  Water account service charge-$20.00. 
(2)  Sprinkling meters turn-on charge-$20.00. 
(3)  Service deposits-Service deposits are set by the Utility and can be up to one-sixth of normal annual bill per service location. 
(4)  Failure to meet appointment scheduled charge-$15.00. 
(5)  Dishonored negotiable instrument charge-$20.00. 
(6)  Processing/disconnect charge. 
-Disconnect during office hours-$25.00. 
-Additional reconnect charges after hours-$70.00. 
-Additional reconnect charges on Sundays and holidays-$90.00. 
(7)  After hours service charge. 
After hours and Saturdays-$70.00 minimum first two hours. 
After two hours call out time an additional $35.00 per hour per man. 
Sundays and holidays-$90.00 minimum first two hours. 
After two hours call out time an additional $45.00 per hour per man. 
(8)  Turn water services off/on (for repair or to test plumbing). No charge during office hours 8-5. 
For after hour charges, refer to item (7). 
(9)  Late penalty-Ten percent of the first $3.00 plus three percent of the balance. 
(10)  Meter tampering charge. 
First offense-Actual cost of parts, labor, equipment and overhead plus cost of service estimated to have been used, based on prior history-$75.00 plus damages and a police report filed with police. 
Second offense-Same as above, plus $250.00 plus damages. 
Subsequent offenses-Same as second offense, plus disconnection of service. 
(11)  Violation of fire service agreement-Illegal use of fire hydrant. 
First offense-$500.00. 
Subsequent offense-$1,000.00 and subject to criminal charges. 
(12)  Construction permit fees. 
150-day residential-$65.00. 
240-day commercial-$135.00 per building or $5.00 per unit (whichever is larger). 
320-day Industrial-$600.00 per building. 
(13)  New service address meter charges-Contact water department for current cost-574-258-1652. 
Meter Size Charge 5/8 " to 3/4" (touch pad) Actual current cost 1" Actual current cost 11/2" Actual current cost 2" Actual current cost 3" and larger Actual current cost  
Damage to existing system actual cost of repair. 
(14)  Meter test at customer request. (No charge for first and second meter testing if second test has been requested after 12 months of the first testing). 
Meter Size Charge 5/8 " to 1" $25.00 11/2" to 2" $48.00 3" and larger Actual cost  
(15)  Hydrant use agreement. 
Hydrant permit charge-$35.00. 
Deposit $750.00. 
Damages to hydrant - repair cost to be deducted from deposit before refund, plus cost of water used, or per month (whichever is larger)-$50.00 minimum. 
Township hydrant use (fire department use only)-$25.00 plus cost of water. 
(16)  Tapping permit. Existing taps never used and no fee paid at time of installation. 
Residential 3/4" $1,198.00 1" $1,203.00 11/2" $1,564.00 2" $1,738.00 Commercial3/4" Actual current cost 1" Actual current cost 11/2" Actual current cost 2" Actual current cost Commercial/Industrial4" Actual current cost 6" Actual current cost 8" Actual current cost 10" Actual current cost 12" Actual current cost  
All new taps-Actual current cost. 
Contact water department for current pricing-574-258-1652. 
(17)  Lead service line replacement tap costs. (Does not include meter). 
Size Cost 5/8 " to 3/4" $1,198.00 1" $1,203.00 11/2" $1,564.00 2" $1,738.00  
(18)  Land improvement charges. 
Nonresidential Water Main Charge/Linear Foot 6" $12.00 8" $16.00 10" $20.00 12" $24.00 14" $28.00 16" $32.00 20" $40.00 24" $48.00 Residential1/2 of the current cost of a 6" water main (100 feet maximum)  
(Code 1985, § 51.10; Ord. No. 2150, 6-5-1978; Ord. No. 2257, 2-19-1979; Ord. No. 2562, 10-18-1982; Ord. No. 2564, 10-18-1982; Ord. No. 2605, 4-19-1983; Ord. No. 3002, 1-5-1987; Ord. No. 3072, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3073, 7-23-1987; Ord. No. 3548, 12-2-1991; Ord. No. 3756, 9-27-1993; Ord. No. 4462, 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 4463, 12-6-1999; Ord. No. 4494, 6-19-2000; Ord. No. 4513, 8-21-2000; Ord. No. 5381, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-2013; Ord. No. 5569 , § 1(Exhs. A, B), 3-6-2017) 
Sec. 62-413. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined subject to the provisions of section 1-7. 
(Code 1968, tit. 550, § 2; Code 1985, § 51.99; Ord. No. 469, 4-1-1918) 
Secs. 62-414-62-439. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRIC SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-440-62-461. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 62-462. - Rate R, residential service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available for residential service through one meter to individual residential customers, including rural residential customers. 
(b)  Character of service. Alternating current, 60-cycle, single phase, at a standard voltage. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate R, residential electrical service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.35; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-463. - Rate C, commercial service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available to nonresidential and commercial customers. 
(b)  Character of service. Alternating current, 60-cycle, single phase service supplied through a single set of service wires to a single meter location at a standard service voltage. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate C, commercial electrical service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.36; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-464. - Rate P, commercial service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available for all commercial and industrial customers taking service through one three-phase meter. 
(b)  Character of service. Alternating current, 60-cycle, three-phase service supplied through a single set of service wires to a single meter location. The service voltage shall be standard secondary voltage as the utility may, at its option, make available. Any applicant requiring service differing from that to be supplied as herein provided shall provide proper converting, transforming, regulating, or other equipment upon his own premises and at his own expense. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate P, commercial electrical service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.37; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-465. - Rate EH, electric heating service. 
(a)  To whom available. This tariff is available to existing customers only who were taking service under tariff EHND prior to December 12, 1984. 
(b)  Character of service. Alternating current, 60-cycle, supplied through a single set of service wires to a single meter location at a standard service voltage. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate EH, electric heating service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.38; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-466. - Rate MS, municipal service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available to the city for the supply of electrical energy to public buildings or locations which are supported by public tax levies or municipally-owned utility rates. 
(b)  Character of service. Electric energy supplied hereunder shall be alternating current, 60-cycle, at standard single-phase or poly-phase voltage. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate MS, municipal electrical service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.39; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-467. - Rate SL, street lighting service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available to the city and other governmental agencies for street lighting service. 
(b)  Character of service. The utility shall install, operate, and maintain, at its expense, all street lighting equipment and appurtenances. 
(c)  Rates. The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate SL, street lighting service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.40; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-468. - Rate OL, outdoor lighting service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available for outdoor lighting customers within the service area of the utility. 
(b)  Rates . The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate OL, outdoor lighting service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office. 
(Code 1985, § 52.41; Ord. No. 2694, 6-13-1984; Ord. No. 3789, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 3958, 8-7-1995) 
Sec. 62-469. - Rate I, industrial power service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available for all industrial customers taking service through one, three-phase meter with a monthly billing demand greater than 149 KW. 
(b)  Rates. [The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate I, industrial power service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office.] 
(Ord. No. 5426, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-2013 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5426, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 18, 2013, added new provisions, but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 62-469 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 62-470. - Rate S, school service. 
(a)  To whom available. Available to public and private not-for-profit entities providing educational instruction serving students pre-kindergarten through twelfth grade for facilities that house classrooms. 
(b)  Rates. [The current rates, charges and adjustments for rate S, school service shall be according to a schedule of rates, charges and adjustments, as amended from time to time by the common council, and made available for public viewing in the city clerk's office and/or the city utilities business office.] 
(Ord. No. 5426, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-2013 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5426, § 2(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 18, 2013, added new provisions, but did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 62-470 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 62-471-62-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ESTABLISHING FOG; POLICIES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 5265, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as art. V, §§ 62-481-62-498 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 62-481. - Definitions. 
    Authority shall mean the utility board, as designated by ordinance and/or its authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
    Authorized representative of food service establishment. 
(1)  In the case of an independently-owned establishment, the owner shall serve as the authorized representative. The owner may designate a representative, provided that representative is responsible for the overall operations of the establishment; 
(2)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor shall serve as the authorized representative. The general partner or proprietor may designate a representative, provided that representative is responsible for the overall operations of the establishment; 
(3)  In the case of a corporately-owned establishment, the corporation shall be responsible for designating an authorized representative for each facility operating in the city. The authorized representative designated for each location shall be an individual responsible for the overall operations at that location. 
    Engineering standards shall mean the latest edition of the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards, as approved by the City of Mishawaka Board of Public Works and Safety. 
    FOG-Fats, oil, and grease means any fats, oils, and greases generated from the food preparation process, as identified by the most current EPA method listed in 40 CFR 136.3. 
    FOG management system means the system of devices and/or procedures in place at a facility to minimize FOG in the sewer lines. 
    Food service registration means a registration form required by the City of Mishawaka for each food service establishment operating within the city. The form shall be completed in full by an authorized representative of the facility. 
    Food service establishment means food preparation facilities including, but not limited to, restaurants, banquet halls, cafeterias, and hospitals. In addition, all food manufacturing facilities. 
    Grease-control device means any grease interceptor or grease trap installed at a food service establishment as part of a FOG management system. 
    Grease interceptor means a passive tank installed in the building sewer outside of a building designed to remove fats, oils, and grease from flowing wastewater while allowing wastewater to flow through it. 
    Grease trap means an indoor system designed to remove fats, oils, and grease by physical separation from flowing wastewater. 
    Remedial action plan means a written plan required when a food service establishment is found to be in violation of this article. The plan shall detail the steps the facility will take to correct the violation, the time frame for the violation to be corrected, and will be signed by an authorized representative of the facility. 
    Sanitary sewer permit means a permit required by the City of Mishawaka engineering department for construction, excavation, and inspection of any new or proposed modifications to FOG management system devices. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-482. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to establish the requirements for food service establishments and other commercial facilities that discharge fats, oils, and grease (FOG) into their wastewater flow. All new and existing facilities that generate and discharge FOG into their wastewater flow shall be subject to the provisions in this article. The requirements of this article shall supplement and be in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-483. - Facilities covered by this article. 
    Facilities covered by this article shall include all food service establishments; including, but not limited to, restaurants, banquet halls, and cafeterias. In addition, all food manufacturing facilities are subject to the provisions of this article. Other facilities may be subject to this article at the sole discretion of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-484. - Right of entry. 
    City or utility personnel or their authorized agents shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any food service establishment to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. The right of entry shall include, but not be limited to, any equipment necessary to conduct inspections, measuring, and sampling. It shall be the duty of the facility operator to provide all necessary clearance before entry and not to unnecessarily delay or hinder the inspector in carrying out the review of relevant records, inspection, measuring, and/or sampling. The right of entry shall exist at any time during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-485. - Registration. 
    All food service establishments operating in the City of Mishawaka shall file a food service registration concurrently with the restaurant license application or renewal. The restaurant license shall not be granted unless a completed food service registration accompanies the license application or renewal. The food service registration shall be subject to a $30.00 annual fee. Restaurants and itinerant restaurants operated by fraternal organizations, service clubs, or religious, educational, and charitable institutions shall be exempted from the fee. However, they shall be subject to all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-486. - FOG minimization. 
    All facilities are required to practice FOG minimization techniques in order to limit the amount of FOG entering the wastewater stream. At a minimum, the following practices shall be implemented: 
(1)  FOG shall not be introduced to the municipal sewer system through any connection. This includes, but is not limited to, toilets, floor drains, prep sinks, and utility sinks. 
(2)  All employees shall be trained in the proper handling of FOG. 
(3)  Quantities of FOG that are scraped or removed from pots, pans, dishes, and utensils shall be disposed of as a solid waste. 
(4)  All fats, oil, and grease collected for rendering shall be stored in a separate, covered, leak-proof FOG container and not disposed into the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-487. - Grease trap cleaning frequency. 
    Grease traps shall be inspected at least one time every two weeks. If during the grease trap inspection, it is determined that greater than 25 percent of the effective depth of the trap is full of FOG, the trap shall be cleaned. If the inspection shows that the grease trap reaches the 25 percent threshold in less than two weeks, the inspection and cleaning frequency shall be increased to ensure that the grease layer does not exceed 25 percent of the effective depth of the trap at any time. 
    Each time it is cleaned, the grease trap shall be inspected to ensure that the baffles are installed and in operating condition. If the baffles are no longer in operating condition, they shall be repaired or replaced as soon as possible, but not longer than ten business days after the discovery of the malfunctioning baffle. 
    The installation and maintenance of grease traps is the responsibility of the building owner or restaurant operator. All new grease traps installed in the city shall be Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI) certified. 
    During each inspection or servicing of the grease trap, a maintenance record shall be documented in the maintenance log, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the grease control device maintenance records section. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-488. - Grease interceptor cleaning frequency. 
    Grease interceptors shall be serviced by a reputable service company at a frequency of not less than 90 days. Facility personnel shall witness the interceptor cleaning to ensure that the service is being properly conducted. 
    If during the interceptor cleaning, it is discovered that floating grease and/or settled solids have accumulated in excess of 25 percent of the effective depth of the interceptor, the interceptor cleaning frequency shall be increased. A sufficient cleaning frequency shall be one that ensures that the grease and solids layer does not exceed 25 percent of the effective depth of the interceptor at any point. 
    During each inspection or servicing of the grease interceptor, a maintenance record shall be made in the maintenance log, in accordance with the requirements set forth in the grease control device maintenance records section. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-489. - Grease control device maintenance records. 
    The user shall maintain a written maintenance record for each grease control device for a period of at least three years from the date the service is performed. All such records shall be available for inspection by city personnel at all times. In the case of locations with more than one grease control device, a separate maintenance record shall be generated for each device located on the premises. These records shall include: 
(1)  Food service establishment name and physical location; 
(2)  Date of service; 
(3)  Time of service; 
(4)  Name and affiliation of individual performing grease control device service; 
(5)  Nature of the service; 
(6)  Approximate amount of FOG removed from the device; 
(7)  Destination of removed wastes; 
(8)  Any maintenance issues identified during the inspection and records of any maintenance performed on the grease control device; 
(9)  Dated signature of personnel confirming service completion; 
(10)  Any other information required by the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-490. - Exhaust filters. 
    Exhaust filters used to capture grease and oil shall be routinely cleaned and kept free of excess grease and oil. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-491. - Outdoor grease and oil storage containers. 
    Outdoor grease and oil storage containers shall be covered securely at all times, except for when grease is being added to or removed from the container. The exterior of the container shall be kept clean and free of grease. Any grease spilled on the outside of the container shall be promptly cleaned up and disposed of immediately. 
    All containers shall be located at least 20 feet from a storm drain or catch basin. Absorbent pads shall be used to clean up oil and grease spills that occur within 20 feet of a storm drain or catch basin. 
    Grease control devices and equipment shall not be cleaned outdoors in an area where water can flow to the gutter, storm drain, or street. All outdoor cleaning shall be performed on a grassy area to allow infiltration of the cleaning waters. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-492. - Maintenance of public sewers. 
    The sewer department manager has the sole discretion for determining which sewer lines pose a FOG maintenance problem. 
    If a sewer line is deemed to be a FOG maintenance problem, city personnel shall inspect all food service establishments contributing to that line to evaluate maintenance records. If the maintenance records indicate that the problem may be from poor maintenance practices at a facility, the appropriate maintenance schedule shall be implemented immediately and a remedial action plan shall be submitted, as outlined below. If the establishment has any further problems related to maintenance, the facility may be assessed penalties according to the penalties outlined in this article and at the discretion of the authority. 
    If the FOG problem created by an establishment cannot be remedied using a more frequent cleaning schedule, the facility may be directed to implement other actions as approved by the authority. If the alternative actions do not resolve the problem, the authority may require improvements to the fog management system including, but not limited to, the installation of a new or larger grease control device or the installation of a grease interceptor. Such improvements are subject to the provisions of the modifications to system subsection of this article. 
    In the cases of discharge of excessive FOG or repeat violations of this article, the authority may require a facility to reimburse the city for the cost of the work required to clean or repair the public sanitary sewer system. The reimbursement may be in place of, or in addition to, applicable penalties for creating a FOG maintenance problem. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-493. - Remedial action plan. 
    Any facility that is identified as violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to submit a remedial action plan to the authority within seven business days of notification of the violation. The remedial action plan shall detail the steps the facility will take to correct the violation, the time frame for the violation to be corrected, and will be signed by an authorized representative of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-494. - Modifications to system. 
    Any proposed modifications to the FOG management system shall be submitted for review and approved by the City of Mishawaka Engineering Department and obtain a sanitary sewer permit before the modifications are made. All construction methods shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. All grease traps and/or grease interceptors shall have a volume equal to or greater than the required volume calculated using the methods outlined in the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-495. - New construction. 
    Proposed restaurants or food service establishments shall install a FOG management system, as required by the City of Mishawaka Site Plan Approval Process identified by the City of Mishawaka Zoning Ordinance. All sizing and design, and ultimately the construction methods, shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. All grease control devices shall have a volume equal to or greater than the required volume calculated using the methods outlined in the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-496. - Remodeled facilities. 
    Food service establishments undergoing a remodel that requires expansion of a FOG management system or requires an occupancy permit from the Mishawaka Building Department shall be required to install or upgrade an existing FOG management system at the discretion of the director of engineering. All construction methods shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. All grease control devices shall have a volume equal to or greater than the required volume calculated using the methods outlined in the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-497. - Change of use. 
    Existing facilities that undergo a change in use to a food service establishment shall be required to install or improve the existing FOG management system. All grease control devices shall have a volume equal to or greater than the required volume calculated using the methods outlined in the City of Mishawaka Engineering Standards. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-498. - Administrative fees. 
    Where an authorized representative of a food service establishment desires to modify devices in the existing FOG management system or construct a new facility, a sanitary sewer permit shall be obtained from the City of Mishawaka Engineering Department prior to the commencement of construction activities. The FOG management system that is modified and reviewed by the department of engineering, and independent of the City of Mishawaka Site Plan Approval Process, shall be subject to a $75.00 fee that shall be retained by the city. The proposed modifications shall be subject to the provisions of section 62-494. 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Sec. 62-499. - Administrative fines. 
    At the discretion of the authority, fines may be administered for violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
Grease limitations and/or maintenance requirements: 
First noncompliance after warning ..... $100.00 
Second noncompliance within 12 months of the first ..... 200.00 
Each additional noncompliance within 12 months of the previous violation ..... 400.00 
Recordkeeping requirement: 
First noncompliance after warning ..... 50.00 
Second noncompliance within 12 months of the first ..... 100.00 
Each additional noncompliance within 12 months of the previous violation ..... 200.00 
Additional violations: 
Violation of outdoor grease storage provisions, per occurrence, after warning ..... 100.00 
(Ord. No. 5265, § 2, 8-2-2010) 
Chapter 66 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 66-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Weeds means and includes rank vegetation or any other vegetable matter which exceeds the height of nine inches from the ground; provided, however, that this does not include: 
(1)  Trees, bushes, or shrubs which have been planted or cultivated by the owner or occupant of the property; 
(2)  Agriculture crops, such as hay or pasture; or 
(3)  Vegetable matter cultivated in plant beds. 
(Code 1985, § 94.23; Ord. No. 4770, 7-9-2003) 
Sec. 66-20. - Duty of property owner. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, place, or area within the city, or the agent of the owner, to permit or allow to remain on the lot, place, or area, or on the sidewalk abutting the same, any weeds, grass, fallen leaves or deleterious, unhealthful growths over nine inches high, or other noxious matter which may be growing, lying, or located thereon. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 10; Code 1985, § 94.20; Ord. of 6-1-1970; Ord. No. 3911, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 66-21. - Notice to owner in noncompliance. 
    The county health department or the division of code enforcement is authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any lot, place, or area within the city, or the agent of the owner, to cut, destroy, or remove any weeds, grass, or deleterious, unhealthful growths over nine inches high, ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish, or other noxious matter found lying or located on the owner's property, or on the sidewalk abutting the same. The notice shall be directed to the owner or agent at his last known address or his address as disclosed by the public records listing the property for taxation, by ordinary mail, postage prepaid, and shall specify a reasonable time of not less than ten days nor more than 60 days in which to comply with the provisions of this article. If compliance is not made within the time specified by the notice, the owner, or agent, shall be subject to the penalties specified for violation of this article. 
(Code 1968, tit. 190, § 11; Code 1985, § 94.21; Ord. of 6-1-1970; Ord. No. 2398, 9-15-1980; Ord. No. 2975, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 3681, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3911, 12-19-1994) 
Sec. 66-22. - Failure to comply with notice. 
(a)  If the owner or agent of the owner fails to comply with the health department or division of code enforcement notice or order, the city or any of its agencies may, but shall not be required to, perform such work with its own forces and employees. After the work is completed, the city or its agency shall notify the owner or its agent of the cost of the work, which cost may be recovered in an appropriate action of law against the record owner of the property. 
(b)  In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the cost of performing the work on the property or the sidewalk abutting the same shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be payable within 30 days at the office of the city controller. If the cost is not paid when due, it shall be enforceable by foreclosure in an appropriate action of law. The amount of the costs shall become a part of the funds of the city or its agency doing the work. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this article within the time prescribed in the notice, or any written extension of that time granted by the director of code enforcement or his designee, the division of code enforcement, either by use of employees of the city or by contractors hired by the division of code enforcement, may enter the property to abate the violation of this article by cutting and removing such weeds and/or rank vegetation as may exist at that time. 
(d)  If the division of code enforcement removes such weeds and/or rank vegetation, either by use of city employees or by use of contractors, the division of code enforcement shall issue a bill to the owner for the costs incurred by the city in abating the violation, including administrative and removal costs. The bill shall be served on the owner in the same manner as the notice of violation pursuant to section 66-21. 
(e)  Any appeal of either the removal notice or the bill must be made in writing within ten calendar days of the date of the document being appealed. Any appeal must be in writing and filed with the division of code enforcement. Appeals shall be scheduled for hearing before the hearing officer appointed to hear code enforcement matters pursuant to IC 36-7-9, at the next scheduled time for such hearings. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue written findings. Any appeal from these findings must be made within ten calendar days from the date they are issued, to any court of general jurisdiction in the county. 
(f)  If the owner fails to pay a bill issued pursuant to this section within the time specified in the bill, or within the time specified in the order, if an appeal of the bill was made, the division of code enforcement shall certify to the auditor of the county the amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative costs incurred in the certification. The county auditor shall then place the entire amount certified on the tax duplicate for the property affected, and the total amount, including any accrued interest, shall be collected as delinquent taxes are collected, and shall be disbursed to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 94.22; Ord. No. 2398, 9-15-1980; Ord. No. 3681, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3697, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3911, 12-19-1994) 
Secs. 66-23-66-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Real property, action to bring compliance, IC 36-1-6-2. 

Sec. 66-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the city board of public works and safety. 
    Maintaining means the trimming, care, cutting, pruning, spraying, and preservation of trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, and plants. 
    Street means any portion of any street, boulevard, avenue, parkway, thoroughfare, alley, or other public highway lying between the curblines of the street, boulevard, avenue, parkway, thoroughfare, alley, or other public highway. 
    Tree and lawn area means the land lying between the city's property line on each side of a public street and the curbline on that side of the public street. 
    Trees and shrubs means trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, stumps, and plants. 
(Code 1985, § 102.01; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-51. - Applicability of article limited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the provisions of this article shall not apply to privately owned property. 
(Code 1985, § 102.02; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-52. - Posting materials to trees prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall in any manner post or affix any poster or advertising material of any kind to any tree or shrub in the tree and lawn area or within the limits of the public streets. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit the posting of local, state, or federal government notices, or orders of any court, or any legal notices required or authorized by law. 
(Code 1985, § 102.03; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-53. - Jurisdiction of board of public works and safety. 
    The board of public works shall have exclusive jurisdiction and authority to do the following: 
(1)  Serve as or designate a department to serve as the enforcement body for sections 62-59 through 66-61; 
(2)  Order, control, and regulate the sodding, seeding, and maintenance of lawns, and the planting, maintaining, and removal of trees and shrubs within the limits of the public streets and tree and lawn areas within the city; 
(3)  Order, control, and regulate the removal of dead or diseased trees or portions thereof, which constitute a menace to public health and safety, wherever located within the city; 
(4)  Adopt and enforce rules, regulations, and specifications relative to subsection (2) of this section; and 
(5)  Regulate and prescribe the terms and conditions upon which permits for the maintaining, planting, and removal of trees and shrubs shall be issued. 
(Code 1985, § 102.04; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 4036, 4-15-1996) 
Sec. 66-54. - Interference with board or code enforcement employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere in any manner with agents or employees of the board of public works or the designated employees or agents of the enforcement body designated by the board of public works, while those agents or employees are engaged in carrying out the provisions of this article or orders issued by the board or the department designated as the enforcement body. 
(Code 1985, § 102.05; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 4036, 4-15-1996) 
Sec. 66-55. - Unlawful to remove, destroy, and the like without permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, transfer, destroy, spray, or do any surgery work upon any tree or shrub within the limits of the public streets or tree and lawn area without first obtaining a permit to do so from the board of public works or its designee. 
(Code 1985, § 102.06; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-56. - Unlawful to plant without permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to plant a tree or shrub within the limits of a public street or tree and lawn area without first receiving a permit to do so from the board of public works or its designee. 
(Code 1985, § 102.07; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-57. - No fee for permit. 
    No fee or charge shall be made for any permit required by this article. 
(Code 1985, § 102.08; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-58. - Tree and lawn area regulations. 
(a)  Use. No tree or lawn area within the city shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than the purposes and manner provided in this article. 
(b)  Grade. The surface of the tree and lawn area shall be as nearly level as practicable. Its grade shall be the top lines of the sidewalk and curb. 
(c)  Standard for planting trees and shrubs. 
(1)  No tree or shrub shall be planted in a tree or lawn area having a width of less than five feet. 
(2)  No hedge or shrubbery planted in the tree and lawn areas shall be permitted to grow more than three feet in height. 
(3)  All trees planted in those areas shall be of healthy stock, not less than two inches in caliper, and the lowest limbs of the trees shall not be less than ten feet above the curb and sidewalk. 
(4)  No tree shall be planted less than 35 feet from another tree. No tree or shrub in the areas of street intersections shall be planted less than 15 feet from the intersection of the curbs. 
(5)  No person shall plant trees within six feet of a fire hydrant, or in such a manner as to obstruct the view of any streetlight, traffic sign, signal device, or street intersection. 
(Code 1985, § 102.09; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987) 
Sec. 66-59. - Trimming trees overhanging streets; manner. 
(a)  All trees and shrubs which overhang a street within the city, located on tree and lawn areas, shall be trimmed by the designee of the board of public works. 
(b)  Overhanging trees shall be trimmed so that there is a clear space of ten feet above the surface of the curb, and in such manner as not to obstruct the view of any street light, traffic sign, signal device, street intersection or pedestrian. 
(Code 1985, § 102.10; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 4036, 4-15-1996) 
Sec. 66-60. - Trees on private property overhanging public ways. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or tract of land to allow the branches or foliage to any trees, shrubs, or bushes growing on the lot or tract of land to hang down or out over a street, alley, or sidewalk within ten feet of the surface of the street, sidewalk or alley. It shall be the duty of the board of public works and safety or its designated enforcement body to notify the owner or occupant of the occurrence of a violation. 
(Code 1985, § 102.11; Ord. No. 3048, 5-18-1987; Ord. No. 4036, 4-15-1996) 
Sec. 66-61. - Notice to owner in noncompliance. 
(a)  Form of notice. The board of public works, or its designated enforcement body, is authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any lot or tract of land that is in violation of this article. The notice shall be directed to the owner or agent at his last known address or the address as disclosed by the public records listing the property for taxation, by ordinary mail postage prepaid, and shall specify a reasonable time of not less than ten days in which to comply with the provisions of this article. If compliance is not made within the time specified by the notice, the city or any of its agencies may, but shall not be required to perform such work with its own forces and employees. After the work is completed, the city shall notify the owner or its agent of the cost of the work for reimbursement to the city. If the cost is not reimbursed to the city, the cost shall be recovered in an appropriate action at law against the owner of the property in violation. 
(b)  Cost of performing work. In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the cost of performing the work on the property shall constitute a lien on the property and shall be payable within 30 days after notice of lien has been mailed to the owner of the property. The payment shall be made at the office of the city controller. If the cost is not paid when due, it shall be enforceable by foreclosure in an appropriate action at law. The amount recovered in such an action shall become a part of the funds of the city or its agency doing the work. 
(c)  Failure to comply with notice. 
(1)  If the owner fails to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this article within the time prescribed in the notice, or any written extension of that time granted by the board of public works and safety, or its designated enforcement body, whether by use of employees of the city or by contractors hired by the enforcement body, may enter onto the property to abate the violation of this article by cutting and trimming such trees, bushes or shrubs as may protrude onto public property. 
(2)  If the department designated as the enforcement body trims such vegetation, either by use of city employees or by use of contractors, the department shall issue a bill to the owner for the costs incurred by the city in abating the violation, including administrative and removal costs. The bill shall be served on the owner in the same manner as the notice of violation pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1985, § 102.12; Ord. No. 4036, 4-15-1996) 
PART II - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
Chapter 101 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 101-1-101-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 101-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building commissioner means the city building commissioner. 
    Corporation counsel means the corporation counsel or designee. 
(Code 1985, § 150.02; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.02), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards for the protection of life, health, environment, public safety and general welfare, and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of buildings and structures. 
(Code 1985, § 150.03; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.03), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-22. - Authority. 
    The building commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. Whenever in this article it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of the building commissioner or any other officer of the city, this shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether this article has been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this article shall be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances, or to enforce this article in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. 
(Code 1985, § 150.04; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.04), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-23. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article apply to the construction, alterations, repair, use, occupancy, maintenance, and additions to all buildings and structures, other than fences, in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.05; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.05), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-24. - Adoption of rules by reference. 
(a)  Building rules of the state fire prevention and building safety commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this article, and shall include later amendments to those articles as the same are published in the state register or the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein: 
(1)  Article 13, Building Codes. 
a.  Fire and Building Safety Standards (675 IAC 13-1). 
b.  2003 Indiana Building Code (675 IAC 13-2.4). 
(2)  Article 14, One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. Indiana Residential Code (675 IAC 14-4.3). 
(3)  Article 16, Plumbing Code. Indiana Plumbing Code, 1999 Edition (675 IAC 16-1.3). 
(4)  Article 17, Electrical Codes. Indiana Electrical Code, 2005 Edition (675 IAC 17-1.7). 
(5)  Article 18, Mechanical Code. Indiana Mechanical Code, 2003 Edition (675 IAC 18-1.4). 
(6)  Article 19, Energy Conservation Codes. Indiana Energy Conservation Code, 1992 Edition (675 IAC 19-3). 
(7)  Article 20, Swimming Pool Code. 
a.  General Provisions and Definitions (675 IAC 20-1.1). 
b.  Public Swimming Pools (675 IAC 20-2). 
c.  Public Spas (675 IAC 20-3). 
d.  Residential Swimming Pools (675 IAC 20-4). 
(b)  Copies of adopted building rules, codes, and standards are on file in the office of the city building commissioner. 
(Code 1985, § 150.06; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.06), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-25. - Permit required. 
    A permit shall be obtained before beginning in construction, alteration, repair, or demolition of any building or structure in the city, the cost of which exceeds $300.00, or before beginning any other work in the city as described by the various categories of permitted work set forth in section 101-27(a)-(h), hereinafter, using forms furnished by the building commissioner; and all fees required by this article shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.07; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 3591, 5-4-1992; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.07), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-26. - Other ordinances. 
    All work done under any permit shall be in full compliance with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits, there shall be paid the fees prescribed in such ordinances. 
(Code 1985, § 150.08; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.08), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-27. - Fees. 
(a)  Permits issued after commencement of work. Permits required by section 101-25 shall be issued upon prior payment of permit fees according to the schedule currently on file in the city building commissioner's office. For any permits issued and obtained under the authority of this article after the commencement of the work for which the permit is required, the fee shall be equivalent to three times that required for a permit if it had been issued prior to commencement of the work. 
(b)  Demolition bond. A demolition bond of $5,000.00 must be filed with the building commissioner before demolition work commences. 
(c)  Length of validity. Each permit issued shall state the length of time for which it is valid. 
(d)  Loan procurement inspection fees. Where applicable, loan procurement inspection fees shall be required according to the schedule currently on file in the city building commissioner's office. 
(e)  Late fee. Before a late fee shall be assessed, each person or entity found in violation of this section shall be given one warning of violation. 
(f)  When construction must begin. Building permits are valid for one full year from date of issue. Construction must begin within six months from date of purchase or permit becomes invalid. If construction has been abandoned prior to the six months, the cost of the permit may be refunded less a ten percent penalty. 
(g)  Stopping work; start up after permit becomes invalid. When and if work stops on a project within the 12-month period and is to again start up after the permit becomes invalid a new permit must be purchased based upon the cost to finish the project. 
(h)  Performance bond. 
(1)  All commercial or residential buildings to be constructed, repaired, or altered by the owner (not a contractor) shall post a cash bond if the estimated construction cost of the project, repair, or alteration equals or exceeds $5,000.00. 
(2)  A cash bond of $500.00 shall be posted for all construction projects, repairs, or alterations with an estimated construction cost between $5,000.00 and $8,000.00. 
(3)  A cash bond of $1,000.00 shall be posted for all construction projects, repairs, or alterations with an estimated construction cost of $8,001.00 or more. 
(4)  The building commissioner shall have the right to determine the estimated construction cost of the project. 
(5)  The cash bond must be in the form of a certified check, made payable to the city. The city controller's office will hold the certified check until the building commissioner or his designee determines that the project has been completed within the date set forth on the signed building permit application, and that all state and city building codes have been satisfied. 
(6)  If the construction project does not meet these requirements without just cause, the cash bond will be forfeited, and the certified check will be deposited into the city's general fund. 
(i)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the rules of the commission, or whenever the building commissioner or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, the building commissioner or his authorized representative may enter the building or premises at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building commissioner by 675 IAC 12-1.1, provided that if the building or premises is occupied he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; or if the building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building commissioner or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(j)  Fees to be paid to general fund of municipality. The fees collected by the building commissioner shall be reported and paid to the city controller and become a part of the city's general fund. 
(Code 1985, § 150.09; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 3591, 5-4-1992; Ord. No. 4534, 11-9-2000; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.09), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-28. - Review of application. 
    Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the building commissioner shall direct the review of all building permit applications: 
(1)  To determine full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  For new construction or substantial improvements, to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  For major repairs within the floodplain area having special flood hazards, to determine that the proposed repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage, and uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(4)  For new construction or substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood hazards, to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and mobile homes) is protected against flood damage; is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and flood damage; and uses construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(Code 1985, § 150.10; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.10), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-29. - Inspections. 
(a)  After the issuance of any building permit, the building commissioner shall make, or cause to be made, inspections of the work being done as are necessary to ensure full compliance with the provisions of this division and the terms of the permit. Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed in this division. No work performed under any permit issued under this article shall be closed or covered without such inspection and final approval to close or cover. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department or his designated representative shall assist the building commissioner in the inspection of fire suppression and detection and alarm systems, and shall provide reports of such inspection to the building commissioner. 
(c)  Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building commissioner or his duly authorized representative may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this division. 
(Code 1985, § 150.11; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.11), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-30. - Mobile homes; anchorage and tie downs. 
(a)  Every mobile home or travel trailer situated on a permanent site within the city shall, within 30 days after it has been so situated, be so anchored and tied down as to enable it to withstand winds of the velocity of not less than 90 miles per hour without shifting upon its supporting blocks or piers or overturning. It shall be the responsibility of the owner thereof to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  All mobile home park owners who lease space to persons residing in mobile homes or travel trailers in the city shall provide each permanent parking space for mobile homes or travel trailers with devices to anchor and tie down those units as required by this section. Each mobile home park owner shall furnish to the building commissioner all engineering data necessary to substantiate that the anchor and tie-down devices in his mobile home park comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  The city shall adopt for the purpose of prescribing standards for anchoring and supporting devices capable of meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section (those standards shall include footings and supporting blocks or piers and anchoring both for the frame and for the above-frame structure of the mobile home or travel trailer), and the Regulations for Mobile Home Anchorage and Tie-Down as promulgated by the city building commissioner, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended; of which not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city clerk. These regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(d)  The city building commissioner shall have the authority and be charged with the responsibility of inspecting mobile homes situated in the city to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  Mobile home owners and mobile home park owners shall have three months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived to comply with the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 150.12; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.12), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-31. - Workmanship. 
    All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner according to accepted standards and practices in the trade. 
(Code 1985, § 150.13; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.13), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-32. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected, altered, or repaired after the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be issued unless such building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to occupy any such building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner. 
(Code 1985, § 150.14; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.14), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-33. - Violations; remedies; stop orders. 
(a)  Unlawful actions. It shall be unlawful for any person whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure other than fences in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any code, law, or ordinance enforced by the city. 
(b)  Enforcement. Where no specific enforcement provisions, notices, or penalties, and the like, are provided for in the separate codes herein adopted, and for the enforcement of this article, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Notices. Whenever the building official is satisfied that a building, structure, or any work in connection therewith, the plumbing, electric wiring, erection, construction, alteration, or execution of which is regulated, permitted, or forbidden by this article, is being erected, constructed, or altered in violation of the provisions or requirements of this article, or in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, he shall serve a written notice or order upon the person responsible therefor directing discontinuance of the illegal action and the remedying of the condition that is in violation of the provisions or requirements of this article. 
a.  Failure to comply. In case the notice or order is not promptly complied with, the building official shall request the corporation counsel or other proper prosecuting authority to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or remove the violation, the execution of work thereon, or plumbing or wiring work; to restrain or correct the erection or alteration thereof; or to require the removal of or to prevent the occupation or use of the building or structure erected, constructed, or altered in violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of this article or with respect to which the requirements thereof or of any order or direction made pursuant to provisions contained therein shall not have been complied with. 
b.  Stopping work. Whenever, in the opinion of the building official, by reason of defective or illegal work in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, the continuance of a building operation is contrary to public welfare, he shall order, in writing, all further work to be stopped and may require the suspension of all work until the condition in violation has been corrected. 
(2)  Abatement. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the corporation counsel from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use; restrain, correct, or abate a violation; prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or premises; or prevent an illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about any premises. 
(Code 1985, § 150.15; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.15), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-34. - Right of appeal. 
    All persons shall have the right to appeal the building commissioner's decision first through the city board of public works and safety and then through the state fire prevention and building safety commission in accordance with the provisions of IC 22-12-7. 
(Code 1985, § 150.16; Ord. No. 3152, 3-8-1988; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.16), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-35. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to citations and prosecution through the ordinance violations bureau. A fine schedule for such violations is located in section 2-2. 
(Code 1968, tit. 100, § 8(c); Code 1985, § 150.99; Ord. No. 994, 5-2-1949; Ord. No. 1008, 4-17-1950; Ord. No. 1121, 4-16-1956; Ord. No. 1887, 3-3-1975; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.99), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-36-101-58. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 101-59. - Purpose. 
(a)  The common council hereby finds that there is a need to develop licensing procedures for building contractors doing business in the city. 
(b)  The common council declares that the following procedures are established for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.40; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.40), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building contractor includes any person engaging for remuneration in the building construction business of new construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling for which a building permit is required by the building code, but excluding electricians, plumbers, and heating, air conditioning and ventilating contractors. 
    Handyman means any person providing repair or maintenance services for remuneration which would not require a building permit under the building code. A handyman is exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1985, § 150.42; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.42), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-61. - License required; annual renewal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the city as a building contractor without first holding a valid annual license as required by this article. 
(b)  Annual renewal of the license shall be required of building contractors for each year, defined as January 1 to December 31, if they wish to engage in business in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.41; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.41), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-62. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a building contractor's prelicensing registration shall be established as part of the schedule currently on file in the city building commissioner's office, the payment of which shall be placed in the general fund of the city. The annual fee shall be valid January 1 through December 31. 
(b)  The annual fee for a building contractor's license shall be established as part of the schedule currently on file in the city building commissioner's office, the payment of which shall be placed in a special nonreverting fund to assist in the implementation of this article or other costs within the building department. The annual fee shall be valid January 1 through December 31. 
(Code 1985, § 150.43; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 3682, 8-1-1994; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.43), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-63. - Compliance with regulations. 
(a)  Any building contractor engaging for remuneration in the construction business for new construction, repair, alteration, or remodeling for which a building permit is required by this article, shall be construed as doing business as a building contractor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all building contractors to comply with the building codes adopted by the city, and all other ordinances relating to new construction, alterations, repairs and remodeling of buildings. 
(c)  Failure to comply with this article and all other applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations shall be grounds for revocation of a building permit, issued hereunder, and may be grounds for refusal by the building commissioner to renew the annual building contractor's license. 
(Code 1985, § 150.44; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.44), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-64. - Licensing procedures. 
(a)  Application and forms. 
(1)  All forms required by this division shall be made available in the office of the building commissioner and shall be kept on file in that office for a minimum of three years. 
(2)  Every application for a building contractor's license or renewal thereof, as required by this division, shall be filed with the office of the building commissioner. Such license renewals shall be reviewed by the building commissioner as to their content and applicability. 
(3)  Application forms shall provide that applicants provide written proof of workers' compensation coverage and a certificate of insurance for liability. 
(b)  Building contractors licensing and renewal fees. All building contractors licensing and renewal fees shall be paid to the office of the building commissioner, upon review of the completed application form. A written receipt for payment of said fee shall be given by the city. 
(c)  Surety bond. Each applicant for a license must also provide a surety bond payable to the city in the penal sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon faithful compliance with the provisions of this article as it relates to work performed by the applicant and agreeing to pay all damages, costs and expenses caused by the applicant through failure to comply with such provisions. 
(d)  Terms of license. All licenses received under this section shall be for a term of one year, and must be renewed each year. 
(e)  Examinations. 
(1)  Applicants shall be examined through a written examination which shall be administered by the building commissioner or his designee. A grade of 70 percent shall be passing to the applicant insofar as the test is used for partial qualification. Testing accomplished by a professional testing company/organization or a current license with similar or greater testing standard may be accepted by the building commissioner in lieu of the testing provisions identified herein at the discretion of the building commissioner or by the policy of an examining board if applicable. 
(2)  Applicants successfully passing the examination are not required to be reexamined insofar as the building contractor's license if continually renewed before expiration, and all other regulations within the application process are satisfied. 
(3)  No person shall be examined for a license unless he has had at least two years' experience as a building contractor or working for a building contractor and provides evidence thereof on the application form. 
(4)  Should an applicant fail to pass the examination a license will not be issued; reexamination will be required. 
(5)  The written examination shall be kept on file for a minimum of three years after the date of examination. 
(f)  Holder of license. The holder of the license shall be the person and firm or corporation to whom the license is issued. The same person shall not be designated as representative in two or more licenses issued to different persons and firms as corporations. 
(g)  License certificate. Each license certificate shall specify the name of the person and firm or corporation to whom the license is issued, the name of the person designated as the factory representative, and the expiration date. 
(Code 1985, § 150.45; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.45), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-65. - Nature of interest conferred by permit. 
    All building contractors licenses issued under this division shall be accepted as a privilege to do business within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 150.46; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.46), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-66. - Transferability. 
    All building contractors licenses issued under this division are nontransferable. 
(Code 1985, § 150.47; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.47), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-67. - Regulations supplemental. 
    The registration and license procedures set forth in this division are supplemental to all other regulations set forth in this Code. In the event of conflict, those regulations shall supersede all others. 
(Code 1985, § 150.48; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.48), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-68. - Citations. 
(a)  Upon learning that a building contractor is doing business without having a license, a citation shall be issued to said building contractor by the building commissioner, or his designee, for each violation. 
(b)  Citations may be issued for each and every violation of the required provisions of this division, and each such violation shall be treated as a separate act for which a citation may be issued. 
(c)  Citations issued under this division shall contain the date, time, name and address of the violator, the Code section violated, the nature of the violation, location of the violation, the name of the person issuing the citation and instructions as to the disposition of the citations. 
(Code 1985, § 150.49; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.49), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-69. - Stop work order. 
    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the city's Code, the building commissioner, or his designee, may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building commissioner, or his designee, to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1985, § 150.50; Ord. No. 3785, 11-15-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.50), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-70-101-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND VENTILATING 

Sec. 101-97. - Duties, powers and responsibilities of building commissioner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building commissioner or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of this division. He shall make inspections of all heating, air conditioning and ventilating equipment installations, all as provided in this division, and leave an inspection tag denoting approval or rejection within 72 hours after being notified that heating, air conditioning and/ or ventilating work is ready for inspection. The inspector shall immediately notify the person doing the installation of any reason for rejection of work installed. 
(b)  The building commissioner may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his inspectors. 
(Code 1985, § 150.60; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.60), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-98. - License required; renewal; fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not holding a valid annual license as herein required to install heating, air conditioning and/or ventilating equipment in any public or private building within the city limits, except by the individual who owns and occupies the property for a one-year period. The building commissioner shall condemn and cause to be immediately removed any and all heating, air conditioning and/or ventilating equipment which he finds to have been installed in violation of this section. 
(1)  Class "A" heating, air conditioning and ventilating contractor's license. The holder of a class "A" heating, air conditioning and ventilating contractor's license shall be principally engaged in the business of heating, air conditioning or ventilating contracting, and it shall entitle the holder and his employees, to perform heating, air conditioning and ventilating contracting work and to sell approved heating, air conditioning and ventilating equipment, apparatus and devices. 
(2)  The fee for such license shall be established as part of the schedule currently on file in the city building commissioner's office. 
(3)  All licenses shall expire yearly on December 31 and must be renewed before January 1 to remain valid. 
(Code 1985, § 150.61; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.61), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-99. - Examination procedures. 
(a)  In order to obtain a class "A" license, the applicant must be at least 21 years of age. For purposes of taking the examination required by this division, the term "applicant" shall refer to an individual applicant or a supervisor representing an applicant that is a corporation or other firm eligible to be the holder of a license as hereinafter provided. No such person shall take an examination for a license unless he has had at least four years' experience in the heating, air conditioning and ventilating fields of residential, commercial or industrial construction; and is able to furnish proof of such experience. A certificate or diploma from a recognized school of heating, air conditioning and ventilating will be accepted in lieu of two of the four years' experience hereinabove mentioned. Two years of heating, air conditioning and ventilating experience in the United States military service will be accepted in lieu of one year of the four years' experience stated above. However, not more than two years' credit shall be given for military experience. All applicants must be reviewed by the board of examiners. The applicant must have a letter of reference from each contractor listed on his application, verifying his apprenticeship. 
(b)  The applicant shall also be required to obtain a grade of not less than 70 percent on a written examination, which shall consist of questions that will show his ability and fitness for the license desired. Testing accomplished by a professional testing company/organization or a current license with similar or greater testing standard may be accepted by the building commissioner in lieu of the testing provisions identified herein at the discretion of the building commissioner or by the policy of an examining board, if applicable. 
(Code 1985, § 150.62; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.62), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-100. - Examining and review board; appeal. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created the Heating, Air Conditioning and Ventilating Examining and Review Board (hereinafter the board) which shall consist of five members, not more than three of whom shall be members of the same political party. The members shall be appointed by the mayor as follows: One shall be the heating, air conditioning and ventilating inspector; one representative of the board of public works and safety; one representative of the insurance industry; and two representatives of the heating, air conditioning and ventilating contractors holding a valid license. 
(b)  Appointment; terms of office. Of the five members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, and two for terms of four years, and thereafter each member shall be appointed for a term of four years. The board shall appoint one of its members to act as chairman of the board, and one member to act as secretary to the board. Records of the meetings of the board shall be open to the public for inspection at all times. The board shall keep a record of all licenses and certificates issued by it. The members of the heating, air conditioning and ventilating examining and review board shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  Meetings. The board shall hold a regular meeting twice during each year, on the first Monday of March and the last Friday of September, except that a special meeting may be called in case of an emergency upon three days' notice given by the chairman of the board or by waiver, in writing, of all members of the board, for the examination of applicants for licenses, providing any such applications are pending. 
(d)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the board to examine the applications of persons who apply for licenses; to grant licenses; and to issue certificates of qualification to the building commissioner for qualified applicants who have paid the prescribed fees, and to revoke or suspend any license on the grounds set forth in this division. 
(e)  Quorum. Three members of the board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present. 
(f)  Appeals. Any person may register an appeal with the board for a review of any decision of the heating, air conditioning and ventilating inspector, provided that such appeal is made in writing five days after such person, firm or corporation shall have been notified of such decision by the heating, air conditioning and ventilating inspector. Upon receipt of such appeal, the board shall call a meeting and hold a hearing to determine whether the action of the heating, air conditioning and ventilating inspector complies with this division and within 20 days shall make a decision. The decision of the board shall be final, subject to the state administrative review provisions in the state code. 
(Code 1985, § 150.63; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.63), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-101. - Examinations. 
(a)  Each application to take an examination shall be made in writing to the board 30 days before the examination date, stating the license applied for, the name and place of business of the applicant or, if the applicant is a corporation or other firm, the names of the representatives of the applicant who will act as supervisors of the work to be done under the license. An examination fee of $10.00 shall be paid when the application is made. 
(b)  An individual applicant or the supervisor designated by an applicant that is a corporation or other firm shall be examined by the heating, air conditioning and ventilating examining and review board as to his knowledge of the rules and regulations for the installation of heating, air conditioning and ventilating equipment, as set forth by the appropriate codes; and to determine the general qualifications and fitness of the applicant for executing the class of work covered by the license applied for. 
(c)  The examination shall be in writing and a complete record of every examination given shall be kept on file three years after the date of the examination. 
(Code 1985, § 150.64; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.64), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-102. - License and bond. 
(a)  The building commissioner shall issue all licenses required by this article. A class "A" license shall only be issued after examination and qualification of an applicant for such license and the execution of a bond to the city, with security to be approved by the building commissioner, in the sum of $5,000.00, conditional for the proper performance of an applicant's duties as a heating, air conditioning and ventilating contractor. When issued, such license shall run until December 31 of the year issued, unless sooner revoked. The bond required shall be executed to run concurrently with the license. 
(b)  Application forms shall provide that applicants provide written proof of workers' compensation coverage and a certificate of insurance for liability. 
(c)  Applicants shall be examined through a written examination which shall be administered by the building commissioner or his designee. A grade of 70 percent shall be passing to the applicant insofar as the test is used for partial qualification. 
(Code 1985, § 150.66; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.65), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-103. - Holder of license and supervisor. 
(a)  The holder of the license shall be the person to whom the license is issued. Any person working under the person holding the license may operate under that license as may be directed by the licensee. 
(b)  If the business association of the holder of the license shall terminate with a particular business or company, the holder of the license shall immediately notify the board of such termination and said license shall become null and void. A new license shall be issued to the licensee reflecting the change in business status, except that no fee shall be charged for such new license. 
(Code 1985, § 150.67; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.66), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-104. - Citations. 
(a)  Upon learning that a heating, air conditioning or ventilating contractor is doing business without having a license, a citation shall be issued to said contractor by the building commissioner, or his designee, for each violation. 
(b)  Citations may be issued for each and every violation of the required provisions of this division, and each such violation shall be treated as a separate act for which a citation may be issued. 
(c)  Citations issued under this division shall contain the date, time, name and address of the violator, the Code section violated, the nature of the violation, the location of the violation, the name of the person issuing the citation and instructions as to the disposition of the citations. 
(Code 1985, § 150.68; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.68), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-105. - Stop work order. 
    Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the building commissioner, or his designee, may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building commissioner or his designee to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1985, § 150.69; Ord. No. 3792, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4958, § 1(150.69), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-106-101-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 101-124. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to citations and prosecution through the ordinance violations bureau. A fine schedule for such violations is located in section 2-2. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 22; Code 1985, § 153.99; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.99), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-125. - Application of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, appliances, and fixtures, hereinafter referred to as "electrical equipment" within or on private and public buildings and premises, with exceptions as provided in section 101-177 and with the following general exceptions: 
(1)  The provisions of the article shall not apply to installations in railway cars, commercial or governmental radio transmission beyond the point of energy to the individual units, nor to installations and equipment employed by an electrical supply or communication agency in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electrical energy, or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence in the exercise of its function as a utility. 
(2)  As used in this article, the term "reasonably safe to persons and property," as applied to electrical installations and electrical equipment, means safe to use in the service for which the installation or equipment is intended without unnecessary hazard to life, limb, or property. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 1; Code 1985, § 153.01; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.01), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-126. - General liability for damages. 
    This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the examination authorized herein, or by the license and certificate therefor issued as herein provided. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 23; Code 1985, § 153.02; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.02), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-127-101-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 101-151. - Conformance to certain codes and standards required. 
(a)  All installations of electrical equipment shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this article and the applicable statutes of the state. 
(b)  Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with this article and with applicable regulations set forth in the National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition and all amendments thereafter, or electrical provisions of other safety codes which have been approved by the American National Standards Institute, shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. The building commissioner or his designee shall permit trial installations of new methods of installing electrical equipment. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 7; Code 1985, § 153.10; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.10), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-152. - Conduits; other types of installations. 
(a)  Rigid conduit, electrical metallic tubing, or other approved raceways shall be used for all wiring installed within the fire and fireproof limits of the city as defined in the city building code on fire limits, and on all public buildings, or commercial garages, all manufacturing concerns, all state, county, and city buildings, schools, hotels, motion picture houses, theatres, hospitals, asylums, storehouses, churches, all stores and offices within the city limits. Type AC (BX) cable can be used only with permission of the building commissioner or his designee. All multifamily buildings of wood frame or brick veneer construction only may use Romex-type wiring, starting from the service box. 
(b)  Electrical metallic tubing or flexible metal conduit shall not be used where exposed to weather, wet locations, or refrigerated areas. 
(c)  All new service entrance equipment hereafter installed having a capacity of 800 amperes or more shall be housed in an enclosure containing only electrical equipment and proper working space. 
(d)  All vertically mounted switches or circuit breakers must be installed with the "on" position at the top and the "off" position at the bottom, and must be so indicated. 
(e)  No bare copper will be allowed in the city as a neutral; bare copper may be used for a common ground only. All neutrals shall be white up to #6 wire. 
(f)  An emergency lighting system consisting of a battery system or auxiliary engine generator must be installed in places of assembly where artificial illumination is required, such as hotels, theaters, sports arenas, hospitals, and similar institutions. 
(g)  On all new wiring or upgrade installations, it shall be the responsibility of the contractor doing the work to comply with the National Electrical Code, and to install a minimum of one UL-approved carbon monoxide detector near the bedrooms of the home or dwelling unit that is being upgraded or built. 
(h)  100-ampere service. 
(1)  All homes or dwelling units with less than 100-ampere service shall be increased to a minimum of 100 amperes and the entire home or dwelling unit's electric system upgraded to present-day code when a change of occupancy is made or the home is sold. All homes or dwelling units not upgraded according to the above rule will be condemned. 
(2)  All homes or dwelling units that have fuse-type service panels must be changed to a minimum of a 100-ampere circuit breakers, and the entire home or dwelling unit's electric system upgraded to present-day code when its existing fuse panel is replaced. All homes or dwelling units not upgraded according to the above rule will be condemned. 
(i)  All hollywood risers will have to be a minimum of two feet above the roof of any dwelling or structure, or when in range cable 12 feet above the ground. 
(j)  All new residences having more than 600 square feet shall require 100-ampere three-wire entrance switch or electric center multicircuit breaker. Exception can be made to this provision whenever the enforcing authority deems a smaller size justifiable. 
(k)  All structures sided or re-sided with any metallic material shall enclose the service lead in the metal conduit from weatherhead to the inside of the home. 
(l)  Conversion of existing single-family residences to multifamily dwellings shall require the conformance of each newly created dwelling unit to all applicable sections of this article. Exception to this requirement can be made by the building commissioner or his designee whenever, in his opinion, the requirements of the National Electrical Code have been maintained. 
(m)  On multiple-occupancy structures, when first built, or when reconfigured after initial use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner/contractor to mark the address and/or apartment unit number on the meter trim, both inside the box and on the outside on the cover (permanently embossed or engraved tag), and to verify the address and/or apartment unit number for the building commissioner or his designee. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 7; Code 1985, § 153.11; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 2843, 12-2-1985; Ord. No. 3501, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 4661, 1-22-2002; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.11), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-153. - Connections to installations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a supply of electricity or to supply electricity to any electrical equipment for the installation of which a permit is required, or which has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building commissioner or his designee, until approval has been issued by the building commissioner or his designee authorizing the connection and use of the equipment. All services that have been disconnected shall not be reconnected until approval is issued by the building commissioner or his designee. 
(b)  The electric utility shall submit regularly to the building department, the address of each service location where the utility's customer requests a final billing of the account. 
(c)  No application shall be allowed more than one service of the same voltage (three-phase or single-phase) in one structure unless the following condition applies: An area separation wall meeting the 2003 Indiana Building Code (675 IAC 13-2.4) requirements for separation of the building. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 19; Code 1985, § 153.12; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 3501, 6-17-1991; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.12), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-154. - Final inspection; certificate of approval. 
(a)  Upon completion of any installation of electrical wiring and equipment which has been made under a permit, it shall be the duty of the person making the installation to notify the building commissioner or his designee, who shall inspect the installation within 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, of the time the notice is given or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(b)  Where the building commissioner or his designee finds the installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he shall issue to the person making the installation a certificate of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the supply of electricity, and shall give written notice of the authorization to the agency supplying the electrical service. 
(c)  When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation, the certificates shall be issued to expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable by the building commissioner or his designee for cause. 
(d)  When any electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person installing the equipment shall notify the building commissioner or his designee, and the equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected and approved by the building commissioner or his designee. On large installations where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the building commissioner or his designee due notice, and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(e)  If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the building commissioner or his designee shall at once forward to the person making the installation, notice to make the necessary correction immediately and call for reinspection. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 18; Code 1985, § 153.13; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.13), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-155-101-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSES 

Sec. 101-177. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in section 101-125, no person shall in any manner undertake to execute or perform any work of installing, maintaining, altering, or repairing any electrical equipment unless he is the holder of a city electrical contractor's license. 
(b)  Despite the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, no license shall be required in order to execute or perform any of the following electrical work: 
(1)  Installations and equipment employed by an electrical supply or communication agency in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electrical energy in its function as a public utility. 
(2)  The installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by wire. 
(3)  Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering, or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus except that this exemption shall not include any permanent wiring other than that required for testing purposes. 
(4)  The assembly, erection, and connection of electrical equipment by the manufacturer of the equipment, but not including any electric wiring other than that involved in making electrical connections on the equipment itself or between two or more parts of such equipment. 
(5)  Work performed by the owner of any residence in which the owner resides and for which the effort requires a permit by any other section of this article, if the work shall actually be done by the owner or member of his immediate family and the owner furnishes a sworn statement to that effect. In addition, the owner of any building shall not be permitted to perform his own electrical wiring if the building is to be used as a place of business, apartment house, rental unit, or is a house which is to be offered for sale within one year. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 8; Code 1985, § 153.20; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.20), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-178. - Electrical contractor's license. 
    The holder of an electrical contractor's dealers license shall maintain an office and have a business telephone in the county and shall be principally engaged in the business of electrical contracting. The license shall entitle the holder, any person or his employees, to perform electrical contracting work and to sell approved electrical appliances, apparatus, and devices. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 9; Code 1985, § 153.21; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.21), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-179. - Application; examining fee. 
    Each application for a license shall be made in writing to the electrical examining board 30 days before the examination date, stating the class of license applied for, and the name and place of business of the applicant. An examining fee of $10.00 shall be paid when application is made. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 11; Code 1985, § 153.22; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.22), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-180. - Examinations. 
(a)  Applicants shall be examined to determine their knowledge of the rules and regulations governing the installation of electric wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment, as set forth in the statutes of this state, or as issued under the authority of the statutes of this state, in ordinances of the city, and in the National Electrical Code, and to determine the general qualifications and fitness of each applicant for executing the work authorized to be performed by the license applied for. Applicants successfully passing the examination are not required to be reexamined. Testing accomplished by a professional testing company/organization or a current license with a similar or greater testing standard may be accepted by the building commissioner in lieu of the testing provisions identified herein at the discretion of the building commissioner by the policy of the examining board. 
(b)  No person shall be examined for a license unless he has had at least four years' experience as an electrician in the electrical residential, commercial, or industrial field, and is able to furnish satisfactory evidence of such fact. 
(c)  A certificate or diploma from a recognized school of electricity will be acceptable in lieu of two of the four years of experience required. 
(d)  Two years' electrical experience in the United States military service will also be acceptable, in lieu of one year of the four noted in subsection (b) of this section. However, not more than two years' credit shall be given for any combination of school work or military experience. The applicant must be reviewed by the board of examiners. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the electrical examining board to prepare and approve all written tests for applicants. The tests will have a minimum of 25 questions covering basic electrical theory and ability and fitness for the license desired. A grade of 70 percent shall be passing to the applicant insofar as the test is used for qualification. 
(f)  A passing score given by the electrical examining board is valid for 90 days for the purposes of applying for a license. 
(g)  The license is granted for a probationary period of 90 days, in which time the license holder by practical application must prove his ability to execute the mechanics of the examination from which he secured his passing grade. 
(h)  The examination shall be in writing and a complete record of every examination given shall be kept on file until three years after the date of the examination. 
(i)  Should an applicant fail to pass an examination, the applicant may be reexamined upon submitting an application, in writing, at least 30 days prior to the next examination date and accompanied by the examination fee. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 12; Code 1985, § 153.23; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.23), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-181. - License fees; expiration. 
(a)  Any person representing a firm or corporation for a license as required by this article, shall, before being granted a license, give, execute, and deliver a surety bond to the city, in the penal sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful compliance with this article and laws regulating electrical work and apparatus, with an agreement to pay all damages, costs, and expenses that may be caused by the negligence of the person and firm or corporation through failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Before a license is granted to any applicant, a fee shall be paid according to the schedule referenced in article II of this chapter. Before any expiring license is renewed, a fee shall be paid as referenced in this chapter. 
(c)  All licenses shall expire yearly on December 31. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 10; Code 1985, § 153.24; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.24), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-182. - Holder of license; change of representative. 
(a)  The holder of the license shall be the person to whom the license is issued. Any person working under the person holding the license may operate under that license as may be directed by the licensee. 
(b)  In the event that the business association of the holder of the license shall terminate with a particular business or company, the holder of the license shall immediately notify the board of such termination and said license shall become null and void. A new license shall be issued to the licensee reflecting the change in business status, except that no fee shall be charged for such new license. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, §§ 13, 14; Code 1985, § 153.25; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.25), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-183. - License certificate; required display. 
(a)  Each certificate for a license shall specify the name of the person and firm or corporation to whom the license is issued, the name of the person designated as the factory representative, and the expiration date. 
(b)  Each holder of a license shall keep his certificate of license displayed in a conspicuous place in his principal place of business. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 15; Code 1985, § 153.26; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.26), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-184-101-204. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 101-205. - Required. 
(a)  No electrical wiring or equipment shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises publicly or privately owned, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing equipment except as provided in sections 101-125 and 101-177 without first securing a permit therefor from the building commissioner or his designee, or posting a certificate showing a permit has been applied for and authorizing the contractor to proceed with electrical installation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to secure a permit under his or his firm's name to enable any person not a bona fide employee, person or firm holding a license to do electrical work. 
(c)  If work is such that the exact number of circuits, or h.p. are unknown, a permit shall be taken for the minimum and a correction made when the work is completed. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, §§ 16, 17; Code 1985, § 153.35; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.35), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-206. - Fee schedule. 
    Before any permit is granted for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment, the person making application for the permit shall pay the clerk a fee in the amount as referenced in article II of this Code. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, § 17; Code 1985, § 153.36; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 2843, 12-2-1985; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.36), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-207-101-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 101-236. - Building official, electrical inspector; powers and duties. 
(a)  There is created the position of electrical inspector, who shall report to the building commissioner. The person chosen to fill the office of electrical inspector shall be of good moral character, shall be possessed of such executive ability as is requisite for the performance of his duties, and shall have a thorough knowledge of the standard materials and methods used in the installation of electrical equipment. He shall be well versed in approved methods of construction for safety to persons and property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work, and any orders, rules, and regulations issued by authority hereof, and the National Electrical Code as approved by the American National Standards Institute. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall have police powers restricted to enforcement of this article only. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to enforce the provisions of this article. He or his designee shall, upon application, grant permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment and shall make inspections of electrical installations, all as provided in this article. He or his designee shall keep complete records of all permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made, and other official work performed in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the building commissioner, or any of his designees to engage in the business of electrical contracting in the city, either directly or indirectly, and they shall have no financial interest in any firm which sells, installs, or performs maintenance of electrical equipment within the city. 
(e)  The building commissioner or his designee shall have the authority to make electrical inspections, and when any electrical equipment is found by the building commissioner or his designee to be dangerous to persons or to property because it is defective or defectively installed, the person responsible for the electrical equipment shall be notified in writing and shall make any changes or repairs required in the judgment of the building commissioner or his designee to place the equipment in a safe condition. If such work is not completed within 15 days or any longer period that may be specified by the building commissioner or his designee in the notice, the building commissioner or his designee shall have the authority to disconnect or order the discontinuance of electric service to the electrical equipment. 
(f)  In cases of emergency, where necessary for the safety of persons or property, or where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department, the building commissioner or his designee shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the disconnection of any electrical equipment. 
(g)  The building commissioner may delegate any of his powers or duties to any of his designees. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, §§ 2-4; Code 1985, § 153.45; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.45), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-237. - Electrical examining board. 
(a)  Created; members. There is created an electrical examining board of the city, hereinafter designated as the board, which shall consist of the city electrical inspector and four members to be appointed by the mayor, as follows: one member shall be a class "A" electrical contractor, one member shall be an electrical engineer registered in the state, one member shall be a class "B" industrial electrician licensed, and one member shall be a class "A" electrical construction journeyman. Of the four members initially appointed, one shall serve for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, and one for a term of four years. Thereafter, each appointment shall be for a term of four years or until a successor is appointed. The board shall elect one of the members a chairman of the board. Any appointed member may be removed from office by the mayor. 
(b)  Compensation. Each appointed member shall receive a sum of $25.00 for each day during which he has attended a meeting of the board. 
(c)  Meeting schedule; duties. The board shall hold a regular meeting twice during each year on the second Wednesday in March and the second Wednesday in August at the call of the mayor and chairman of the board, for the examination of applicants for licenses provided any such applications are pending. It shall be the duty of the board to examine the reports of persons and firms or corporations who apply for licenses; to issue certificates therefore; and to revoke or suspend any license on the grounds set forth in this article. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, §§ 5, 6; Code 1985, § 153.46; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.46), 8-15-2005) 
Sec. 101-238. - Board of review; authority to hear appeals, revoke or suspend licenses. 
(a)  There is created a board of review which shall consist of the four members of the examining board, and a fifth member, other than the city electrical inspector, who is a citizen of the city and a freeholder and who shall be chairman of the board, to be appointed annually by the mayor. The board shall be paid the sum of $5.00 per member for each day of service. Any person may register an appeal with the board of review for a review of any decision of the electrical inspector provided that such appeal is made in writing within ten days after the person, firm, or corporation has been notified of the decision by the electrical inspector. Upon receipt of the appeal, the board shall proceed to determine whether the action of the electrical inspector complies with this article and within ten days shall make a decision in accordance with its findings. Three members of the board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of at least three members. 
(b)  No license or certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be assignable or transferable. Any such license may, after hearing, be suspended for a definite length of time, or revoked by the board of review, if the person holding the license willfully or by reason of incompetence, violates any ordinance of the city, or any statute of the state, relating to the installation, maintenance, alterations, or repair of electrical equipment, or any orders, rules, or regulations issued by authority thereof. 
(Code 1968, tit. 150, §§ 20, 21; Code 1985, § 153.47; Ord. No. 1290, 3-2-1964; Ord. No. 1585, 7-21-1970; Ord. No. 1600, 9-30-1970; Ord. No. 1664, 11-16-1971; Ord. No. 4959, § 1(153.47), 8-15-2005) 
Secs. 101-239-101-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of plumbers, IC 25-28.5-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 101-270. - Applicability of article. 
    The provisions of this article and any other plumbing ordinance now in force shall not be construed to apply to service piping and connections, meter installations, and repairs to piping made by the water department of the city in the course of its business. 
(Code 1985, § 156.01) 
Sec. 101-271. - Registration with city. 
(a)  Before the building commissioner may issue a plumbing permit to a plumbing contractor as defined in IC 25-28.5-1-2 (as may be from time to time amended), said plumbing contractor shall be required to register his name and address and his business name, name of business owner, and business address, and his current valid state plumbing contractor's license or permit number with the building commissioner. 
(b)  The registration will be valid from January 1 through December 31 of each year. 
(c)  The applicant for such registration shall pay a registration fee, according to a schedule of fees currently on file in the building commissioner's office, as of the time of issuance of the registration certificate to the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 156.02; Ord. No. 3177, 7-18-1988) 
Secs. 101-272-101-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Unsafe building law, IC 36-7-9-1 et seq. 

Sec. 101-291. - BOCA basic property maintenance code. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. The fifth edition of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996, promulgated by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set forth herein to govern existing buildings and structures in the city, except for the additions, modifications or deletions which are specified in this section. At least two copies of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996 shall be kept in the code enforcement department for public inspection. 
(b)  Additions, modifications and deletions. The provisions of the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1996, adopted by subsection (a) of this section shall be modified, added to or deleted so that the following articles, sections or subsections shall read as follows: 
(1)  PM-100.1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mishawaka, Indiana, hereinafter referred to as the Property Maintenance Code. 
(2)  PM-101.7 Application of other codes: Any repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electric and Fire Prevention Code. 
(3)  PM 106.2 Penalty: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)  PM 107.3 Method of service: Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Sent by first class mail addressed to the property owner or occupant; 
b.  Delivered personally to the property owner or occupant; or 
c.  Left at the dwelling or usual place of abode of the property owner or occupant. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the agent of the property owner or occupant to be notified shall constitute actual service of notice upon the property owner or occupant. 
(5)  PM 109.3 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(6)  PM 110 and 111 shall be deleted in their entirety. 
(7)  PM 202: The definitions for the terms "building code" "hotel" and "two family dwelling" in PM 202 General Definitions shall be deleted and replaced with the following: 
    Building code: The Indiana Building Code in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof, Indiana One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof, or other such codes and ordinances adopted by the State of Indiana and/or the city that were in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof, for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings or structures. 
    Hotel: Every building or structure kept, used, or maintained and advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, family hotel, apartment hotel, lodginghouse, dormitory, or place where sleep or rooming accommodations are furnished for hire or are used or maintained for the accommodation of guests, lodgers, or roomers. 
    Two-family dwelling: A building containing two dwelling units. 
(8)  PM 202: The following definitions shall be added in alphabetical order to PM 202 General Definitions: 
    Electrical code: The Indiana Electrical Code or other such electrical codes and ordinances adopted by the State of Indiana and/or the city, that were in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof. 
    Fire prevention code: The Indiana Fire Prevention Code or other such fire codes and ordinances adopted by the State of Indiana and/or the city, that were in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof. 
    Mechanical code: The Indiana Mechanical Code or other such mechanical codes and ordinances adopted by the State of Indiana and/or the city; that were in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof. 
    Plumbing code: The Indiana Plumbing Code or other such plumbing codes and ordinances adopted by the State of Indiana and/or the city, that were in effect at the time of the construction of the building or at the time of the commencement of the present use thereof. 
(9)  PM-303.4 and PM-305.4 shall be deleted in their entirety. 
(10)  PM-304.15 Insect screens: During the period from April 1 to October 1, every door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16-mesh per inch and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans are employed. 
(11)  PM-602.2 Residential buildings: Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms in accordance with the building code and mechanical code. 
(12)  PM-602.2.1 Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guestrooms on terms, either express or implied, must furnish heat to the occupants thereof and shall supply sufficient heat to maintain the room temperatures specified in section PM-602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees Celsius) during other hours. 
(13)  PM-602.2.2 Room temperature exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the outdoor design temperature required for the locality by the building code and mechanical code, the owner or operator shall not be required to maintain the minimum room temperatures, provided that the heating system is operating at full capacity, with supply valves and dampers in a fully open position. 
(14)  PM-602.3 Nonresidential structures: Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during all working hours. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions; and 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(15)  PM-604.2 Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the electrical code. Every dwelling shall be served by a main service that is not less than 60 amperes, three wires. 
(16)  PM-702.2 Exit capacity: The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be sufficient for the occupant load thereof as determined by the building code. 
(17)  PM-702.3 Number of exits: The number, location and maintenance of required exits shall be in accordance with the building code and the fire prevention code. 
(18)  PM-702.5 Exit signs: All means of egress shall be indicated with approved "Exit" signs where required by the building code. All "Exit" signs shall be visible and all "Exit" signs shall be illuminated at all times that the building is occupied. 
(19)  PM-702.6 Corridor enclosure: All corridors serving an occupant load greater than 30 and the openings therein shall provide an effective barrier to resist the movement of smoke. All transoms, louvers, doors and other openings shall be closed or shall be self-closing. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Corridors in occupancies in other than Use Group H which are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Patient room doors and corridors in occupancies in Use Group 1-2 where smoke barriers are provided in accordance with the fire prevention code are not required to be self-closing. 
3.  Corridors in occupancies in Use Group E where each room that is occupied for instruction or assembly purposes has at least one-half required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior of the building at ground level. 
4.  Corridors that are in compliance with the building code. 
(20)  PM-702.7 Dead-end travel distance: All corridors that serve required exits shall be maintained in accordance with the fire prevention code. The length of a dead-end corridor shall be as specified in the building code. 
(21)  PM-702.9 Stairways, handrails and guards: Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than two risers in every open portion of the stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Handrails and guardrails shall be installed in accordance with the building code. 
(22)  PM-702.10 Information signs: A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in all interior stairways more than three stories above grade, designating the floor level above the floor of discharge. All elevator lobby call stations on all floor levels shall be identified by approved signs in accordance with the requirements for new buildings in the building code. 
Exception: The emergency signs shall not be required for elevators that are part of an accessible means of egress complying with the building code. 
(23)  PM-702.11 Locked doors: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge, or effort, except as provided for in the building code and the fire prevention code. 
(24)  PM-702.11.1 is hereby deleted. 
(25)  PM-702.12 Emergency escape: Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency egress or rescue which complies with the building code. 
(26)  PM-702.12.1 Security: Bars, grills, grade, or similar devices may be installed on emergency exit windows or doors provided: 
1.  The devices are equipped with approved release mechanisms which are openable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort; and 
2.  The building is equipped with smoke detectors installed in accordance with the building code. 
(27)  PM-703.2 Hazardous material: Combustible, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials, such as paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids or combustible rubbish, such as waste paper, boxes, and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored unless such storage complies with the applicable requirements of the building code and the fire prevention code. 
(28)  PM-707.1 Smoke and heat detection: Approved smoke and heat detector shall be installed in each recirculating air system with a capacity of 2,000 cfm in accordance with the mechanical code. 
(c)  Applicability. This section does not apply to buildings under construction, but only to buildings after they have been constructed and are in existence. To the extent that the BOCA Property Maintenance Code adopted by this section contains provisions in the nature of building codes or structural requirements, only the building codes that were in existence at the time of the construction of the building in question, or at the time that the present use of the building commenced, are applicable and enforceable under this section. 
(Code 1985, § 155.01; Ord. No. 4413, 7-20-1999) 
Sec. 101-292. - Unsafe Building Law. 
(a)  Adopted by reference. Pursuant to the authority granted by the Indiana General Assembly, the city hereby adopts the Unsafe Building Law, being IC 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Definitions. The definitions set forth in IC 36-7-9-2 are incorporated by reference herein in their entirety, including the definition of substantial property interest therein; and for purposes of this section, the following additional definitions shall apply: 
    Dilapidated means no longer adequate for the purpose or use for which it was originally intended. 
    Public nuisance includes: 
(1)  Any physical condition, use, or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences or structures; or for which the required precautions against trespassers have not been provided. 
(2)  Any premises from which the plumbing, heating, electrical, and facilities required by law have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed, or rendered ineffective. 
(3)  Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded, as set forth in this article; open, vacant, or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter; in danger of collapse or failure, and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises. 
(4)  Any structure where the paint has been severely removed by time, or where the paint is checked or bleeding. 
    Unsafe building means, in addition to the definition thereof contained in IC 36-7-9-4, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects herein described, provided that these conditions or defects exist to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide a safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than 11/2 times the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before the catastrophe, and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled, or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building, structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting the building; the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(10)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(11)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(12)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls, or coverings. 
(13)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to become an attractive nuisance to children, or freely accessible to persons for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to the building or structure provided by the building regulations of this city, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the condition, location, or structure of buildings. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly-constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location. 
(16)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the county health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, or lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction is determined by the chief of the city fire inspection bureau to be a fire hazard. 
(18)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months, so as to constitute that building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or organization with a substantial property interest, as that term is defined in IC 36-7-9-2, to maintain or permit the existence of a public nuisance or unsafe building within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  The code enforcement department is hereby designated as the executive department which shall administer the provisions of the property maintenance code of the city. The director of the code enforcement department shall be the person responsible for the administration of property maintenance code of the city. 
(e)  The board of public works and safety shall have the responsibility for establishing and fixing the average processing expense as provided in IC 36-7-9-12. 
(f)  As provided by IC 36-7-9-14, a fund designated as the Unsafe Building Fund shall be established in the operating budget of the code enforcement department. Any balance remaining at the end of the fiscal year shall be carried over in the fund for the following year and shall not revert to the general fund. Monies for the fund may be received from any source, including appropriations by local, state, or federal governments and donations. As further provided by IC 36-7-9-15, the code enforcement department may take action to transfer to the Unsafe Building Fund all or any part of any money which may exist in the Building, Demolition, Repair and Contingent Fund which may have been created, or which may exist in any similar designated demolition fund in the city budget. 
(g)  The administrative hearing procedure provided for in IC 36-7-9-1 et seq. may be utilized by the city in the enforcement of any provision of this Code. 
Chapter 105 - DESIGN REVIEW AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Series development plans, IC 36-7-4-1401 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Background. 
    The city recognizes that certain established areas of the city are inherently unique relative to their establishment and physical characteristics; specifically, the following is generally known, understood, and considered in the development of this chapter: 
(1)  Development and redevelopment within established areas of the city occur over time based on ever-evolving standards. 
(2)  Growth and redevelopment efforts in established areas are organic and occur in a seemingly random pattern based on influences such as availability, adjacent uses, the market, infrastructure, and natural site amenities. 
(3)  The diversity of established development types, character, and size contribute to the quality, flavor and essence of the city. 
(4)  The quality, flavor and essence of the city play an integral role in property values, as well as the identity, quality of life, and welfare of its citizens. 
(5)  The quality, flavor and essence are not restricted to boundaries and could be influenced by adjacent communities, as well as regional or national relative design trends. 
(6)  The essence of the city is ever evolving and is made up of a variety of elements. 
(7)  Elements include the collective semblance of a network of buildings, roads, open spaces, landscaping, cultural elements, landmarks and other tangible items. 
(8)  Over time, the city has regulated certain tangible items to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(9)  Standard regulations in the form of dimensional zoning or municipal codes, although providing basic protections, do not comprehensively reflect the diversity of unique established areas. 
(10)  Standard regulations could unnecessarily influence development and redevelopment efforts creating monolithic single dimensional products that could negatively influence the previously established areas of the city. 
(11)  There is a need for aesthetically oriented requirements that allow for flexibility, promote design creativity, and enhance the established goals of the community that ultimately affect the quality, flavor and essence of the community. 
(12)  Within certain unique and established areas, development efforts have a potential to impact property values, city identity, and the quality of life of its residents. 
(13)  An ordinance that provides guidelines, objectives, and standards for the development and redevelopment of certain unique established areas of the city is appropriate. 
(Code 1985, § 161.01; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-2. - Statement of intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide guidelines, objectives, and standards in a design review format to allow for flexibility and creativity in order to achieve high quality orderly development and redevelopment reflective of unique established areas of the city; specifically, the chapter looks to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Provide sufficient direction to developers so as not to be arbitrary or capricious. 
(2)  Promote design flexibility and creativity. 
(3)  Enhance the quality, flavor and essence of the community. 
(4)  Provide standards that reflect and/or complement notable quality existing developments, as well as appropriate regional or national design trends. 
(5)  Require and seek the advice of design professionals in considering the review of proposed developments. 
(6)  Provide the administrative authority the ability to waive standard dimensional zoning requirements as part of the design review process when it is determined that the proposed design is consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
(7)  Require construction materials and elements that reflect and/or complement notable quality existing developments. 
(8)  Require urban solutions to standard design elements such as parking, landscaping, signage, and utilities. 
(9)  Promote the development of pedestrian friendly and visually inviting streetscapes. 
(10)  Provide requirements that restrict the ability of a proposed development to adversely impact adjacent property values. 
(11)  Limit the negative appearance of miscellaneous items such as mechanical equipment, vending machines, aboveground utilities, site lighting, and dumpster areas. 
(12)  Provide guidelines which promotes the establishment of view corridors. 
(13)  Require the consideration of historically relevant structures. 
(Code 1985, § 161.02; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; any words not defined in this section shall be construed in generally accepted meanings as defined in a recent edition of a dictionary of the English language: 
    Appearance means the outward aspect visible to the public. 
    Applicable means indicative of a close logical relationship with a matter under consideration. Although one matter is being considered, one or more additional matters could require consideration due to their immediate and direct bearing on the first. 
    Appropriate means sympathetic, or fitting, to the context of the site and the whole community. Relative to the interpretation of this chapter, deemed by the administrative authority to meet or exceed requirements of the chapter following the review and input of a design professional. 
    Appurtenances means the visible, functional objects accessory to and part of buildings. 
    Architectural concept means the basic aesthetic idea of a building, or group of buildings or structures, including the site and landscape development, that produces the architectural character. 
    Architectural feature means a prominent or significant part or element of a building, structure, or site. 
    Architectural style means the characteristic form and detail, as of buildings of a particular historic period. 
    Attractive means having qualities that arouse interest and pleasure in the observer. 
    Berm means a raised form of earth to provide screening or to improve the aesthetic character. 
    Cohesiveness means unity of composition between design elements of a building or a group of buildings and the landscape. 
    Compatibility means harmony in the appearance of two or more external design features in the same vicinity. 
    Conservation means the protection and care that prevent destruction or deterioration of historical or otherwise significant structures, buildings, or natural resources. 
    Consistent means appropriate, in agreement or harmony with, compatible. 
    Design professional means an individual trained in artistic/aesthetic principals relative to the built environment who can professionally interpret the possible fine distinctions between the attributes of a given proposal and the requirements contained herein. Design professionals may include, but shall not be limited to, the city planner by nature of the position, a state licensed architect, a state licensed landscape architect, or urban planner certified by the American Institute of Certified Planners. 
    Discouraged means deemed not to meet the requirements of this chapter. Discouraged items or materials may only be utilized or incorporated into a project where determined as satisfactory by the plan commission as part of the waiver process. 
    Encouraged means deemed appropriate or meeting the requirements of this chapter. Item which promotes the intent of this chapter. 
    Exterior building component means an essential and visible part of the exterior of a building. 
    External design feature means the general arrangement of any portion of a building, sign, landscaping, or structure and including the kind, color, and texture of the materials of such a portion, and the types of roof, windows, doors, lights, attached or freestanding signs, or other fixtures appurtenant to such portions as will be open to public view from any street, place, or way. 
    Harmony means a quality that represents an appropriate and congruent arrangement of parts, as in an arrangement of varied architectural and landscape elements. 
    Historically relevant means a structure or other real property rated as notable or outstanding within the City of Mishawaka Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites & Structures Inventory as may be amended. 
    Incidental means secondary or minor, occurring as a result of something of more importance. 
    Mechanical equipment means equipment, devices, and accessories, the use of which relates to water supply, drainage, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and similar purposes. 
    Miscellaneous structures means structures, other than buildings, visible from public ways. Examples are memorials, antennas, water tanks and towers, sheds, shelters, fences, walls, kennels, transformers, drive-up facilities. 
    Monotone means the repetition of the same appearance, texture, form, or color. 
    Not applicable means a requirement that is deemed by the plan commission, or its designee, to not apply to a given project or proposal based on a lack of a relationship between the requirement and the given project or proposal. 
    Pedestrian means indicative of characteristics that relate to human scale including visual and physical interaction at ground level. 
    Proportion means a balanced relationship of parts of a building, landscape, structures, or buildings to each other and to the whole. 
    Satisfactory means recognition of an effort to fulfill requirements. Relative to the interpretation of this chapter, the term deemed by the administrative authority to meet intent of the requirements of the ordinance following the review and input of a design professional. Not meeting the literal requirements require a waiver by the administrative authority. 
    Scale means proportional relationship of the size of parts to one another and to the human figure. 
    Screening means the structure of plantings, walls, or decorative fencing that conceals from view from public ways the area behind the structure. 
    Sign means a letter, illustration, symbol, figure, insignia, or other device employed to express and illustrate a message or part thereof. 
    Significant means having a quality or essence important to and pertaining to the intent of this chapter. Relative to changes in appearance, a modification that is noticeably different in character when compared to the original by an untrained passerby. Relative to building or structure additions, an increase of more than 1,000 square feet of building coverage or 25 percent of the existing gross floor area. 
    Street hardware means manmade objects other than buildings that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: tree grates, directional signs, benches, litter containers, ash urns, planting containers, mailboxes, and street walls. 
    Street, collector/arterial, means a public street that serves as a connection or route of transportation through an area, to other parts of the city, or beyond as may be determined by the city department of engineering. 
    Street, local, means a public or private street that predominantly serves as a destination route for businesses or residences located in a specific area as may be determined by the city department of engineering. 
    Street wall means a wall that generally abuts the sidewalk, although there may be required setbacks and recesses for open space. The street wall helps define and enclose the street corridor, creating a sense of activity, intensity, and spatial containment. 
    Streetscape means the scene as may be observed along a public street which may be composed of natural and manmade components, including buildings, paving, planting, street hardware, and miscellaneous structures. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground. 
    Utility means any device, including wire, pipe, conduit, poles, assemblies, detention areas, electrical boxes, pits, manholes, transformers, or the like which carries, contains, or provides access to gas, water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, electricity, oil, and communications. 
(Code 1985, § 161.10; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-4. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the city that has been designated by chapter 137, zoning, as requiring design review as part of the height, area, and developmental regulations of a specific zoning district. Designated specific zoning districts shall list the applicable requirements of this chapter where only a portion is intended to apply. If applicable requirements are not listed individually, all requirements contained herein shall apply. This chapter, in whole or part, may also be incorporated by reference within overlay zoning districts or within individual planned unit development districts. Design review shall be required for the following: 
(1)  The erection, exterior alteration, exterior reconstruction, change of use, addition, or other modification that changes the appearance of an existing structure, related appurtenance, and/or external design feature not otherwise identified as exempt by this chapter. 
(2)  Demolition of existing structures identified as "outstanding" or "notable" within the City of Mishawaka Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory. 
(Code 1985, § 161.11; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-5-105-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 105-27. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following uses, development, redevelopment, modifications, or maintenance: 
(1)  The creation of new single-family residential structures. 
(2)  Additions and modifications to existing single-family residential structures, including structures incidental or accessory to single-family residential uses. 
(3)  Building repair or maintenance of non-single-family residential structures including painting, replacement of siding, roofing, replacement of windows, including similar incidental modifications, provided said modification is reasonably consistent with the external appearance of the existing structure. Significant color modifications, increase/decrease in window area, or changes in materials shall be subject to the requirements contained herein. 
(4)  Interior modifications that do not change the use of the structure, increase usable areas, or otherwise increase the intensity of the use. 
(5)  Demolition of existing structures not identified as "outstanding" or "notable" within the City of Mishawaka Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory. 
(6)  Public improvements, projects, construction, and redevelopment efforts supported by tax dollars undertaken by the city located on city-owned property, public parks, rights-of-way, or easements. However, the city shall be required to consider the intent and requirements of this chapter for any improvement, or redevelopment effort located within a geographic area subject to the requirements contained herein. 
(7)  All property and structures that are legally existing, or have received final site plan approval, before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be considered legally nonconforming. Subsequent modifications, additions, demolition, new construction, and changes in appearance need only meet the provisions of this chapter in accordance with section 105-40. 
(Code 1985, § 161.12; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-28. - Overlay requirements. 
    In accordance with IC 36-7-4-1400 series (development plans), this chapter shall serve as an addition to chapter 137, zoning. As such, the requirements contained herein shall be considered as an addition to any requirements identified within chapter 129, on-premises sign standards, chapter 133, subdivision regulations, chapter 137, zoning, and/or any other applicable code, regulation, or requirement. Should requirements contained herein differ between separate ordinances or documents, the most stringent shall apply. 
(Code 1985, § 161.13; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-29. - Authority. 
    The plan commission is established as the administrative agency for this chapter. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to local government by IC 36-7-4-1400 series (development plans). 
(Code 1985, § 161.14; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-30. - Plan commission review. 
    The plan commission shall review, approve or disapprove design/development plans for new construction, demolition, changes in use, additions, and or any other modifications to structures not otherwise identified as being exempt by this chapter. Review for a limited number of items may be performed for the plan commission by its designee as part of the administrative review process as set forth in section 105-31. 
(1)  Public hearing required. A public hearing shall be required for design/development plans as follows: 
a.  Final site plans excluding those identified by section 137-35(b). 
b.  Final site plans including those identified by section 137-35(b) that require the demolition of a historically relevant structure. 
c.  Signage that does not meet the size, area, and location requirements of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards, and the requirements of this chapter. 
d.  Parking modifications where the parameters for administrative review are identified by section 105-31. 
e.  Any improvement or modification that requires a waiver in accordance with section 105-38. 
f.  Appeals of the designee of the plan commission in accordance with section 105-32. 
(2)  Hearing procedure. Required public hearings shall be accomplished in a manner similar to the procedure required for subdivision plats as identified by section 133-74(e), (f) and (g) in accordance with IC 5-3-1 and the plan commission's rules of procedure. 
(3)  Plan commission elected hearing. In addition to those items identified by subsection (1) of this section, the plan commission may defer action on any application and require a public hearing in accordance with subsection (2) of this section where the plan commission deems the proposal could have an impact on adjacent properties or otherwise warrants the input of the greater community. 
(Code 1985, § 161.15; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-31. - Administrative review-Application and process. 
    In order to decrease time delays for certain projects, applications for the following may be submitted to, reviewed, and approved/denied by the designee of the plan commission, on behalf of the plan commission in accordance with IC 36-7-4-1402(c). The designee of the plan commission shall be the city planner/executive director of the department of city planning as appointed in accordance with IC 36-7-4-311(a). In the absence or vacancy of this position, the plan commission may appoint an interim designee from the staff of the department of city planning. Conditions and/or modifications may be required by the designee in accordance with this chapter. Only the following items may be considered as part of the administrative review process: 
(1)  Final site plans limited to those identified by section 137-35(b). 
(2)  Signage that meets the size, area, and location requirements of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards, and the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Parking modifications, provided the total number of spaces per lot does not exceed 50, or the total increase to an existing lot that exceeds 50 spaces does not exceed ten percent of the existing number. 
(4)  Any improvement or modification, that has not been identified as being exempt from this chapter, which requires design review and is not otherwise identified within section 105-30(1)a. 
(Code 1985, § 161.16; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-32. - Same-Appeal. 
    A decision of the designee of the plan commission may be appealed directly to the plan commission. To initiate an appeal, an interested party shall file said appeal in writing stating the reasons for the appeal. Appeals shall be filed at the city department of planning no longer than 30 calendar days from the date of the administrative review decision. The filing fee of the appeal shall equal the fee required for plan commission final site plan review. A public hearing shall be held for each appeal in accordance with section 105-30(1)a. The date of the public hearing shall be determined by the filing deadlines established every year by the rules of procedure of the plan commission. 
(Code 1985, § 161.17; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-33. - Procedures for plan commission submission. 
    The procedures for submission for development plan/design review shall be consistent with the requirements for filing a final site plan in accordance with the section 137-35. Those improvements or modifications identified by this chapter as requiring development plan/design review, that do not require final site plan review, shall submit an application for an improvement location permit in accordance with the section 137-36. All applications submitted before the plan commission shall meet applicable filing deadlines and will be scheduled for review accordingly. Any improvement and/or modification may be submitted for plan commission review. To expedite the approval process, certain improvements and/or modifications may be submitted for administrative review at the discretion of the applicant. Decisions made as part of administrative review process are final and may only be appealed to the plan commission in accordance with section 105-32. 
(Code 1985, § 161.18; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-34. - Procedures for administrative review. 
    Administrative review applications may be filed at any time. The designee of the plan commission may take up to five business days to review an application. The designee of the plan commission shall approve, deny, or forward the application to the plan commission for review. The designee shall notify the applicant in writing and identify the reasons for denial or why an application has been forwarded to the plan commission. Applications may be forwarded to the plan commission by its designee if there is a perceived conflict of interest or the designee deems the proposal could have an impact that warrants the consideration of the entire plan commission. Applications forwarded to the plan commission by the designee of the plan commission shall be considered one submission. No additional fees or application shall be required. All administrative reviews shall be reported by memorandum to the plan commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 161.19; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-35. - Design professional review. 
    Each application for development plan/design review shall be evaluated by a third party design professional. The plan commission, or its designee, may not consider an application for design/development plan review without the evaluation of a design professional. This evaluation, at a minimum, shall include a checklist that signifies the design professional has reviewed and evaluated the proposal relative to each requirement contained within this chapter. The design professional shall indicate whether the proposal is appropriate, satisfactory, inappropriate, or not applicable. Items identified as being satisfactory or inappropriate shall require the design professional to outline the reasons for this evaluation for plan commission consideration. The plan commission, or its designee, as part of the review of any application shall consider this evaluation. This evaluation, as may be modified by the plan commission, or its designee, may be adopted as the written findings required by IC 36-7-4-1406 and section 105-37. To expedite the administrative review process, the designee of the plan commission may perform both the required design professional review and administrative review for a given proposal. 
(Code 1985, § 161.20; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-36. - Review fees. 
    Separate filing fees for design/development plan review are not required. Reviews shall occur simultaneously with required site plan and/or improvement location permit submissions. As such, all applicable site plan and/or improvement location permit fees shall apply. 
(Code 1985, § 161.21; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-37. - Written findings and records. 
    The plan commission, or its designee, shall adopt written findings for each application reviewed in accordance with IC 36-7-4-1406. Plan documentation and supporting information required as identified within this chapter shall be recorded in a manner consistent with the final site plan improvement process. Site plan information not required to be recorded on the final site plan shall be maintained by the department of city planning. Plan documentation and supporting information required in conjunction with improvements and/or modifications that require only an improvement location permit need not be recorded. Records regarding improvement location permits shall be maintained by the department of city planning. 
(Code 1985, § 161.22; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-38. - Waiver of development requirements. 
    The plan commission may waive or reduce development requirements only following a public hearing held in accordance with section 105-30(1)a. The designee of the plan commission may not waive or reduce any requirements contained herein. As part of the findings required by section 105-37, the plan commission shall identify the reasons for approving/denying each waiver request. In addition, the plan commission may impose additional conditions, beyond those that may be imposed under section 105-39, where the commission determines that the additional conditions directly relate to the intent of this chapter and are deemed to holistically compensate for a specific aspect of a requested waiver. Waivers shall be limited to the following development requirements: 
(1)  The height, area, and developmental regulations of the specific zoning district that requires design review, provided it is determined that said waiver advances the intent of this chapter. The plan commission may not waive height, area, and developmental regulations of a specific zoning district (excluding those identified by this chapter) based only on the apparent hardship imposed by the strict application of the terms of the ordinance. 
(2)  The requirements identified by this chapter, provided the plan commission identifies said standards, pose an unnecessary physical or financial hardship relative to the proposed project. 
(3)  The requirements identified by this chapter, provided it is determined that said waiver advances the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 161.23; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-39. - Conditions and commitments. 
    The plan commission, or its designee, may impose conditions as part of any design review application provided the conditions are consistent with the intent of this chapter and are reasonably necessary to satisfy any applicable development requirement. The plan commission, or its designee, may also require a performance bond or other written assurance that requires the timely completion of public improvements within or associated with a given project. To ensure projects are completed as presented, the plan commission, or its designee, may permit or require the owner of real property to make a written commitment in accordance with IC 36-7-4-613. The plan commission, or its designee, may accept commitments from the agent of the owner of real property only where the owner has provided the written consent for the agent to act as the legal representative of the owner. 
(Code 1985, § 161.24; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-40. - Modification of legally existing nonconforming property and structures. 
    The plan commission, or its designee, may require proportional modifications to legally existing nonconforming property and structures as part of any improvement that requires design review. The proportional modifications requested need not relate to the proposed modifications. However, the cost and scope of requested modifications shall be relatively consistent with the value of proposed improvements. For example, a proposed sign improvement could warrant the required relocation/removal of a vending machine or news rack. A proposed building addition could require the screening or enclosure of unassociated existing exterior mechanical equipment. A proposed sign modification would not warrant the replacement of an existing nonconforming roof material. 
(Code 1985, § 161.25; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-41. - Plan documentation and supporting information. 
    The following documentation and supporting information shall be submitted for any development or proposal where design/development plan review is required. Items that are not applicable for a particular proposed improvement or modification need not be submitted if not relevant to the proposed project. For example, if a given proposal does not involve a sign or mechanical equipment, the required supporting information for these items would not be applicable unless otherwise required by the plan commission, or its designee, as a condition of approval. The plan commission, or its designee, as part of the review process may request additional documentation and supporting information as necessary to determine compliance with the requirements contained herein. 
(1)  All information identified by section 137-35(c) for site plan approval. 
(2)  Building/structure elevations and construction details illustrating exterior appearance of required design elements, identification of materials, exterior window treatments, and entrance features. 
(3)  Proposed building/structure color schemes, renderings, and/or any other information necessary to indicate compliance with this chapter. Typical material and paint samples illustrating the exterior appearance of any building/structure may also be requested by the plan commission or its designee. 
(4)  Context drawings. Where requested by the plan commission, or its designee, may require elevations of a proposed project in relation to surrounding streets and structures. The purpose of these elevations is to assist the plan commission, or its designee, in reviewing the appropriateness of building height, proportions, and pedestrian emphasis. 
(5)  Location and description of exterior mechanical equipment, antennas, or similar structures. 
(6)  Location of exterior vending machines, newsracks, telephones, teller machines, and similar structures. 
(7)  For projects that are located adjacent to or within 50 feet of the St. Joseph River, shall identify the location of the river and any associated amenities. 
(8)  Documentation identifying the type and location of proposed and existing exterior utilities. Construction details shall be provided for all proposed utilities. 
(9)  An exterior lighting plan documenting the location and type of existing and proposed building mounted and freestanding site lighting. Construction details and or catalogue cuts shall be provided for each type of proposed fixture identifying the style, mounting height, wattage, and type (metal halide, high pressure sodium, mercury vapor, etc.). In addition, the plan commission, or its designee, may require an applied photometric drawing documenting the average sustained horizontal footcandle level for a given site. 
(10)  Construction details for proposed fences and walls. Where wall heights vary, the minimum and maximum wall heights shall be identified. 
(11)  The location and proposed screening of proposed dumpster and utility service areas. Existing dumpster and utility service areas intended to remain shall also be identified and labeled. 
(12)  Documentation of the location and type of existing and proposed street hardware. Construction details and or catalogue cuts shall be provided for each type of hardware proposed. 
(13)  A signage plan documenting the location, form, character, mounting height, and style of existing and proposed signage. 
(14)  Color rendered elevations of all proposed signage. 
(15)  A landscaping plan indicating the common name, botanical name, location, and installed size of proposed plantings. 
(16)  Irrigation plans that indicate the service connection, controller location, areas to be irrigated, and irrigation method. 
(17)  A plan identifying the location of historically relevant structures identified as either "notable" or "outstanding" within the City of Mishawaka Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory. 
(18)  A plan identifying the use or integration of landmarks or cultural artifacts. 
(19)  The location, associated amenities, and construction details relative to proposed urban plazas, outdoor seating, and water features. 
(Code 1985, § 161.26; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-42. - Violations and enforcement. 
    Projects that are constructed not in compliance with this chapter or without required review shall be considered in violation of chapter 137, zoning. Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be accomplished in accordance with sections 137-45 through 137-47. 
(Code 1985, § 161.27; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-43. - Design requirements. 
    The requirements contained within this chapter shall apply to all projects and be considered as part of development plan/design review as applicable to a given proposal. Where possible, graphic representations, illustrations, and photographs have been included as appropriate and inappropriate examples for each requirement. The use of examples are intended to provide guidance only. As such, each requirement is meant to be reviewed holistically relative to the context of its location and the scope of the proposed improvement. These requirements are intended to allow for flexibility and creativity in order to achieve high quality orderly development and redevelopment. Design professionals are encouraged to apply for waivers where appropriate to further the intent of this chapter. As part of the design/development plan review process, the plan commission, or its designee (where permitted), will determine if a project is appropriate, satisfactory, inappropriate, or not applicable. 
(Code 1985, § 161.28; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-44-105-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-75. - Architectural character and style. 
    The basic aesthetic idea of a proposal shall be considered holistically relative to the context of its location and the scope of the proposed improvement. New buildings and substantial modifications of property shall be designed by a design professional in the relation to the specific characteristics of the site, the surrounding area, and the intent of this chapter. The applicable seal or other relevant proof of professional certification shall be considered appropriate documentation relative to design professional status. The use of boilerplate buildings and architectural features shall be discouraged. This chapter shall not dictate the appropriateness of a specific architectural style, except inasmuch as said style otherwise complies with the intent of this chapter. The replication of existing historic styles of architecture within the city shall be encouraged only when the location or context of a proposal would warrant as deemed by the plan commission, or its designee. 
(Code 1985, § 161.40; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-76. - Architectural materials. 
    The use of natural materials shall be encouraged. Natural materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, fired brick, limestone, river stone, slate, granite or other similar material. Use of imitation or synthetic materials shall be discouraged. Imitation or synthetic materials shall include but shall not be limited to aluminum or vinyl siding, wood siding, pressed concrete veneer brick, exposed pre-cast concrete, concrete block (smooth, split face, or otherwise), or replicate stone. Structures that primarily consist of glass and steel and/or stucco shall be discouraged. Glass block, stucco, metal, and wood may be utilized as an accent or decorative feature incidental to the principle natural materials. The use of reflective glass shall be discouraged. The use of metal, fiberglass, or hard plastic awnings shall be discouraged. Appropriate awning materials include cloth, canvas, or similar materials with a concealed frame. 
(Code 1985, § 161.41; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-77. - Architectural color and textures. 
    The use of natural materials and colors shall be encouraged. Natural colors shall include but shall not be limited to brick red, maroon, limestone, beige, brown, and other earth tones. Bold contrasting vibrant colors shall be discouraged except where deemed appropriate for accents. Bold colors shall include but shall not be limited to yellow, red, purple, pink, orange, lime-green, sky blue, and any neon or fluorescent. Monotone colors shall be discouraged. Blending ranges of colors of bricks and other building materials shall be encouraged to provide rich textures. 
(Code 1985, § 161.42; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-78. - Architectural features and details. 
    Balconies, decorative facades, bracketed eaves, columns, balustrades, towers, turrets, skylights, and arches shall be encouraged. Door and window location, size, and spacing shall be provided to promote visual interest, provide pedestrian emphasis, and to enhance the architectural concept. Architectural features and details shall be designed in proportion to the building. Details shall be provided to promote visual interest, provide pedestrian emphasis, and to enhance the designer's concept. Monotone or flat single dimensional walls shall be discouraged within view of the public right-of-way and the St. Joseph River. The use of historic details, or mimicking of existing details, may be utilized where appropriate to the design in accordance with the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 161.43; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-79. - Building height and proportions. 
    The height, width, and general proportions of a building shall be designed in consideration of surrounding structures. Buildings, including incidental accessory appurtenances, over 80 feet in height shall be discouraged. Facade modulation and articulated rooflines shall be encouraged to reduce the apparent mass of structures at street level. Physical features such as balconies, terraces, large windows, canopies, porches, and exterior seating shall be encouraged to develop street character, pedestrian emphasis, and liveliness. Larger buildings, over three stories above grade, shall be encouraged to provide an architectural differentiation of ground level. Differentiation may be provided by the incorporation of architectural elements such as recesses, arcades, higher structural bays, and overhangs. 
(Code 1985, § 161.44; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-80. - Roof materials. 
    Wood shingle, asphalt shingle, tile, slate, painted metal, and copper shall be considered appropriate roofing materials that are visible from public right-of-way. Roll roofing, built up tar and gravel, plastic, and fiberglass materials will generally be deemed inappropriate materials that are visible from the public right-of-way. The plan commission or its designee may require roofs to match or be constructed of materials of a similar appearance based on adjacent structures, in accordance with the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 161.45; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-81. - Roof form. 
    The design lines created by the shape of the roof shall constitute the roof form. Varied roof forms (multiple design lines) shall be encouraged where possible. Roof forms for new construction shall be encouraged to create pedestrian emphasis and incorporate multiple forms to provide visual interest. Large flat roofs shall be discouraged for buildings under 30 feet in height. 
(Code 1985, § 161.46; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-82. - Foundation walls. 
    Exposed foundation walls shall be constructed of architectural materials that match the principle facing of the structure. The maximum exposure of foundation walls not constructed of materials that match the principle facing of the structure shall be limited to a maximum of 12 inches. 
(Code 1985, § 161.47; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-83-105-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-108. - Mechanical equipment. 
    To minimize the impact of mechanical equipment on the appearance of the community, window air conditioning units or condenser elements shall be discouraged. Antennas shall be located where they are not visible from the public right-of-way and/or the St. Joseph River. Mechanical equipment on the ground shall be screened or housed in a structure that is in harmony with the surroundings. Mechanical equipment and/or related appurtenances attached to the side of a building shall be covered or designed in harmony with the building. Mechanical equipment attached to the roof of a building should be kept as low as possible and screened from view at ground level. The use of screening that utilizes appropriate architectural materials shall be encouraged. 
(Code 1985, § 161.50; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-109. - Vending machines and newsracks. 
    Vending machines and newsracks shall not be located where visible from public right-of-way or the St. Joseph River. An appropriate location for these items is within enclosed structures such as a foyer or entranceway. 
(Code 1985, § 161.51; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-110. - Pay telephones, teller machines, and similar accessory structures. 
    Pay telephones, teller machines, and similar accessory structures shall be incorporated integrally within main architectural structures. Items may be housed separately within individual accessory structures provided said structures meet the design review standards adopted herein. Drive-through facilities (facilities that may be operated without leaving a motor vehicle) shall be discouraged. 
(Code 1985, § 161.52; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-111. - Integration and use of river property. 
    Property that contains frontage on the St. Joseph River, including associated water bodies such as the Mill Race, shall be developed in a manner to emphasize and incorporate this amenity. This shall be accomplished in a manner reflective of the intended use of the property. Integration shall include the creation of both active and passive public uses. This integration may include, but shall not be limited to, the dedication of easements for public use, the construction of public river-oriented improvements such as walks and overlooks, developing view corridors, and providing an architectural relationship between principle buildings and the river through the use of windows, entrances, details, and views. 
(Code 1985, § 161.53; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-112. - Pedestrian emphasis. 
    Architectural projects shall be developed in a manner that contains amenities, design elements, and features that promote the emphasis of pedestrian uses and interaction. This requirement shall apply to all public right-of-way, frontage on the St. Joseph River, as well as, internal entrances designed for frequent use. Pedestrian emphasis shall be accomplished in a manner reflective of the intended use of the property. Integration may include, but shall not be limited to, providing significant amounts of window store frontage, providing an overhead plane such as canopies or awnings, physical amenities such as bollard lights, benches, as well as, providing wide walks with varying patterns or materials. 
(Code 1985, § 161.54; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-113. - Exterior utilities. 
    All new or proposed site utilities shall be located underground. Aboveground utilities shall be discouraged. Entry fixtures and related appurtenances shall be located away from high use areas and main entrances. Stormwater detention shall not be accomplished by using open ponds or retention areas except where the incorporation of the element further contributes to the intent of this chapter. Non-appearance-related stormwater retention methods, such as utilizing shallow storage on parking areas, shall be encouraged. High voltage electric lines (nonservice lines) may be located above ground as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission or its designee. Where possible, existing aboveground utilities and related appurtenances shall be placed underground or obscured from view of public rights-of-way and the St. Joseph River. This may be accomplished by locating utilities and appurtenances behind structures in nonvisible areas. 
(Code 1985, § 161.55; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-114. - Exterior lighting. 
    All exterior lighting shall be appropriate to the building and its surroundings in terms of style, scale, and intensity of illumination. Standard city ornamental street lights shall be provided along all public road rights-of-way and the St. Joseph River spaced no greater than 80 feet apart. Standard city ornamental street lights shall also be provided at roadway and private vehicular drive intersections. The plan commission may require existing city poles and fixtures be upgraded to an ornamental standard as part of the conditions of approval. Low wattage (maximum of 250 watts per location) shall be encouraged. Maximum sustained light coverage over two horizontal footcandles shall be discouraged. Mounting heights of over 20 feet for exterior lighting fixtures shall be discouraged. Miscellaneous site lighting shall be shielded, 90-degree cut-off or otherwise designed to prevent glare on public right-of-way, walks, and adjacent buildings. Wood poles or similar amenities that appear temporary in nature shall be discouraged. Up-lighting of buildings, trees, and flag poles shall be encouraged where said lighting does not produce glare or other visual detractions. 
(Code 1985, § 161.56; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-115. - Fences and walls. 
    Where fences or walls are utilized they shall be constructed of iron, steel picket, stone, or natural materials designed to match the principle building. Chain link, concrete block, fiberglass, vinyl and wood fences shall be prohibited. Solid screening more than four feet in height shall be discouraged except where appropriate in conjunction with screening dumpster and utility areas. Railroad ties and unfaced concrete shall be considered inappropriate for wall construction. Sheet piling that extends more than two feet above grade, or two feet below the 100-year flood elevation of the St. Joseph River, shall utilize stone, masonry, or other facing material as deemed appropriate by the plan commission, or its designee. Street walls, where proposed or required, shall be of a masonry construction, or concrete faced with natural materials, designed to be in harmony with the surroundings. Street walls shall predominantly be designed for seating purposes no higher than 24 inches above the surrounding grade. 
(Code 1985, § 161.57; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-116. - Dumpster/utility service areas. 
    Dumpster and utility service areas (including transformers, truck docks, and loading areas) shall be located where they are not visible from the public right-of-way and/or the St. Joseph River. Equipment/dumpsters on the ground shall be screened or housed in a structure that is in harmony with the surroundings. The use of screening that utilizes appropriate architectural materials shall be encouraged. 
(Code 1985, § 161.58; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-117. - Street hardware. 
    Street hardware shall be required where appropriate relative to a proposed use and/or the scope of a proposed project. As such, the plan commission may require the incorporation of directional signs, ash urns, benches, litter containers, tree grates, mailboxes, and other relevant appurtenances as part of the conditions of approval. Street hardware shall utilize high-quality materials such as painted steel, iron, and masonry. Street hardware consisting of wood and/or plastic materials shall be discouraged. Signs (excluding supports) may utilize materials such as wood, plastic, and fiberglass provided said sign meets the other requirements identified by this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 161.59; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-118-105-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING FACILITY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-149. - Off-street parking areas. 
(a)  Fifty spaces or fewer. Parking areas that contain 50 spaces or fewer shall be designed to limit the use of frontage on public rights-of-way. Parking shall be designed to be located behind or between buildings. The utilization of small residual areas between buildings within developed areas for parking shall be encouraged. Angled parking shall be discouraged within new developments except where parcel configuration would otherwise restrict the development of standard 90-degree spaces. It is also encouraged that within new development parking areas be developed in accordance with the standards identified for parking areas greater than 50 spaces in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Greater than 50 spaces. Contiguous parking areas that contain greater than 50 spaces shall be designed reflective of urban conditions to maximize the use of property. Parking shall be designed on multiple levels. The shared use, occupancy, and maintenance of structures shall be encouraged. Parking structures shall be designed as per the building design requirements identified by this chapter. Parking structures greater than two stories above ground shall incorporate retail space or a different ground level treatment along public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1985, §§ 161.60, 161.61; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-150. - On-street parking areas. 
    On-street parking areas located within public right-of-way shall be encouraged on local and service-oriented streets. On-street parking areas located within public right-of-way shall be discouraged on collector and arterial streets. Where appropriate pavement widths are provided, parking shall be limited to angled and parallel spaces. Perpendicular spaces within road right-of-way shall be discouraged. On-street parking may be prohibited by the plan commission where it deems that there could be a negative impact on public safety. Approval of on street parking may only occur with the prior consent of the city board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 161.62; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-151-105-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNAGE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-169. - Exterior signage materials. 
    Exterior signage materials such as wood, metal, and masonry shall be encouraged where possible. Use of exposed neon shall be discouraged. An appropriate application for exposed neon, if utilized, shall be located within exterior display windows. Support materials for freestanding signs shall consist of a masonry style consistent with the exterior appearance of the principle building. Metals, or other materials consistent with and complementary to the principle building may also be considered appropriate. 
(Code 1985, § 161.70; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-170. - Exterior signage colors. 
    Bold contrasting vibrant colors shall be discouraged except where deemed appropriate for incidental portions, characters, or accents. Color restrictions shall not apply to established company symbols or corporate logos. This exemption shall be limited to the specific symbol or logo and shall not apply to background colors or construction materials. Bold colors shall include but shall not be limited to yellow, red, purple, pink, orange, lime-green, sky blue, and any neon or fluorescent. Limited applications of these colors may be considered satisfactory by the plan commission based on the specific context of a proposal, the architectural concept, and application relative to the intent of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 161.71; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-171. - Signage form. 
(a)  The following types of signs shall be encouraged: 
(1)  Projecting signs; 
(2)  Suspended signs; 
(3)  Wall signs; 
(4)  Marquee signs; 
(5)  Building identification signs; 
(6)  Low profile freestanding identification signs; 
(7)  Menu boards; and 
(8)  Temporary wall mounted banners. 
(b)  The following types of signs shall be discouraged: 
(1)  Off-premises signs; 
(2)  Freestanding identification signs which exceed eight feet in height; 
(3)  Automatic changing signs; 
(4)  Changeable copy signs; 
(5)  Exterior temporary signs, excepting menu boards and temporary wall mounted banners; 
(6)  Roof signs; and 
(7)  Portable signs. 
(c)  Signs shall be designed in a comprehensive singular manner. 
(d)  Multiple message type signs shall utilize similar colors, framing materials, and/or styles to compliment each other. 
(e)  Signs of different styles that are pieced together shall be discouraged. 
(Code 1985, § 161.72; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999; Ord. No. 5395, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 105-172. - Window signage. 
    Window signs shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the transparent window area of each individual windowpane where a sign is placed. Window signage shall be prohibited above the ground floor or street level. 
(Code 1985, § 161.73; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-173. - Projecting signage clearance. 
    Projecting or suspended signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet from the lowest adjacent grade below the sign. Signs that project into public rights-of-way or easements shall require the prior consent of the city board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 161.74; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-174. - Signage size limitations. 
    The individual letter characters or symbols on any proposed sign shall not exceed 18 inches in height. The vertical size of any sign which exceeds six feet in height shall be discouraged. The horizontal size of any sign which exceeds 20 linear feet shall be discouraged. Wall-mounted letters or messages that extend beyond 20 linear feet along the horizontal face shall be discouraged. 
(Code 1985, § 161.75; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-175. - Signage quantity. 
    A maximum of one freestanding sign shall be permitted per street frontage, excluding directional signs. A maximum of one projecting or suspended sign shall be permitted per street frontage. A maximum of one wall sign, painted graphic, or building sign shall be permitted per building face, excluding window signs. 
(Code 1985, § 161.76; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-176. - Signage clutter. 
    To avoid clutter and confusion in viewing signage, a maximum of 40 characters per sign shall be encouraged, excluding window signs. Company symbols or logos need not be included as a character for determining the maximum number. The integration of company symbols or logos shall be encouraged; however, the logos shall be of a size and use materials/colors consistent with the requirements identified herein. 
(Code 1985, § 161.77; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-177. - Signage lighting. 
    The internal illumination or uplighting of identification signs shall be encouraged. Sign lighting that produces glare or other visual detraction shall be discouraged. Visual detractions shall include, but shall not be limited to, flashing or moving lights, lights that change in color or intensity, and lighting that is not reasonably uniform emphasizing a particular character or message. 
(Code 1985, § 161.78; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-178. - Signage style considerations. 
    Special consideration waivers may be provided for signs that are designed to reflect a desirable style, character, or image. Consideration shall be given for signage reflective of a particular era, style of construction, special use of materials, etc. Examples of this type of sign could include the reconstruction of a historical marquee, a 1950's style of lettering and use of material, and the use of a specific product or the incorporation of a relative product within signage. Creativity and the creation of distinct and unique signs shall be encouraged. These types of signs may be deemed satisfactory by the plan commission as part of a holistic review of a specific design or architectural concept provided said signage is determined to be appropriate based on the specific context of a proposal and application relative to the intent of this article. 
(Code 1985, § 161.79; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-179. - Menu boards. 
    Portable temporary sign displays in front of a business for the specific use of advertising that business, that are brought in/not displayed overnight. Signs may a freestanding sandwich board easel sign, or a flush mounted sign attached to the face of the building. The sign area of an individual face shall not exceed six square feet. Only one sign of this type shall be permitted per store frontage. The location of the sign shall not interfere with outward opening doors/windows, or negatively impact use of the public sidewalk or street in any way. Signs shall not be located within 15 feet of any handicapped ramp or at the corner of public streets. Any proposed sign located within the public right-of-way shall require a notice of public recognition and encroachment from the Mishawaka Board of Public Works and Safety prior to placement. 
(Ord. No. 5395, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Sec. 105-180. - Temporary wall mounted banners. 
    One temporary banner not to exceed 12 square feet may be placed flush mounted to the face of existing buildings. Banners shall be firmly secured so as not to move in the wind and shall be maintained in good condition. Faded or torn signs shall be immediately removed. One banner shall be permitted per store frontage. Where a building fronts on a corner, one banner sign shall be permitted for each face of the building fronting public right-of-way. For the purpose of this section, temporary shall be defined as not to exceed 120 continuous calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 5395, § 1, 7-15-2013) 
Secs. 105-181-105-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-210. - Street trees. 
    Deciduous shade trees shall be planted within public street rights-of-way and along the banks of the St. Joseph River. Trees shall be planted a maximum of 30 linear feet on center, based on the total frontage and the location of high quality existing trees intended to be preserved. Trees shall be planted in an urban context. This shall include providing cast iron tree grates within sidewalk areas where appropriate. The use of male Ginkgo biloba (maidenhair tree) shall be encouraged along public road rights-of-way and along the banks of the St. Joseph River. Trees shall be nursery quality material installed at a 31/2-inch to four-inch caliper size and shall be limbed to seven feet clear. 
(Code 1985, § 161.80; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-211. - Parking area screening. 
    Evergreen shrubs whose height at maturity ranges between three and four feet shall be planted continuously as a hedge between parking areas and public road rights-of-way/St. Joseph River. Shrubs shall be nursery quality materials installed at a minimum of 24 inches in height. This screening shall be supplemented with vertical plantings such as ornamental or deciduous shade trees. Shade trees shall be located within parking areas no greater than 100 feet apart within curbed landscaped islands to dissipate light and break up large areas of asphalt. Curbed landscape islands shall be a minimum of nine feet in width with a minimum landscaped/nonimpervious area of 180 square feet. Given the difficulties of maintaining lawn, groundcover and/or shrubbery, plantings within curbed islands shall be encouraged. Shade trees shall be nursery quality material installed at a 31/2-inch to four-inch caliper size and shall be limbed to seven feet clear. 
(Code 1985, § 161.81; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-212. - Variety of landscape material. 
    Each project shall contain an aesthetic landscape element appropriate to the size, scale, and location of the property. New development and redevelopment sites shall incorporate a variety of materials that convey interest through multiple seasons. The combined use of evergreens, flowering shrubs, perennials, and bulbs shall be encouraged. On existing properties where potential landscape space is limited, this requirement may be met by window boxes, and/or container plantings as deemed appropriate by the plan commission, or its designee. 
(Code 1985, § 161.82; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-213. - Maintenance of landscape; duty of property owner; irrigation systems. 
    Required landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition based on standard horticultural practices. Where practical, particularly in conjunction with new development or redevelopment, the developer shall cause to be installed an irrigation system for required landscaping, including plantings that may be located within the public right-of-way. Property owners shall be responsible for the continual maintenance of required landscaping. Maintenance shall be considered the irrigation, trimming, cutting, and fertilization necessary to provide a healthy manicured appearance. Required landscaping that is dead, significantly diseased, or significantly distressed shall be removed and replaced at the owners' expense. Proposed tree installation, removal, and replacement located within the public rights-of-way requires the prior consent of the city board of public works and safety. 
(Code 1985, § 161.83; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Secs. 105-214-105-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-235. - View corridors. 
    Only projects subject to design/development plan review which are located within the areas identified by the referenced map and this section shall be subject to this restriction. Projects shall be developed in a manner that promotes, frames, or otherwise does not restrict the view corridors identified on the map. View corridors have been identified to maintain a sense of place and to emphasize longstanding structures that have served as visual landmarks to the community. Views may be intermittently interrupted as may be approved by the plan commission provided the proposed development has been designed to minimize the interruption and otherwise meets the intent of this chapter. As part of the review process, the plan commission, or its designee, may request additional documentation that may include, but shall not be limited to, sections, perspectives or computer imaging that shows the context of a project in relation to the established view corridor. Required documentation shall be dependent on the scope of the proposed project and its location. The corridors shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Main Street/Church Street. From the centerline intersection of Mishawaka Avenue and Main Street following the centerline of Main/Church Street to the intersection of the Grand Trunk Railroad underpass and Church Street. The corridor shall be 160 feet in width, 80 feet on either side of the centerline of the road. 
(2)  Lincolnway. From the centerline intersection of Lincolnway East and Laurel Street following the centerline of Lincolnway to the intersection of Lincolnway West and Logan Street. The corridor shall be 140 feet in width, 70 feet on either side of the centerline of the road. 
(3)  Spring Street. From the intersection of Spring Street and Fourth Street following the centerline of Spring Street to where, if projected due north, Spring Street would intersect with the southern bank of the St. Joseph River. The corridor shall be 120 feet in width, 60 feet on either side of the centerline of the road. 
(4)  River Center. From the intersection of Mishawaka Avenue and Main Street following a straight line to the projected intersection of the south bank of the St. Joseph River and Spring Street. The corridor shall be 120 feet in width, 60 feet on either side of the line. 
_____
View Corridor Map   
(Code 1985, § 161.90; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
_____
Sec. 105-236. - Consideration of historically relevant structures. 
    Before undertaking the development or redevelopment of a parcel of land or modification of an existing structure, the applicant shall research the historic status of the structure or parcel of land. This shall be accomplished by reviewing the City of Mishawaka Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory. This report is available at the office of the department of city planning. Before the demolition or significant alteration of any structure rated as "outstanding" or "notable," the applicant shall investigate and research the adaptive reuse of the existing structure. If adaptive reuse is possible, the applicant may pursue the project subject to all relevant codes and requirements. The plan commission may provide special consideration waivers based on an applicant's effort to adaptively reuse a historically relevant structure in accordance with the intent of this chapter. If the adaptive reuse is not feasible based on proposed development or project plans, the applicant shall submit a written summary of said investigations with a written request to demolish concurrently with final site plan submission. The demolition of a historically relevant structure shall require a public hearing in accordance with section 105-31. A demolition permit for the removal of a historically relevant structure shall not be issued or considered valid prior to final site plan approval by the plan commission. Demolition of a historically relevant structure, or portion thereof, prior to the demolition time constraints required by this article, shall result in a fine of $2,500.00 per day, per violation. Final site plan approval that requires the demolition of a historically significant structure shall not occur until a minimum of 90 days following the initial public hearing on the proposal. The 90-day waiting period is required to allow for the potential identification of a viable interested party to relocate the structure. The applicant/property owner shall provide any viable interested party the ability to relocate historically relevant structures at the interested party's expense. To be identified as a viable interested party, an individual or entity shall identify its interest in writing to both the property owner/applicant and department of city planning. The interested party must also identify the specific verifiable financial resources and proposed location of the structure. If a viable interested party is not identified the plan commission may act on the final site plan at the next regularly scheduled meeting. If a viable interested party is identified, the final site plan may be acted upon; however, the plan commission may require up to an additional 120 days to allow for the relocation of said structure. The plan commission may require the applicant to contribute to the relocation costs associated with moving a historically relevant structure in an amount that does not exceed twice the estimated demolition, removal, and disposal costs of said structure based on multiple independent quotations provided by the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 161.91; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-237. - Incorporation of landmarks and cultural artifacts. 
    Landmarks and cultural artifacts, real or fabricated, contribute to the character and sense of place of a specific geographic region. The incorporation of landmarks and cultural artifacts within development proposals shall be encouraged. Examples include the re-creation of a theater marquee, the use of historical sign designs, or the incorporation of manufactured goods/machinery in the landscape or buildings. 
(Code 1985, § 161.92; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-238. - Incorporation of urban plazas, outdoor seating, and water features. 
    Special consideration waivers may be provided for projects that incorporate desired quality elements such as urban plazas, outdoor restaurant seating, and the incorporation of water features. The intent is to encourage the incorporation of these elements where appropriate. These types of amenities may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission as part of a holistic review of a specific design or architectural concept relative to a given location and the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 161.93; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Sec. 105-239. - Sources and reference. 
    The following sources and reference materials were reviewed in establishing this article. These materials provided outline language, illustrations, photographs, and other pertinent information relative to the production of this chapter. 
(1)  Books. 
a.  Newton, Norman T., Design on the Land. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, and London England. 1971. 
b.  Jakubovich, Paul J., and Vollmert, Les., Good for Business, A guide to rehabilitating the exteriors of Older Commercial Buildings. Published by the City of Milwaukee, Department of City Development. June 1995. 
(2)  Planning advisory service reports. 
a.  Glassford, Peggy, Appearance Codes for Small Communities. American Planning Association, 1313 E. 60th St., Chicago Illinois, 60637, 1983. 
b..  Duerksen, Christopher J., Aesthetics and Land-Use Controls, Beyond Ecology and Economics. American Planning Association, 1313 E. 60th St., Chicago Illinois, 60637, 1986. 
c.  Hinshaw, Mark L., Design Review. American Planning Association, 1313 E. 60th St., Chicago Illinois, 60637. 1995. 
(3)  Public documents. 
a.  City of Mishawaka, Indiana. Summary Report, Indiana Historic Sites and Structures Inventory. Published by the City of Mishawaka Historic Review Board and Beiger Heritage Corporation. November 1995. 
b.  City of Mishawaka, Indiana. Mishawaka Center City/Riverfront Revitalization Project, Mishawaka River Center. Published by the City of Mishawaka, prepared by the Troyer Group. June 1999. 
(Code 1985, § 161.98; Ord. No. 4469, 12-20-1999) 
Chapter 109 - DOWNTOWN REVITALIZATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 109-1. - Establishment of downtown revitalization revolving fund. 
(a)  There is authorized a special fund to be identified as the Downtown Revitalization Revolving Fund (hereinafter called the "fund"). The purpose of the fund is to provide for restricted loans to owners of nonresidential property located within the boundaries of the central business district and the Mishawaka Avenue Area of the city (see appendices A and B to this chapter for boundary descriptions). This area hereinafter shall be called "area". 
(b)  The fund shall have an initial deposit of $200,000.00, consisting of $125,000.00 from the industrial development fund as administered by the state department of commerce pursuant to IC 5-28-9-1 et seq. and the sum of $75,000.00 to be derived from community development block grant funds of the city. Additional funds derived from the collection of principal and interest payments or additional local funds may also be deposited from time to time. Disbursements from the fund shall be limited to the approved loan amount to eligible borrowers, the state department of commerce, and other costs directly related to the administration of the loan program. 
(Code 1985, § 151.01; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977; Ord. No. 2337, 12-17-1979) 
Sec. 109-2. - Loan committee to administer. 
(a)  For the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby ordered created a loan committee to act upon the behalf of the city. 
(b)  The loan committee will consist of the following: 
(1)  City engineer. 
(2)  City planner. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(4)  Director of community development. 
(5)  Council representative. 
(Code 1985, § 151.02; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Secs. 109-3-109-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOANS FROM FUND 

Sec. 109-23. - Regulations applicable to all borrowers. 
    The regulations and restrictions contained in this article shall apply in every case toward every eligible borrower from the fund. 
(Code 1985, § 151.10; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-24. - Loan application procedure. 
(a)  An eligible property owner will make application for a loan under the provisions of this article by submitting a written letter of application directly to the loan committee. While the form of this letter is left to the applicant, the content should include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  Identification of the borrower. 
(2)  Identification and location of the structure involved. 
(3)  General description of rehabilitation or restoration activities contemplated. 
(4)  Estimated amount of loan needed, if this is known. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application, the loan committee will make preliminary review and determination of the loan requested and the work activities contemplated. Preliminary approval will be given if the applicant, structure, and work activities meet the provisions and intent of this article. If approved, the applicant will be referred to one of the participating banks. The participating bank will process and review the loan application, using traditional procedures, to the loan committee within 30 days of referral of the application. The loan committee will make final determination of approval or disapproval of the loan within ten days of receipt of the bank's recommendation. 
(c)  Upon approval of the loan, the city will initiate the following: 
(1)  Letter of commitment to the bank. 
(2)  Request a formal, detailed list of work items to be performed and paid for by the loan. This may include detailed drawings and specifications. 
(d)  Upon approval of the loan, the borrower will perform the following: 
(1)  Provide the bank with all necessary documents, title reports, certificate of insurance, appraisals, and any other information requested. 
(2)  Agree to seek competitive bidding on all work to be performed by the loan. 
(3)  Agree to include in its contract documents the provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act and applicable equal employment opportunity provisions, and any other state or federal regulations applying to working conditions, rates of pay, and equality in employment. It is understood that the provisions of this subsection (3) apply only to the extent of the work activities covered by the loan. 
(4)  Agree to allow the city to inspect all work performed under the loan, during construction and upon final completion. 
(5)  Agree to allow the city to inspect all records and documents pertaining to any aspect of the loan or the use of funds obtained therefrom. 
(6)  Agree to start construction of the approved work activities within three months of loan approval and complete them within 12 months. 
(Code 1985, § 151.11; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-25. - Local banking institutions to review, approve, and finance loan applications. 
    In order to facilitate the review and servicing of loans under the provisions of this article, it is intended that the full involvement and assistance of local banking institutions be enlisted to perform certain required functions. The term "local banking institutions" means either the Valley Bank and Trust Company of Mishawaka, Indiana, or the First National Bank of Mishawaka, Mishawaka, Indiana (hereinafter referred to collectively as the bank). The functions contemplated shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Review of loan application, including requesting any additional documents or submissions, to enable a thorough review of the financial posture of the borrower, the business, or both. The additional documentation shall include the completion and submission of a formal loan application, the form and content normally required and used by the bank. The review shall include debt service considerations in regard to any existing indebtedness and the ability to assume the proposed additional obligations imposed by the proposed loan. 
(2)  To make recommendations to the loan committee as to the granting of a loan under the provisions of this article. All applications shall be returned to the loan committee with recommendations for final determination and communication to the applicant. 
(3)  Upon approval of the loan by the loan committee, the bank shall provide interim financing to the borrower during the ensuing construction or reconstruction period. The bank shall immediately receive a letter of commitment from the loan committee guaranteeing the permanent longterm financing at the completion of the rehabilitation activities. The bank shall levy a charge for the interim financing not to exceed ten percent of the interim loan amount. The city reserves the right to make inspection of work completed prior to any draws upon the interim loan. 
(4)  Using funds received from the city, the bank will administratively set up the permanent loan and will perform all those functions in servicing the permanent loan as an agent of the city. These services will include, but not be limited to, the sending of monthly notices, collection and recording of payments, depositing all payments into the fund account, and the like. In this capacity as agent, the bank shall enact a service charge against the payments in an amount not to exceed 0.5 percent. 
(5)  Should any monthly payment be deemed late, the bank will send the usual late notices and levy against the delinquent payment the normal late charges, which will be retained by the bank. 
(6)  In the preparation of the final loan, the bank shall cause to be executed by the borrower a longterm mortgage note and warranty mortgage, the form and content of which is normally used by the bank, with the assignment of the note and mortgage to the city as the need may arise. 
(7)  The relationship between the city and the bank is further defined by the execution of a buy-sell agreement. 
(Code 1985, § 151.12; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-26. - Permissible types of loans. 
    Loans from the fund to eligible property owners shall be restricted to include only those costs involved in the repair, rehabilitation, restoration, or preservation of the facade of a nonresidential structure located within the area described in section 109-1(a). It is the intent and express purpose of this loan that it be used only for work activities relating to the creation of a harmonious and aesthetically pleasing presentation of individual structures within the area. 
(Code 1985, § 151.13; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-27. - Eligible structures. 
(a)  All nonresidential structures within the area shall be eligible for consideration. Structures of two or more stories, having residential dwelling units or a secondary use on upper floors, will also be eligible; provided, however, that the nonresidential use is the primary street level function of the structure. 
(b)  No structure whose location is found to be in conflict with any comprehensive development plan, major thoroughfare plan, urban renewal plan, or any other such instrument of city planning and redevelopment will be eligible for participation in this loan program. 
(Code 1985, § 151.14; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-28. - Eligible applicants. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ownership means having possession of a fee-simple title to the property which is the subject of the loan. 
(b)  To be eligible, an applicant for a loan from the fund must be an individual, partnership, or corporation that owns property within the area. If a corporation, the city will require a personal guarantee on behalf of the stockholders toward repayment of the loan. A loan cannot be considered if the applicant has a clear record of past disregard for former obligations or if there is a clear inability to make the payments that will be required. 
(c)  Ownership through possession of a land sales contract shall be considered if such contract meets the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The contract shall be a written, legally binding instrument involving the property. 
(2)  The seller of the property must hold fee simple title to the property, and while the contract is in good standing, must be unable to use the property for collateral or to convey the property to any other party unless that use for collateral or conveyance of fee is subject to the land sales contract. Legally acceptable limitations on the effect of conveyance or use of the property for collateral must be found to exist under local law, the provisions of the contract, or some other written agreement in recordable form. The city shall record this agreement or the contract promptly after loan settlement, if necessary to give either document the legal effect described. 
(3)  Under the contract, the seller and any subsequent holder of the fee to the property must be obligated, without qualification, to deliver to the purchaser fee-simple title and a deed to the property upon full payment of the contract price, or some lesser amount. 
(4)  Under the terms of the contract, the purchaser shall have: 
a.  Full use, possession, and quiet enjoyment of the property; 
b.  Equitable title to the property; and 
c.  Full rights of redemption for a period of not less than 90 days, unless redemption rights not less than 90 days are afforded by local law to a purchaser under a land sales contract. 
(d)  Before an application for a rehabilitation loan to a purchaser under a land sales contract can be approved, the city must obtain a copy of the land sales contract and a written legal opinion from its counsel that each of the foregoing conditions is satisfied, and setting forth the basis for the opinion. 
(Code 1985, § 151.15; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-29. - Eligible activities. 
    Loans shall be made only for the following activities as they relate to the structure involved: 
(1)  Preparation of plans, specifications, and related architectural services. 
(2)  Removal of exterior portions of the structure. 
(3)  Construction or reconstruction of the exterior facade, either to front or rear of the structure, or to either or both exterior side walls depending upon whether the structure is in a corner location or is freestanding with all exterior walls exposed. 
(4)  Removal of any outdoor advertising displays. 
(5)  Expenses incurred in interim financing, including interest charges. 
(6)  Landscaping. 
(7)  Painting. 
(8)  Removal and replacement of on-premises signage. 
(9)  Removal and replacement of sidewalks. 
(10)  The cost of securing approval of the loan, these costs to include recording fee, title services, and appraisals. These costs are to be initially borne by the borrower with reimbursement at the time of final loan approval and payout. Reimbursement will not be made should the loan be disapproved. 
(Code 1985, § 151.16; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-30. - Ineligible activities. 
    The following activities shall be ineligible for the loans provided in this article: 
(1)  Any and all activities associated with the interior of the structure. 
(2)  Any and all activities relating to the roof of the structure. 
(3)  Foundation and related activities. 
(4)  New outdoor advertising displays. 
(5)  Heating, air conditioning, plumbing, and interior electrical work or fixtures/equipment. 
(6)  Acquisition of any real or personal property. 
(7)  Any amount used for payment of any existing, outstanding indebtedness of the property. 
(8)  Expansion of the structure. 
(Code 1985, § 151.17; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-31. - Amount, term of loan. 
(a)  Any loan made under the provisions of this article shall not exceed the sum of $30,000.00 for any single structure, or $60,000.00 for any single borrower. 
(b)  Any loan made pursuant to this article shall not exceed a term of seven years. 
(Code 1985, § 151.18; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977; Ord. No. 2337, 12-17-1979) 
Sec. 109-32. - Interest rate. 
    Any loan made pursuant to this article shall be made at an annual interest rate of 51/2 percent. 
(Code 1985, § 151.19; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-33. - Repayment. 
    Repayment of a loan shall be made in equal monthly installments in an amortized amount that will retire the indebtedness at the time of the final monthly payment at end of term. No penalty will be assessed for prepayment at any time of any additional sums on the unpaid principal. 
(Code 1985, § 151.20; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-34. - Loan security. 
    Each loan shall be secured by either a recorded first or second mortgage on the subject structure. All costs incurred in the event of foreclosure shall be borne by the borrower. In the event of a delinquency on any one installment, the city shall consider the entire unpaid balance to be delinquent and due. Foreclosure action shall immediately be instituted. 
(Code 1985, § 151.21; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
Sec. 109-35. - Loan applicant to agree to fulfill certain provisions. 
    Any applicant receiving funds under this loan program understands or agrees to the following special provisions: 
(1)  Liability for damages. The applicant will agree to defend the city, indemnify, and save harmless the city from any and all claims that may arise from activities undertaken with the proceeds of the loan. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as rendering the applicant liable for acts of the city, its officers, agents, or employees. 
(2)  Close-out report. The applicant shall submit to the city at the conclusion of the construction period a final report which summarizes the activities undertaken with the funds provided; including, but not limited to, names of contractors, work description, costs incurred and paid. 
(3)  Records. 
a.  Establishment and maintenance. Records shall be maintained in accordance with requirements prescribed by the city with respect to all matters covered by the loan. Except as otherwise authorized by the city these records shall be maintained for a period of three years after receipt of final payment under this article. 
b.  Documentation of costs. All costs shall be supported by properly executed payrolls, time records, invoices, contracts or vouchers, or other official documentation evidencing in proper detail the nature and propriety of charges. All checks, payrolls, invoices, contracts, vouchers, orders, or other accounting documents shall be clearly identified and readily accessible. 
(4)  Inspections. At any time during normal business hours and as often as the city may deem necessary, there shall be made available to the city for examination all records with respect to all matters covered by the loan during the construction period. Further, the applicant will permit the city or its representatives to audit, examine, and make excerpts or transcripts from those records; and to make audits of all contracts, invoices, materials, payrolls, records of personnel, conditions of employment, and other data relating to activities undertaken with funds provided by the loan. 
(5)  Conflict of interest. 
a.  Interest of members, officers or employees of the city, members of the common council, or other public officials. No member, officer or employee of the city or its designee or agent, no member of the common council, and no other public official of the city who exercises any functions or responsibilities with respect to the program during his tenure or for one year thereafter, shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or subcontract, or the proceeds thereof, for work to be performed in connection with this loan. 
b.  The applicant agrees that it will incorporate into every contract required to be in writing the following provision: 
    "Interest of Contractor and Employees. The contractor covenants that no person who presently exercises any functions or responsibilities in connection with the activities undertaken with the proceeds of this loan, has any personal financial interest, direct or indirect, in this contract." 
(6)  Bidding procedures. The applicant agrees that all contracts undertaken with funds provided herein with private contractors will be let in accordance with established bidding procedures as prescribed by the state board of accounts. 
(7)  Labor standards. There shall be included in all construction contracts, made possible by or resulting from this loan, with private entities, the applicable labor standard provisions of federal law imposing labor standards on federally assisted construction. The city will obtain the necessary labor standards. 
(8)  Equal opportunity and nondiscrimination. The applicant agrees to comply with equal opportunity requirements applicable to community development block grant activities. Specifically, the applicant agrees to comply with: 
a.  Title VI, Civil Rights Act of 1964, which provides that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance. 
b.  Section 109, Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, which provides that no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, national origin, or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity funded in whole or in part with funds made available under this article. 
c.  Executive order 11246, which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of race, creed, color, sex, or national origin in employment under federally assisted construction contracts. 
d.  Section 3, Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, which provides that to the greatest extent feasible, opportunities for training and employment shall be given to low-income residents of HUD-assisted project areas, and that contracts for work in connection with those projects be awarded to business concerns which are located in, or are owned in substantial part, by project area residents. In connection with its compliances with Section 3 and the Section 3 clause set forth below, the applicant shall insert in full in all contracts and subcontracts for work financed in whole or part with assistance provided under this article, the Section 3 clause which follows: 
1.  "The work to be performed under this contract is on a project assisted under a program providing direct federal financial assistance from the department of housing and urban development, and is subject to the requirements of Section 3 of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968, as amended. Section 3 requires that to the greatest extent feasible opportunities for training and employment be given low income residents of the project area and contracts for work in connection with the project be awarded to business concerns which are located in or owned in substantial part by persons residing in the area of the project. 
2.  "The parties to this contract will comply with the provisions of Section 3 and the regulations issued pursuant thereto by the secretary of the department of housing and urban development, and all applicable rules and orders of the department issued thereunder prior to the execution of this contract. The parties to this contract certify and agree that they are under no contractual or other disability which would prevent them from complying with these requirements. 
3.  "The contractor will include this Section 3 clause in every subcontract for work in connection with the project; and will, at the direction of the applicant for or recipient of federal financial assistance, take appropriate action pursuant to the subcontract upon a finding that the subcontractor is in violation of regulations issued by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. The contractor will not subcontract with any subcontractor where it has notice or knowledge that the latter has been found in violation of regulations under Section 3, and will not let any subcontract unless the subcontractor has first provided it with a preliminary statement of ability to comply with the requirements of these regulations." 
(9)  Certified letter. The applicant, upon approval of the loan, shall certify by letter addressed to the city that he understands, agrees to, and will comply with the foregoing provisions. 
(Code 1985, § 151.22; Ord. No. 2036, 3-21-1977) 
APPENDIX A. - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1. - Central business district urban renewal area. 
    Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Lincolnway West and the west right-of-way line of West Street; thence south along the west right-of-way line of West Street to the north right-of-way line of Penn Central Railroad; thence easterly along that right-of-way line to the centerline of Spring Street; thence north along that centerline to the centerline of Fourth Street; thence east along that centerline for a distance of 570 feet more or less to a point; thence south along a line parallel to Main Street for a distance of 210 feet more or less to a point; thence east along a line, parallel to Fourth Street, to the centerline of Main Street; thence south along that centerline to the north right-of-way of the Penn Central Railroad; thence east along that right-of-way line to the east right-of-way of Pine Street; thence north along that right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of Third Street; thence east along that right-of-way line for a distance of 200 feet more or less to a point; thence north along a line parallel to Pine Street to the north right-of-way line of Lincolnway East; thence west along that right-of-way line for a distance of 75 feet more or less to a point; thence north along a line parallel to Cedar Street to the southern bank of the St. Joseph River; thence westerly along the river bank to the west right-of-way line of Main Street; thence south along that right-of-way line to the north right-of-way of vacated Water Street; thence west along that right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of Mill Street, if extended; thence south along that right-of-way line to the north right-of-way line of Front Street; thence west along that right-of-way to the west right-of-way line of West Street; thence south along that right-of-way line to the main track of the Elkhart and Western Railroad; thence westerly along said railroad track to the west right-of-way line of Towle Avenue; thence south along said right-of-way to the south right-of-way line of Lincolnway West; thence east along that right-of-way line to the west right-of-way line of West Street, which is the point of beginning. 
(Code 1985, ch. 151, app. A, § 1; Ord. No. 2337, 12-17-1979) 
APPENDIX B. - MISHAWAKA AVENUE BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1. - Mishawaka Avenue urban renewal area. 
    Beginning at a point which is the intersection of the extension of the north right-of-way line of the first alley north of Grove Street and the east right-of-way line of Division Street and proceeding south along the east right-of-way line of Division Street to the south right-of-way line of East Mishawaka Avenue; thence east along that right-of-way line a distance of 34.6 feet more or less; thence south a distance of 89.0 feet more or less; thence east a distance of 43.0 feet more or less; thence south to the north bank of the St. Joseph River; thence northwesterly along that river bank to the east right-of-way line of North Main Street; thence west to the west right-of-way line of North Main Street; thence westerly along the north bank of the St. Joseph River to its intersection with the east right-of-way of Ann Street extended; thence north to the south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue; thence west along south right-of-way line of Mishawaka Avenue to the west right-of-way line of Ann Street; thence north to the north right-of-way line of the first alley north of Grove Street; thence east to the east right-of-way line of Division Street, which is the point of beginning. 
(Code 1985, ch. 151, app. B, § 1; Ord. No. 2337, 12-17-1979) 
Chapter 113 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Economic development and pollution control, IC 36-7-12-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 113-1-113-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TARGET AREAS 

Sec. 113-19. - Certain areas declared to be economic development target areas. 
    The following specific geographic territories of the city are hereby declared to be economic development target areas: 
(1)  The area commonly known as the central business district urban renewal area which was declared and confirmed as a redevelopment area before March 31, 1983, by reason of Resolution Number 73-9 and confirming Resolution Number 73-15 by the city redevelopment commission, which declaratory resolution was recorded in the office of the county recorder on March 20, 1973, at Book 276, pages 152-154, which specific geographic area is more particularly described in section 1 of appendix A to chapter 109. 
(2)  The area commonly known as the "Mishawaka Avenue Urban Renewal Area" which was declared and confirmed as a redevelopment area before March 31, 1983, by reason of Resolution Number 73-19 and confirming Resolution Number 73-28, adopted by the city redevelopment commission, which declaratory resolution was recorded in the office of the county recorder on April 25, 1973, at Book 277, pages 96-116, which specific geographic area is more particularly described in section 1 of appendix B to chapter 109. 
(Code 1985, § 152.01; Ord. No. 2631, 8-1-1983) 
Chapter 117 - EROSION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Legislative policy concerning soil and water conservation, IC 14-32-1-1 et seq.; ability to adopt, codify and enforce ordinances, IC 36-1-4-11. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 117-1. - Purpose. 
    To provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and in response to the un-funded federal mandate, the city finds it necessary to adopt standards concerning erosion control, post-construction stormwater pollution prevention, and other provisions related to the regulation of earthmoving, excavation, and stormwater discharge. This chapter provides methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. Specifically, the city has found that soil erosion resulting from nonagricultural land disturbing activities may cause a significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to be transported off-site to locations including adjacent properties, public streets, storm sewer structures, ditches, streams, wetlands, lakes and rivers. Furthermore, the proper installation and operation of stormwater management measures is necessary to ensure that soil erosion and stormwater quality issues do not arise after the completion of a land disturbing activity. The regulation of land disturbing activities will minimize the amount of sediment and other pollutants, resulting from soil erosion due to land disturbing activities, from being transported off site to adjacent public or private lands. It will also minimize erosion and stormwater quality issues that arise due to the longterm operation of the site after construction. This chapter applies to nonagricultural land disturbing activities, including industrial, commercial, institutional, residential, utility, and roadway development. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal drainageways, ponds, lakes, and other stormwater receivers. 
(2)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(3)  To reduce the potential negative impact of land disturbing activities on adjacent properties and the public at large. 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(5)  To minimize or reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels and to continue to enforce no net increase of stormwater runoff from newly developed sites. 
(6)  To minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development, which could otherwise degrade local water quality. 
(7)  To reduce soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.01), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administering authority means the department of city planning, as it relates to the issuance of improvement location permits. The department of city planning, the department of engineering, or any duly authorized representative of the city utilities, as it relates to identifying violations and placing stop work orders. 
    Agricultural land use means use of land for the production of animal or plant life, including forestry, pasturing or yarding livestock, and planting, growing, cultivating, and harvesting crops for human or livestock consumption for profit. The term "agricultural land" further clarified as uses that require specific verifiable tax filings relative to the agricultural nature of the operation. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into stormwaters, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials. 
    City planner means the city planner or his designated representative. 
    Department of engineering means the city department of engineering as the designated unit of government given the authority to review the performance specifications of this chapter. 
    Director of engineering means the director of engineering or his designated representative. 
    Erosion means the detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock fragments by any means including water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
    Erosion control measure means a practice or a combination of practices to control erosion and resulting sedimentation. 
    Erosion control plan means a written and/or graphic description of pertinent information concerning erosion control measures designed to meet the requirements of this chapter as submitted by the applicant for review and approval by the department of city planning. 
    Exposed land uses means those activities that result in continuous or habitual nonagricultural disturbance of land not associated with construction. Exposed land uses shall include, but shall not be limited to, nonsurfaced public or private race tracks and recreational yards, driveways and parking areas, mining and extraction sites, manufacturing storage yards, site clearing and tree harvesting, and other manmade activities that cause land to be subject to erosion due to the lack of pavement, vegetative cover, or other stable surfacing. For the purposes of this chapter, gravel shall not be considered a stable surface when used for vehicular traffic and parking. 
    Land disturbing activity means any manmade change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading. In the context of this chapter, it includes only nonagricultural land disturbing activities. 
    Land users means those entities, individually and collectively who are performing land disturbing activities or have caused these activities to occur. These include but are not limited to owners, operators, contract agents, lessees, renters, and occupiers. For enforcement purposes, the owner is the entity continually responsible for meeting the performance requirements of this chapter. 
    Longterm operation and maintenance agreement means a written description of the pertinent information concerning the longterm maintenance schedule and expectations to ensure that stormwater management BMPs are kept functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be performed by the property owner. 
    Nonagricultural land use means use of land for industrial, commercial, manufacturing, wholesale or retail sale of goods or services, residential, institutional, and recreational uses of land. These uses shall also include utility and public works projects including lanes, sewers, conduits, alleys, and streets, and other land uses not included under agricultural land use. 
    Post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan means a written and/or graphic description of pertinent information concerning permanent stormwater pollution prevention measures designed to meet the requirements of this chapter and submitted for review prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit and approved by the department of engineering. 
    Runoff means the portion of precipitation from such sources as rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water that flows over the ground surface. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the land on which land disturbing activity has been proposed in the permit application or is currently occurring. 
    Stormwater management system means the structural or nonstructural practices that are designed and constructed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or establish storage rates on-site. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.09), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-3. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by IC 36-1-4-11. This authority provides for the administration, enforcement, and amendment of this chapter for controlling soil erosion and other provisions related to the regulation of stormwater in the city. No statement contained herein shall be construed to interfere or conflict with any additional ordinance, code, or law of the city. In addition, no statement contained herein shall be construed to interfere, conflict, or be deemed to fulfill the requirements of any other applicable authority or agency. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.02), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-4. - Applicability of chapter provisions. 
    This chapter applies to all nonagricultural land disturbing activities within the incorporated boundaries of the city. Projects approved by the city board of public works and safety funded in part by city tax dollars where performance and maintenance bonds are required are exempt from the permit and bonding requirements of this chapter, but shall be required to comply with all performance requirements of section 117-10. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.03), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-5. - Calculation of areas and volumes. 
    Due to the quantitative nature of calculating areas and volumes, fractional numbers may arise. For the purposes of this chapter, areas shall be calculated to the nearest square foot. Volumes shall be calculated to the nearest cubic yard. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.04), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-6. - Classification of land disturbing activities. 
    This chapter recognizes that different types of construction and the relative size of land disturbing activities inherently have differing degrees of potential impact relative to erosion and sediment runoff. As such, separate classifications have been established to vary the regulation of land disturbing activities proportionally to the potential impact of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.05), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-7. - Light land disturbing activities. 
    Nonagricultural land disturbing activities including residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, utility, and highway construction falling within the following parameters: 
(1)  Activities involving the excavation, filling, or combination thereof of no more than 40 cubic yards of soil, sand, gravel, stone, or similar material. 
(2)  Activities which disturb no more than 2,000 square feet of land. 
(3)  Emergency repair or replacement of existing utility lines located within easements or rights-of-way as required to restore interrupted service or imminent hazards. 
(4)  Public utility improvements or other public projects that require a performance bond to the city relative to the satisfactory completion of land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.06), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-8. - Moderate land disturbing activities. 
    Nonagricultural land disturbing activities including residential, industrial, commercial, Institutional, utility, and highway construction falling within the following parameters: 
(1)  Activities involving the excavation, filling, or combination thereof of more than 40 cubic yards but less than or equal to 2,000 cubic yards of soil, sand, gravel, stone, or similar material. 
(2)  Activities which disturb more than 2,000 square feet of land but less than one acre of land. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.07), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-9. - Significant land disturbing activities. 
    Nonagricultural land disturbing activities including residential, industrial, commercial, institutional, utility, and highway construction falling within the following parameters: 
(1)  Activities involving the excavation, filling, or combination thereof of more than 2,000 cubic yards of soil, sand, gravel, stone, or similar material. 
(2)  Activities that disturb one acre of land or more. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.08), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-10. - Nonagricultural land disturbing activity performance requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified herein, the following requirements apply to all nonagricultural land disturbing activities, including the light, moderate, and significant levels as identified herein, within the incorporated boundaries of the city. Each item listed below may not be applicable to all land disturbing activities. As such, performance requirements may vary based on the specific land disturbing activities and soil characteristics. Best management practices shall be utilized to address the prevention, control, and reduction of stormwater pollutants on a site-specific basis. 
(1)  Site dewatering/discharge. Sediment-laden water flowing from the site shall be detained to allow sediment to settle and accumulate prior to discharge. Water shall not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion, including the scouring of a receiving channel. Discharge into the existing storm sewer shall not be performed unless previously approved by the city department of engineering, or applicable jurisdictional agency. 
(2)  Waste and material disposal. Wastes or unused building materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, and hazardous substances shall not be carried by runoff from a site. Proper disposal of all wastes and unused building materials, in line with the nature of the waste or material is required. 
(3)  Roadway protection. Public or private roadways shall be kept cleared of accumulated sediment. If appreciable sedimentation occurs after a storm event, the sediment will be removed and deposited on the parcels of land from where it likely originated. Sediment being tracked from a site onto public or private roadways shall be minimized. 
(4)  Property protection. Adjacent properties shall be kept cleared of accumulated sediment. If appreciable sedimentation occurs after a storm event, the sediment shall be removed and deposited on the parcels of land from where it likely originated, where legally permitted. Permission, means, and methods of clean up shall be secured from impacted property owners prior to removal. 
(5)  Drain inlet protection. All storm drain inlets within land disturbing activity areas shall be protected against sedimentation with barriers meeting accepted design criteria, standards, and specifications. In addition, storm drain inlets located outside of land disturbing activity areas, which accept stormwater runoff from a land disturbing activity area, shall also be protected in an identical manner. 
(6)  Exposed land uses. Exposed land uses shall be prohibited, except where specifically identified as a permitted or conditional use within chapter 137, zoning. Any exposed land use, either permitted by right or conditional, shall require prior site plan approval pursuant to the requirements identified within section 137-35. 
(7)  On-site erosion control. The following items apply to significant land disturbing activities and shall be required throughout the period of the time when land disturbing activities are taking place: 
a.  Stormwater runoff passing through a site from adjacent areas shall be controlled by diverting it around disturbed areas whenever possible. Alternatively, the existing channel may be improved to prevent erosion or sedimentation from occurring. 
b.  Barring unforeseeable weather conditions, all disturbed ground left inactive for seven or more days shall be stabilized, by seeding, sodding, mulching, covering, sediment fences, or with other barriers meeting accepted design criteria, standards, and specifications. 
c.  With disturbed areas of more than ten acres, where drainage is in the same direction or where runoff will result in loss of soil, an abatement or recovery program is required. When the disturbed area is stabilized, the sediment basin can be removed. If erosion is likely to continue, the sediment basin shall be maintained by the existing or subsequent landowners. The discharge rate from a sediment basin shall not cause scouring in the receiving channel. 
d.  With disturbed areas of less than or equal to ten acres, filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent erosion control measures, placed along all side-slope and down-slope sides of the site, shall be required. Also, if concentrated runoff passes through the site, filter fences shall be placed along the edges of the concentrated flow area to reduce the amount of sediment removed from the site. If these measures are not sufficient to control off-site sedimentation, a sediment basin may still be required to manage severe slopes. 
e.  Erosion from all soil storage piles containing more than ten cubic yards of material shall be controlled by placing straw bales, filter fence, or other best management practices. Moreover, any soil storage pile containing more than ten cubic yards of materials shall be located at least 25 feet upslope from a roadway, drainage channel, or adjacent property. Furthermore, if remaining in existence for more than seven days, the storage pile shall be stabilized by mulching, vegetative cover, tarps, or other approved best management practice. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.10), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-11. - Significant land disturbing activity post-construction performance requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified herein, the following requirements apply to all nonagricultural land disturbing activities classified as significant as identified herein, within the incorporated boundaries of the city. Performance requirements may vary based on the specific land disturbing activities and soil characteristics. Best management practices shall be utilized to address the prevention, control, and reduction of stormwater pollutants on a site-specific basis. Project completion and release of the performance bond shall not exempt the site owner from the performance activities listed below. The maintenance and inspection measures contained in this section are permanent measures that apply throughout the life of the site. 
(1)  Install and maintain each post construction stormwater management system approved as part of the post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan. Each measure shall be installed in accordance with the approved plan. As-builts of applicable stormwater management systems will be required and may be field verified prior to the release of the performance bond. 
(2)  Maintain all drainage systems and stormwater management facilities in good working order. 
(3)  Maintain natural drainage for any portion of the real estate not served by a constructed drainage system. 
(4)  Maintain all erosion sediment control systems installed on the real estate or identified as part of the construction plan unless such systems were temporary measures only intended to be in place during construction. 
(5)  Maintain all drainage channels, swales and basins installed or identified as part of the construction plan so that they do not cause erosion in the receiving channel, the outlet, or basin side-slope reducing the performance of the system. Keep all natural features such as wetlands and bodies of water protected from stormwater run-off pollutants. 
(6)  Inspect all stormwater management facilities on a schedule sufficient to ensure compliance with this chapter. These inspections shall occur on at least an annual basis. 
(7)  Provide for the removal of silt, litter, grass cuttings, vegetation and other debris from all catchbasins, inlets and stormwater retention/detention areas. 
(8)  Maintain records of all maintenance and inspection activities related to the stormwater management measures. Records shall be retained for at least three years and must be made available to city personnel upon request. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.11), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-12. - Design criteria, standards, and specifications for erosion control measures and post construction stormwater measures. 
    All erosion control and post-construction stormwater management measures including, but not limited to, those required to comply with this chapter shall meet the design criteria, standards, and specifications for erosion control and stormwater management measures similar to or the same as those outlined in the Indiana Department of Environmental Management's Indiana Stormwater Quality Manual, or engineering standards as adopted by the city board of public works and safety, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.12), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-13. - Permit requirements. 
    Where required, no land user shall begin a land disturbing activity subject to this chapter without receiving prior approval of an improvement location permit. Improvement location permits shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of chapter 137, zoning. Permits may be issued specifically for land disturbing activities or in conjunction with planned improvements that require land disturbing activity. An improvement location permit shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Light land disturbing activity: No permit required. 
(2)  Moderate land disturbing activity: Permit required. 
(3)  Significant land disturbing activity: Permit required. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.15), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-14. - As-built requirements. 
(a)  Prior to final release of the bond provided for in section 117-47, the as-built condition of critical stormwater management features must be identified and approved. 
(b)  The volume, slopes, configuration, condition and topographic information of all detention, retention and water quality practices shall be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state. This information shall be provided to the city in the form of a scaled as-built drawing or other electronic form accepted by the city. The as-built certification shall indicate if final conditions are consistent with, or exceed, the provisions of the post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). 
(c)  If it is determined that information provided in the as-built drawing, certification, inspection or survey of the site does not meet or exceed the post-construction SWPPP provisions, the city reserves the right to withhold the final bond until such time as site conditions meet or exceed the plan provisions. Furthermore, other enforcement mechanisms may be applied to the permittee or persons making certifying statements. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.31), 12-4-2006) 
Secs. 117-15-117-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 117-32. - Responsibility. 
    Control of erosion and sediment relative to land disturbing activities shall be the responsibility of the land users. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.13), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-33. - Penalty for proceeding without permit. 
    No land user shall begin a land disturbing activity subject to the provisions of this chapter without receiving prior approval of an improvement location permit where required. The fee for improvement location permits issued following proceeding land disturbing activity shall increase by a factor of ten (ten times the normal associated fee). Land users notified of a lack of permit shall have three business days from the date of notification to obtain a permit. Failure to obtain a permit following notification shall be subject to penalty provisions identified by chapter 137, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.16), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-34. - Bonding requirements. 
    No land user shall begin a land disturbing activity subject to this chapter without receiving prior submission of a surety bond or an irrevocable letter of credit where required. Administration of surety bonds or letters of credit shall rest with the department of engineering. The amount of the surety shall be as identified by this chapter and shall be submitted prior to or concurrently with an improvement location permit to the department of engineering. Surety shall be provided throughout the time of land disturbing activity operations. Surety bonds or an irrevocable letter of credit shall be required as follows: 
(1)  Light land disturbing activity: No surety required. 
(2)  Moderate land disturbing activity: No surety required. 
(3)  Substantial land disturbing activity: Surety required. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.17), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-35. - Determination of required surety. 
    The required dollar amount of the surety bond or an irrevocable letter of credit where required shall be determined as identified below. The largest dollar amount shall apply: 
(1)  Area calculation. 
a.  Up to five acres of disturbed land area: $3,000.00 per acre. 
b.  For each additional acre of disturbed land area: $1,500.00 per acre. 
(2)  Volume calculation. Fifty cents per cubic yard of disturbed material including both cut and fill. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.18), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-36. - Erosion control plan required. 
    An erosion control plan as identified herein shall be required for all moderate and significant land disturbing activities. No land user shall begin a moderate or significant land disturbing activity without submitting an erosion control plan. Two copies of the erosion control plan shall be submitted prior to or concurrently with the improvement location permit. Erosion control plans submitted and approved as part of the review of final development plans need not be resubmitted and can merely be referenced on the improvement location permit application. Although subject to the performance requirements of section 117-10, projects approved by the city or the soil and water conservation service under Rule 5 prior to the establishment of this chapter shall not be required to submit an erosion control plan as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.19), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-37. - Content of erosion control plan-Moderate land disturbing activity. 
    All applications for an improvement location permit for moderate land disturbing activity shall include the following information: 
(1)  Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify the site location; 
(2)  Site construction/grading plan. Erosion control plans submitted concurrently with final site plans need not duplicate information except as necessary for plan clarity. Site construction/grading plans shall include at a minimum: 
a.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities; 
b.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all temporary soil stockpiles; 
c.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all erosion control measures necessary to meet the performance requirements of this chapter; 
d.  Schedule of the anticipated starting and completion dates of each land disturbing activity, including the installation of erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(3)  Any additional information deemed necessary by the department of engineering where specific or unique site conditions warrant clarification identifying that the performance requirements of section 117-10, pertaining to nonagricultural land disturbing activity performance requirements, are met. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.20), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-38. - Same-Substantial land disturbing activity. 
    All applications for an improvement location permit for substantial land disturbing activity shall include the following information: 
(1)  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions on a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet and adequate to show the site and adjacent areas, including: 
a.  Site boundaries and adjacent lands which accurately identify the site location; 
b.  Lakes, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, and other watercourses on and adjacent to the site; 
c.  100-year floodplains, floodway fringes, and floodways; 
d.  Location of predominant soil types, or soil testing report that identifies soil types as identified by a certified professional soil scientist or licensed engineer; 
e.  Vegetative cover types such as grass, weeds, and trees; 
f.  Location and dimensions of stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site; 
g.  Locations and dimension of utilities, structures, roads, highways, and paving; 
h.  Existing site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet; and 
i.  Proposed site topography at a contour interval not to exceed two feet. 
(2)  Site construction/grading plan. Erosion control plans submitted concurrently with final site plans need not duplicate information except as necessary for plan clarity. Site construction/grading plans shall include at a minimum: 
a.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities; 
b.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all temporary soil stockpiles; 
c.  Locations and approximate dimensions of all erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
d.  Schedule of the anticipated starting and completion dates of each land disturbing activity, including the installation of erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
e.  Provisions for maintenance of the erosion control measures during construction. 
(3)  Additional information as deemed necessary. Any additional information deemed necessary by the department of engineering where specific or unique site conditions warrant clarification identifying that the performance requirements of section 117-10, pertaining to nonagricultural land disturbing activity performance requirements, are met. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.21), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-39. - Post-construction stormwater plan required. 
    A post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as identified herein shall be required for all significant land disturbing activities. No land user shall begin a significant land disturbing activity without submitting a post-construction SWPPP. Two copies of the post-construction SWPPP shall be submitted prior to or concurrently with the improvement location permit application and erosion control plan. Post-construction SWPPPs submitted and approved as part of the review of final development plans need not be resubmitted and can merely be referenced on the improvement location permit application. Although subject to the performance requirements of section 117-10, projects approved by the city or the soil and water conservation service under Rule 5 prior to the establishment of this chapter shall not be required to submit a post-construction SWPPP as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.22), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-40. - Content of post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
    The post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) must include the following information, in accordance with 327 IAC 15-5-6.5(a)(8): 
(1)  A description of potential pollutant sources from the proposed land use that may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount of pollutants to stormwater discharges where applicable. 
(2)  Location, dimensions, detailed specifications, and construction details of all post construction stormwater quality measures. 
(3)  A description of measures that will be installed to control pollutants in stormwater that will occur after construction activities have been completed. Such practices include infiltration of run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter strip creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness, maximization of open space, and stormwater retention and detention ponds. 
(4)  A sequence describing when each post construction stormwater quality measure will be installed. 
(5)  Stormwater quality measures that will remove or minimize pollutants from stormwater. 
(6)  Stormwater quality measures that will be implemented to prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian habitat. 
(7)  A narrative description of the maintenance guidelines for all post construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper longterm function. This narrative description shall be made available to future parties who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post construction stormwater quality measures. 
Additionally, the post construction stormwater pollution prevention plan must also include a longterm operation and maintenance agreement containing maintenance guidelines for all post-construction stormwater quality measures to facilitate their proper longterm function. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.23), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-41. - Longterm operation and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Longterm operation and maintenance agreements shall include a maintenance plan for all stormwater quality best management practices (BMPs) for all projects covered under this chapter that require more than general maintenance (e.g., periodic mowing). The longterm operation and maintenance agreements shall be recorded. 
(b)  The plan will be developed to ensure that the stormwater management BMPs are kept functional. The maintenance agreement will specify minimum operation and maintenance requirements and intervals to be performed by the property owner. The operation and maintenance requirements shall be in accordance with the operation and maintenance procedures and schedules listed in the state stormwater quality manual. 
(c)  The plan shall address schedules for inspections and techniques for operation and maintenance including vegetation clearing or mowing and removing accumulated trash, debris, sediment pollutants and other forms of pollution. 
(d)  It is the obligation of the project owners and their successors in interest to provide this agreement to future parties, including property owners, who will assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the post-construction stormwater quality measures. 
(e)  When a stormwater quality BMP serves more than one parcel, an owners' association or binding contract for the purpose of operation and maintenance is required. The owners association shall be responsible for operation and maintenance as directed by this article. 
(f)  Where stormwater detention and/or retention systems are used, care must be taken to ensure that the systems do not become nuisances or health hazards. Detention and retention facilities should be designed to require minimal maintenance, and maintenance expectations must be clearly stated in the longterm operation and maintenance agreement. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.24), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-42. - Easement requirements. 
    All permanent stormwater management systems identified in the post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), including detention or retention basins, filter strips, infiltration systems, conveyance systems, and structures located outside of the right-of-way shall be designated as common areas or incorporated into permanent easements. For the purposes of access, monitoring, inspection, and general maintenance activities, an adequate easement width beyond the actual footprint of the stormwater quality management facility as well as a 20-foot-wide access easement from a public right-of-way to each BMP shall be provided. The easement requirements noted may be changed by the city as deemed necessary for specific cases. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.25), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-43. - Review of erosion control plan, post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), and longterm operation and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Upon submission, the city planner shall review the submission requirements of the erosion control plan, post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), and longterm operation and maintenance agreement. These documents shall not be evaluated by the city planner in regards to the performance requirements of this chapter. The city planner shall promptly forward complete submissions to the department of engineering for review of the performance requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  For moderate land disturbing activities, the city planner may issue an improvement location permit prior to the review of the department of engineering. For substantial land disturbing activities, the city planner may not issue an improvement location permit prior to the review of the department of engineering. When questions arise or specific unique site circumstances dictate it, the city planner may also withhold the issuance of any improvement location permit pending the review of the department of engineering. 
(c)  The department of engineering shall promptly review erosion control plans, post-construction SWPPPs, and longterm operation and maintenance agreements. If the submission is deficient or held for the review of the department of engineering, the city planner shall inform the applicant in writing and require additional information where applicable. When additional information is submitted, the city planner shall again determine whether the plan meets the submission requirements of this chapter. If the plan is disapproved or requires modification based on the review of the department of engineering, the city planner shall inform the applicant in writing giving reasons for disapproval or the need for modifications. 
(d)  In the case where the city planner has issued an improvement location permit prior to the review of the department of engineering, comments of the department of engineering received following the issuance of an improvement location permit shall be forwarded in writing to the land user. If the plan is disapproved or requires modification based on the review of the department of engineering, the city planner shall inform the applicant in writing giving reasons for disapproval or the need for modifications. The review and approval of an erosion control plan by the city planner and/or the department of engineering shall not be construed as more than meeting the submission requirements of this chapter. The review and approval of an erosion control plan by the city planner and/or the department of engineering shall not exempt, remove, or otherwise modify the obligations of the land user relative to the performance requirements of this chapter. Thus, if the proposed erosion control measures are approved but yet fail to meet the performance requirements identified in section 117-10, the land user shall be responsible for installing additional measures, performing maintenance, and taking any measure necessary to ensure compliance with performance requirements on a continual basis. 
(e)  Approval of the provisions of the erosion control plan and post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan as allowed by this chapter shall not be construed as compliance with any other applicable state, federal, or local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.26), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-44. - Inspection. 
(a)  To ensure compliance with the erosion control plan, the city shall inspect sites having ongoing land disturbing activities as deemed appropriate. Inspections may be undertaken by the department of planning, the department of engineering, or any other representative employed by or contracted with the city for said purpose. 
(1)  Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Routine inspections; 
b.  Random inspections; 
c.  Inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; 
d.  Inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; 
e.  Inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NPDES stormwater permit; and 
f.  Joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. 
(2)  Inspections may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Reviewing maintenance and repair records; 
b.  Sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and 
c.  Evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(b)  When any new drainage or erosion control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred. 
(c)  The site owner is responsible for implementing a self-monitoring program, as required by 327 IAC 15-5-7(b)(18). The self-monitoring program shall include the following: 
(1)  A trained individual shall perform a written evaluation of the project site: 
a.  By the end of the next business day following each measurable storm event; and 
b.  At a minimum of one time per week. 
(2)  The evaluation must: 
a.  Address the maintenance of existing stormwater quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly; and 
b.  Identify additional measures necessary to remain in compliance with all applicable statutes and rules. 
(3)  Written evaluation reports must include: 
a.  The name of the individual performing the evaluation; 
b.  The date of the evaluation; 
c.  Problems identified at the project site; and 
d.  Details of corrective actions recommended and completed. 
(d)  All evaluation reports for the project site must be made available to the city within 48 hours of a request. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.27), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-45. - Responsibility of the department of engineering. 
    The administration of this chapter, as identified, is the responsibility of the city planner. However, based on the technical requirements of this chapter, the department of engineering shall be responsible for the review and evaluation of all land disturbing activities compliance with the performance requirements of this chapter. The city planner may only pursue the administration of this chapter relative to performance requirements when the lack of compliance has been documented in writing by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.28), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-46. - Enforcement. 
    The following practices shall be utilized regarding the enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  Land users shall be notified in writing of noncompliance following the inspection and verification of the department of planning and/or department of engineering. 
(2)  If, within five days after notification, a permit holder does not correct said noncompliance, the city planner may pursue issuing a stop work order in accordance with the requirements identified herein. 
(3)  The city planner may also immediately post a stop-work order if: 
a.  Any land disturbing activity requiring an improvement location permit and/or bond under this chapter is being undertaken without a permit and/or bond; 
b.  If the approved erosion control plan has not been implemented in good faith concurrent with construction; or 
c.  The land disturbing activity does not comply with the performance requirements of this chapter and poses an imminent negative impact to the public health, safety, and welfare as determined by the department of engineering following an on-site inspection. 
(4)  Upon correction of the violation, land users may appeal to the city to retract a stop-work order. 
(5)  Ten days after posting a stop-work order, the city may issue a notice of intent to the violator stating the intent of the city to use or draw upon the surety bond, where required, to perform work necessary to provide compliance with this chapter. All expenses for work, administration, and legal fees associated with providing compliance with this chapter which exceeds the amount of the surety bond may be billed to the land user. For all other land disturbing activities where surety was not required, the city may perform the work necessary to provide compliance with this chapter. All expenses for work, administration, and legal fees associated with providing compliance with this chapter may be billed to the land user. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.29), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-47. - Project completion. 
(a)  Land users shall complete land disturbing activities in a timely and orderly manner. Land disturbing activities shall be considered complete when the disturbed area has been stabilized with improvements, vegetative cover, or other department of engineering approved means. When a project has been completed for a significant land disturbing activity, the person holding the permit shall petition, in writing, indicating completion and requesting the release of any surety bonds and/or letters of credit. 
(b)  For significant land disturbing activities, as-builts of permanent stormwater management systems must be submitted prior to or concurrently with the completion notice and request for bond release. The city shall have 28 normal business days to perform an inspection and respond to the request for release. If the city does not respond within the 28 normal business days, the request shall be granted automatic approval. 
(c)  Upon inspection and verification of satisfactory land disturbing completion, any surety bonds and/or letters of credit shall be released by the department of engineering forthrightly. Maintenance responsibilities of completed land disturbing activities shall remain with the person owning the land. 
(d)  If the stormwater management systems on site are deemed to be insufficient, not appropriate and/or inconsistent with the post-construction stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or objectives stated in this chapter, then approval will not be granted. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.30), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-48. - Appeals. 
    Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or staff member may be appealed in the same manner that any provision of chapter 137, zoning. This process is identified in chapter 137. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.37), 12-4-2006) 
Secs. 117-49-117-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 117-70. - Correction of nonconforming situations-General compliance standard. 
    Land users who are currently in violation or are out of compliance with the performance standards identified within section 117-10 pertaining to nonagricultural land disturbing activity performance requirements shall have 30 calendar days from the receipt of notice of violation identified under section 117-46, enforcement, to apply for the applicable permits or bring the property into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.32), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-71. - Same-Compliance standard for existing gravel drive, parking area or alley. 
    Land users who are currently in violation or are out of compliance with the performance standards identified within section 117-10 pertaining to nonagricultural land disturbing activity performance requirements due to an existing gravel drive, parking area, or alley may add gravel as a surfacing material to meet the performance requirements of this chapter provided the area of the existing gravel surface is not expanded. Land users shall have 30 calendar days from the receipt of notice of violation identified under section 117-46, enforcement, to apply for the applicable permits or bring the property into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.33), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-72. - New or expanded gravel drives, parking areas, and alleys prohibited. 
    New or expanded permanent non-construction-related drives, parking areas, alleys shall be hard-surfaced. Gravel or stone surfaces shall not be considered an acceptable stable surface when used for vehicular traffic and parking. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.34), 12-4-2006) 
Secs. 117-73-117-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAINTENANCE MEASURES 

Sec. 117-103. - Maintenance of erosion control measures. 
    During the period of land disturbance at a site, all sediment basins and other erosion control measures necessary to meet the performance requirements of this chapter shall be applied by the land user. If sedimentation is likely to be a problem after land disturbing activities have ceased, some or all of the sediment basins, as well as other erosion control measures shall be maintained by the land user or subsequent landowner for as long as the problem exists. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.14), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-104. - Maintenance of permanent measures. 
    All stormwater/erosion control management facilities must be maintained by the property owner to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and accomplishment of its purposes. Maintenance needs may include the removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catchbasins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.35), 12-4-2006) 
Sec. 117-105. - Failure to maintain permanent measures. 
    The responsible party must ensure that all permanent stormwater management measures are maintained so that they operate according to the approved design. If a responsible party fails or refuses to perform the required maintenance, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. If the erosion control/stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the facility, in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall immediately effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties. 
(Ord. No. 5085, § 1(162.36), 12-4-2006) 
Chapter 121 - FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 5503 , adopted Nov. 4, 2015, repealed the former ch. 121, §§ 121-1-121-4, 121-27-121-36, 121-51-121-53, 121-71-121-78, 121-91-121-97, and enacted a new ch. 121 as set out herein. The former ch. 121 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5283, adopted Nov. 3, 2010; Ord. No. 5289, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2010; and Ord. No. 5332, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
State Law reference- Floodplain management, IC 14-28-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 121-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Indiana Legislature has in IC 36-7-4 granted the power to local government units to control land use within their jurisdictions. Therefore, the City of Mishawaka Common Council does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 1, § A), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, inadequately floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 1, § B), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities. 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage. 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(6)  Make federal flood insurance available for structures and their contents in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 1, § C), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health. 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions. 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains. 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize floodblight areas. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 1, § D), 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 121-5-121-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Secs. 121-27. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    A zone means portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt, or a combination of both. In A zones, floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE, Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM. The definitions are presented below: 
Zone A: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown. 
Zone AE and A1-A30: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown within these zones. (Zone AE is on new and revised maps in place of Zones A1-A30.) 
Zone AO: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. 
Zone AH: Areas subject to inundation by one-percent annual chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. 
Zone AR: Areas that result from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide base flood protection. 
Zone A99: Areas subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an under-construction Federal flood protection system. These are areas of special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. 
    Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure with a floor area 400 square feet or less that is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
    Addition (to an existing structure) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls, is new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation of the one-percent annual chance flood. 
    Basement means that portion of a structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Boundary river means the part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between Kentucky and Indiana. 
    Boundary river floodway means the floodway of a boundary river. 
    Building. See "Structure." 
    Community means a political entity that has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction. 
    Community rating system (CRS) means a program developed by the Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
    Critical facility means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and emergency response installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste. 
    D Zone means unstudied areas where flood hazards are undetermined, but flooding is possible. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in this zone. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a structure or any addition to a structure; 
(2)  Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing a recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days; 
(3)  Installing utilities, erection of walls and fences, construction of roads, or similar projects; 
(4)  Construction of flood control structures such as levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements, etc.; 
(5)  Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations; 
(6)  Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts; 
(7)  Storage of materials; or 
(8)  Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters. 
    "Development" does not include activities such as the maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting, re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation, or the construction of permanent structures. 
    Elevated structure means a non-basement structure built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain walls), pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
    Elevation certificate is a certified statement that verifies a structure's elevation information. 
    Emergency program means the first phase under which a community participates in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the effective date of the initial FIRM. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory floodway. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) is the official hydraulic and hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodprone area means any land area acknowledged by a community as being susceptible to inundation by water from any source (see "Flood"). 
    Flood protection grade (FPG) is the elevation of the regulatory flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA (see "Freeboard"). 
    Floodplain means the channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regulatory flood. The floodplain includes both the floodway and the fringe districts. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. Floodplain management regulations are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, and floodplain management requirements. 
    Floodproofing (dry floodproofing) is a method of protecting a structure that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated debris impact forces. 
    Floodproofing certificate is a form used to certify compliance for non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
    Floodway is the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood of any river or stream. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE, which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the base flood. 
    Fringe is those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway. 
    Hardship (as related to variances of this chapter) means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city board of zoning appeals requires that the variance is exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structures means any structures individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures. 
    Letter of final determination (LFD) means a letter issued by FEMA during the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and provides the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD initiates the six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend its floodplain management regulations during this six-month period unless the community has previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC) is a general term used to refer to the several types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by letter. They include letter of map amendment (LOMA), letter of map revision (LOMR), and letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). The definitions are presented below: 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means an amendment by letter to the currently effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA through the submittal of property specific elevation data. A LOMA is only issued by FEMA. 
    Letter of map revision (LOMR) means an official revision to the currently effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones, delineations, and elevations. 
    Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) means an official revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the BFE and excluded from the SFHA. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation, after completion of construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately next to the structure. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest elevation described among the following: 
(1)  The top of the lowest level of the structure. 
(2)  The top of the basement floor. 
(3)  The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest level of the structure. 
(4)  The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on pilings or pillars. 
(5)  The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure provide any resistance to the flow of floodwaters unless: 
a.  The walls are designed to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls; 
b.  The total net area of all openings shall be at least one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher; and 
c.  Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the parking of vehicles and building access. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the building value, excluding the land (as agreed to between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values. 
    Mitigation means sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery. 
    National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is the federal program that makes flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the Federal Government and the private insurance industry. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance. 
    Non-boundary river floodway means the floodway of any river or stream other than a boundary river. 
    North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) as adopted in 1993 is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Obstruction includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
    One-percent annual chance flood is the flood that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with the letter A is subject to the one-percent annual chance flood. See "Regulatory flood". 
    Physical map revision (PMR) is an official republication of a community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (one-percent annual chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs. 
    Public safety and nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Regular program means the phase of the community's participation in the NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and elevations determined in a FIS. 
    Regulatory flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 121-29 of this chapter. The "regulatory flood" is also known by the term "base flood", "one-percent annual chance flood", and "100-year flood". 
    Section 1316 is that section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be provided for any property that the administrator finds has been declared by a duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or occupancy in floodprone areas. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means those lands within the jurisdiction of the city subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on the St. Joseph County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January 6, 2011, as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1- A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO). 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured home, or a prefabricated building. The term also includes recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "repetitive loss" or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Suspension means the removal of a participating community from the NFIP because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain management regulations required for participation in the NFIP. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation, other certification, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    X zone means the area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA. Shaded X zones shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X zones (C zones on older FIRMs) designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less than 0.2 percent. 
    Zone means a geographical area shown on a FIRM that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
    Zone A. See definition for "A zone." 
    Zone B, C, and X means areas identified in the community as areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However, buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available in participating communities but is not required by regulation in these zones. (Zone X is used on new and revised maps in place of Zones B and C.) 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 2), 11-4-2015) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 121-28. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs and known floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § A), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-29. - Basis for establishing regulatory flood data. 
    This chapter's protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available regulatory flood data is listed below. 
(1)  The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for the studied SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the City of Mishawaka shall be as delineated on the one-percent annual chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of St. Joseph County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas dated January 6, 2011 and the corresponding flood insurance rate map dated January 6, 2011 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date. 
(2)  The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits for each of the SFHAs within the jurisdiction of St. Joseph County, delineated as an "A Zone" on the St. Joseph County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas Flood Insurance Rate Map dated January 6, 2011 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better data that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved. 
(3)  In the absence of a published FEMA map, or absence of identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known floodprone areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one square mile. 
(4)  Upon issuance of a letter of final determination (LFD), any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study shall be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes, replacing all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data provided by FEMA. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § B), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-30. - Establishment of floodplain development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities in areas of special flood hazard. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § C), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-31. - Compliance. 
    No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § D), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-32. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § E), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-33. - Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground elevations. 
(a)  In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern. 
(b)  If the elevation of the site in question is below the base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated accordingly. 
(c)  If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is above the base flood elevation and not located within the floodway, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply for a LOMA. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § F), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-34. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements. 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body. 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § G), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-35. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on the part of the City of Mishawaka, the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § H), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-36. - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated as such in accordance with the provisions of the zoning code for the city. All violations shall be punishable by a fine as prescribed by IC 36-1-3-8, may be amended from time to time. 
(1)  A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day the violation continues to exist. 
(2)  The city common council shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 3, § I), 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 121-37-121-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 121-51. - Designation of administrator. 
    The city common council hereby appoints the city planner or his designated representative to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is herein referred to as the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 4, § A), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-52. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage . 
a.  A description of the proposed development. 
b.  Location of the proposed development sufficient to accurately locate property and structure(s) in relation to existing roads and streams. 
c.  A legal description of the property site. 
d.  A site development plan showing existing and proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades. 
e.  Elevation of the top of the planned lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD 88 or NGVD. 
f.  Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed. 
g.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse changes submitted to DNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of map revision. (See section 121-53(6) for additional information.) 
(2)  Finished construction. Upon completion of construction, an elevation certification (FEMA Elevation Certificate Form 81-31 or any future updates) which depicts the "as-built" lowest floor elevation is required to be submitted to the floodplain administrator. If the project includes a floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification (FEMA Floodproofing Certificate Form 81-65 or any future updates) is required to be submitted by the applicant to the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 4, § B), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-53. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    The floodplain administrator and/or designated staff is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Review all floodplain development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Inspect and inventory damaged structures in the SFHA and complete substantial damage determinations. 
(3)  Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects subject to sections 121-75 and 121-77(a) of this chapter, and maintain a record of such authorization (either copy of actual permit/authorization or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment). 
(4)  Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit. Copies of such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the floodplain development permit. 
(5)  Maintain and track permit records involving additions and improvements to residences located in the floodway. 
(6)  Notify adjacent communities and the state floodplain coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(7)  Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map change (LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter. 
(8)  Utilize and enforce all letters of map change (LOMC) or physical map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the community. 
(9)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(10)  Review certified plans and specifications for compliance. 
(11)  Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 121-52. 
(12)  Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed in accordance with section 121-52. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 4, § C), 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 121-54-121-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 121-71. - General standards. 
    In all SFHAs and known floodprone areas the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the FPG. 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be located at/above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPG. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § A), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-72. - Specific standards. 
    In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  [Protection requirement.] In addition to the requirements of section 121-71, all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following situations: 
a.  Construction or placement of any structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet. 
b.  Addition or improvement made to any existing structure where the cost of the addition or improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the existing structure (excluding the value of the land). 
c.  Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure where the costs of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure (excluding the value of the land) before damage occurred. 
d.  Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days. 
e.  Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This chapter does not apply to returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage. 
(2)  Residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 121-72(4). 
(3)  Non-residential structures. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (or manufactured home) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation) or be floodproofed to or above the FPG. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of section 121-72(4). Structures located in all "A Zones" may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following: 
a.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 121-53(12). 
b.  Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity. 
(4)  Elevated structures. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG. 
Elevated structures with fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings located in a minimum of two exterior walls (having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area). 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no more than one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is higher. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
d.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
e.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
f.  The interior grade of such enclosed area shall be at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade. 
(5)  Structures constructed on fill. A residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in accordance with the following: 
a.  The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot deep before compacting to 95 percent of the maximum density obtainable with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method. The results of the test showing compliance shall be retained in the permit file. 
b.  The fill shall extend ten feet beyond the foundation of the structure before sloping below the BFE. 
c.  The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulkheading. If vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. 
d.  The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties. 
e.  The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be at or above the FPG. 
(6)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following requirements: 
a.  These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
2.  Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in section 121-72(4). 
b.  These requirements apply to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been substantially damaged by a flood: 
1.  The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
2.  Fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in section 121-72(4). 
c.  Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either: 
1.  Be on site for less than 180 days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
3.  Meet the requirements for "manufactured homes" as stated earlier in this section. 
(7)  Accessory structures. Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet the following standards: 
a.  Shall not be used for human habitation. 
b.  Shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials. 
c.  Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters. 
d.  Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation. 
e.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG. 
f.  Shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls as required for elevated structures in section 121-72(4). 
(8)  Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks. All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral movement. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § B), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-73. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § C), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-74. - Critical facility. 
    Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § D), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-75. - Standards for identified floodways. 
    Located within SFHAs, established in section 121-29, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of IC 14-28-1 a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading, clearing and paving etc. undertaken before the actual start of construction of the structure. However, it does exclude non-substantial additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary river floodway. (IC 14-28-1-26 allows construction of a non-substantial addition/improvement to a residence in a non-boundary river floodway without obtaining a permit for construction in the floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to elevate an addition above the existing grade, prior approval for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.) 
    No action shall be taken by the floodplain administrator until a permit or letter of authorization (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in the floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway or letter of authorization has been issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the floodplain administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in article V of this chapter have been met. The floodplain development permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community's more restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence. 
    No development shall be allowed, which acting alone or in combination with existing or future development, that will adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the floodway. This adverse effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven with hydraulic analyses. 
    For all projects involving channel modifications or fill (including levees) the city shall submit the data and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data per mapping standard regulations found at 44 CFR § 65.12. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § E), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-76. - Standards for identified fringe. 
    If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the floodplain administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit provided the provisions contained in article V of this chapter have been met. The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § F), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-77. - Standards for SFHAs without established base flood elevation and/or floodways/fringes. 
(a)  Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile: 
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. 
No action shall be taken by the floodplain administrator until either a permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the one-percent annual chance flood elevation and the recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. 
Once the floodplain administrator has received the proper permit for construction in a floodway (including letters of authorization) or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions contained in article V of this chapter have been met. 
(b)  Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile: 
If the site is in an identified floodplain where the limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the floodplain administrator shall require the applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodplain and one-percent annual chance flood elevation for the site. 
Upon receipt, the floodplain administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in article V of this chapter have been met. 
(c)  The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and shall not increase flood damages or potential flood damages. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § G), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-78. - Standards for floodprone areas. 
    All development in known floodprone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as required per article V. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 5, § H), 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 121-79-121-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 121-91. - Designation of variance and appeals board. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § A), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-92. - Duties of variance and appeals board. 
    The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision to the St. Joseph County Circuit or Superior Court. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § B), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-93. - Variance procedures. 
    In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter; and 
(1)  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
(3)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(4)  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable. 
(5)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage. 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(9)  The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site. 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § C), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-94. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued when there is: 
(1)  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
(b)  No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to section 121-75 or section 121-77(1) of this chapter may be granted. 
(c)  Any variance granted in a floodway subject to section 121-75 or section 121-77(1) of this chapter will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. 
(d)  Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of section 121-72, may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade. 
(e)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(f)  Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures. 
(g)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the flood protection grade and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation (see section 121-95). 
(h)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request (see section 121-95). 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § D), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-95. - Variance notification. 
    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted that allows the lowest floor of a structure to be built below the flood protection grade shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the flood protection grade will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and 
(2)  Such construction below the flood protection grade increases risks to life and property. 
    The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § E), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-96. - Historic structure. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic structure" and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § F), 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 121-97. - Special conditions. 
    Upon the consideration of the factors listed in article VI, and the purposes of this chapter, the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 5503 , § 1(Art. 6, § G), 11-4-2015) 
Chapter 125 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Historic preservation generally, IC 36-7-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 125-1. - Objective. 
    The preservation and conservation of the unique character of many of the city's residential and commercial areas recognizes that the preservation and protection of the elements that make these areas attractive is consistent with the goal of residential and business district vitality. The historic district objective is to protect a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. The conservation district objective is to retain the overall physical dimension of areas through appropriately scaled and sited new construction as well as sensitive rehabilitation of those structures which continue to retain functional usefulness. 
(Code 1985, § 160.01; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alterations means any material change in the external architectural features of any historic structure within an historic district or within any conservation district. 
    Building, accessory, means a building which is subordinate to and serves a principal building and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building. 
    Building, principal, means the main building on a lot. 
    Commission means the historic preservation commission. 
    Conservation district means a continuous and distinctive urban area where a majority of the buildings retain an adequate amount of historic character for interpretation, although some alterations may have occurred. A conservation district may be limited to the boundaries of a property containing a single building, structure, object or site and have been designated by ordinance by the common council, or for which application for such listing is pending within the commission, provided that the commission will determine within 90 days of receipt of application pursuant to section 125-3 whether to list such property, and any property not so listed will not be considered a conservation district within the terms of this chapter. 
    Demolition means the substantial deterioration and/or complete removal of an historic structure or any structure which is located within an historic district or conservation district. 
    Historic district means a concentration of buildings, structures, objects, spaces or sites which may be limited to the boundaries of a property containing a single building, structure, object or site and have been designated by ordinance by the common council, or for which application for such listing is pending with the commission, provided that the commission will determine within 90 days of receipt of an application pursuant to section 125-3 whether to list such property, and any property not so listed will not be considered an historic district within the terms of this chapter. 
    Public way means a strip of land for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way and includes the terms highway, parkway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, lane, court, place, drive, trail, terrace, and other such terms. 
    Staff means the city planner and each member of the department of city planning. 
    Structure means an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or, composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. 
(Code 1985, § 160.02; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The historic district regulations provided in this chapter are intended to preserve and protect historic or architecturally significant buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, squares and neighborhoods of the historic districts. 
(b)  The conservation district regulations provided in this chapter are intended to provide a means for accommodating new buildings and structures which are compatible with the overall physical dimension of a specific area through appropriately scaled and sited new construction, as well as sensitive rehabilitation of existing structures. 
(c)  It is the intent of this chapter to promote and protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public through: 
(1)  The enhancement of property values, the protection of property rights of all citizens, and the stabilization and revitalization of distinctive areas of the city through the establishment of historic districts and conservation districts; 
(2)  The protection, enhancement, and use of structures, sites, and neighborhoods which have an urban character unique within the city; and 
(3)  The recognition of the need to conserve certain unique city areas by focusing on how each structure and element of the area blends and fits with other features of the area. 
(d)  Properties within the boundaries of an historic district or conservation district are subject to the regulations of both the zoning district and the historic district or conservation district. If there is a conflict between the requirements of the zoning district and the historic district or conservation district, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 1985, § 160.03; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Secs. 125-4-125-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOUNDARIES MAP 

Sec. 125-25. - Approval by common council required. 
    The map setting forth the historic district and conservation district boundaries as well as building classifications must be submitted to, and approved in an ordinance by the common council before the historic district or conservation district is established and the building classifications take place. 
(Code 1985, § 160.06; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-26. - Further surveying and mapping. 
(a)  The commission may conduct additional surveys, and draw and submit additional maps for approval by the common council as it considers appropriate. 
(b)  When submitting a map to the legislative body under section 125-25 and subsection (a) of this section, the commission may declare one or more buildings or structures that are classified and designated as historic on the map to be under interim protection. 
(c)  If a building or structure is declared to be under interim protection pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the commission shall, by personal delivery or first class mail, provide the owner or occupant of the building or structure with written notice of the declaration within two days after declaring a building or structure to be under interim protection. The written notice must: 
(1)  Cite the authority of the commission to put the building or structure under interim protection under this section; 
(2)  Explain the effect of putting the building or structure under interim protection; and 
(3)  Indicate that the interim protection is temporary. 
(d)  A building or structure put under interim protection under subsection (b) of this section remains under interim protection until the map is submitted to and approved in an ordinance or rejected by the common council. 
(e)  While a building or structure is under interim protection under this section: 
(1)  The building or structure may not be demolished or moved; and 
(2)  The exterior appearance of the building or structure may not be conspicuously changed by addition, reconstruction or alteration. 
(Code 1985, § 160.07; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Secs. 125-27-125-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 125-56. - Required. 
    Except as provided in sections 125-96 and 125-123, a certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the historic preservation commission before an improvement location permit, demolition permit, building permit or moving permit is issued for, or work is begun on, any of the following: 
(1)  Within all areas of the historic district or conservation district. 
a.  The demolition of any building; 
b.  The moving of any building; 
c.  A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of historic buildings by addition, construction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color changes; or 
d.  Any new construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure subject to view from a public way. 
(2)  Within a primary area of the historic district or conservation district. 
a.  A change in walls and fences or construction of walls and fences, if along public ways; or 
b.  A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of nonhistoric buildings subject to view from a public way by additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance involving exterior color change. 
(Code 1985, § 160.08; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-57. - Application. 
    An application for a certificate of appropriateness may be filed in the office of the department of city planning on forms provided and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The commission may adopt, as a part of its rules, filing requirements which it finds reasonable and necessary to expedite the business of the commission. These rules may include, but are not limited to, filing deadlines and application requirements such as sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions, or other information which the commission requires to make a decision. 
(2)  A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for such application to cover the cost of processing the application. 
(3)  Applications are to be filed at least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled commission meeting. 
(Code 1985, § 160.09; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-58. - Action on certificate by commission. 
(a)  The commission may advise and make recommendations to the applicant before acting on an application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  If an application for a certificate of appropriateness is approved by the commission, or is not acted on by the commission within 30 days after it is filed, a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the department of city planning. If the certificate is issued, the application shall be processed in the same manner as applications for improvement, location, building, demolition or moving permits required by the city. 
(c)  If the commission denies an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 30 days after it was filed, the certificate shall not be issued. The commission must state its reasons for the denial in writing, and must advise the applicant. An application that has been denied shall not be processed as an application for an improvement, location, building, demolition or moving permit and shall not authorize any work by the applicant. 
(d)  The commission may grant an extension of the 30-day limit prescribed by subsections (b) and (c) of this section, if agreed to by the applicant. 
(Code 1985, § 160.10; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Secs. 125-59-125-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REGULATORY PROVISIONS 

Sec. 125-90. - Development standards. 
(a)  An historic building, structure or site or any part of or appurtenance to such, including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and signs may be reconstructed, altered or maintained only in a manner that will preserve the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or appurtenance. 
(b)  An historic building may be relocated or moved to another site only if it is shown that preservation on its current site is inconsistent with subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1985, § 160.11; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-91. - Visual compatibility. 
    Visual compatibility standards preserve or protect the unique character of designed historic districts and conservation districts. These standards are appropriate additions to regulations for historic districts and conservation districts. Except as provided in section 125-123, the construction of a new building or structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance, or repair involving a color change conspicuously affecting the external appearance of any nonhistoric building, structure, or appurtenance within the historic district or conservation district must be generally of a design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material, texture, color, and location on a lot compatible with other buildings in the historic district or conservation district, particularly with buildings designated as historic, and with squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(Code 1985, § 160.12; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-92. - Visual compatibility factors. 
    Except as provided in section 125-123, within the primary area of the historic district or conservation district, new buildings, structures and sites, as well as buildings, structures, sites and appurtenances that are moved, reconstructed, materially altered, repaired, or changed in color, must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which they are visually related. These factors and standards are appropriate additions to regulations for historic districts and conservation districts. Such controls shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Height. The height of proposed buildings must be visually compatible with adjacent buildings. 
(2)  Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width of a building to the height of the front elevation must be visually compatible to buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(3)  Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of width of the windows to the height of windows in a building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(4)  Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(5)  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of a building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings must be visually compatible to the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(6)  Rhythm of entrances and porch projections. The relationship of entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building must be visually compatible to the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(7)  Relationships of materials, texture and color. The relationship of the materials, texture and color of the facade of a building must be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in the building to which it is visually related. 
(8)  Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building must be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is visually related. 
(9)  Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, and building facades, must form cohesive walls of enclosure along the street, if necessary to ensure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(10)  Scale of a building. The size of a building, and the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings, porches, and balconies must be visually compatible with the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related. 
(11)  Directional expression of front elevation. A building must be visually compatible with the buildings, squares and places to which it is visually related in its directional character, including vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional character. 
(12)  Exterior paint colors. In an ordinance establishing an historic district or conservation district, an individual district may exclude changes in paint colors from the activities requiring the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Code 1985, § 160.13; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-93. - Appeal provisions. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to preserve historic districts or conservation districts that are important to the education, culture, traditions and economic values of the city and to afford historic organizations, and other interested persons the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of these buildings, structures or sites. 
(b)  If the commission denies the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a building or structure, a demolition permit may be issued by other agencies and a building may be demolished, but only after establishing all of the following: 
(1)  The property owner must demonstrate to the commission that an historic building or structure is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, as appraised by a licensed real estate appraiser. 
(2)  The property owner shall file with the administrator documented evidence that a good faith effort is being made to sell or otherwise dispose of such property at fair market value to any public or private person or agency which gives a reasonable assurance of its willingness to preserve and restore such property. Such documented evidence shall be provided at the expense of the property owner and shall include: 
a.  Offering price; 
b.  Date the offer of sale is to begin; 
c.  Name and address of listing real estate agency, if any; 
d.  A copy of an advertisement to run in the same manner as the notice in subsection (c) of this section which offers the property for sale; and 
e.  An appraisal of the property's fair market value by a licensed real estate appraiser. 
(c)  Notice of the proposed demolition must be given for a period fixed by the commission, based on the commission's classification on the approved map, but not less than 60 days nor more than one year. Notice must be posted by the staff of the department of city planning on the premises of the building, structure or site proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice must be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three times before demolition, with the first publication not more than 15 days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed, and the final publication at least 15 days before the date of the permit. 
(d)  The commission may approve a certificate of appropriateness at any time during the notice period under subsection (c) of this section. If the certificate is approved, a demolition permit shall be issued without further delay, and demolition may proceed. 
(Code 1985, § 160.14; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-94. - Maintenance. 
    Historic buildings shall be maintained to meet the applicable requirements of state and local building codes so as to prevent the loss of historic material and the deterioration of important character defining details and features. 
(Code 1985, § 160.15; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-95. - Recording the fact of historic district designation or conservation district designation. 
    The boundaries of any historic district or conservation district shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder by the staff. 
(Code 1985, § 160.16; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-96. - Conservation districts. 
(a)  In an ordinance approving the establishment of an historic district, the city may provide that the establishment occur in two phases. Under the first phase, which lasts three years from the date the ordinance is adopted, a certificate of appropriateness is required only for the activities described in section 125-56(1)a, (1)b, and (1)d. At the end of the first phase, the district becomes fully established, and, subject to subsection (b) of this section, a certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the commission before a permit may be issued for or work may begin on an activity described in section 125-56. 
(b)  The first phase described in subsection (a) of this section continues and the second phase does not become effective if a majority of the property owners in the district object to the commission in writing to the requirement that certificates of appropriateness be issued for the activities described in section 125-56(1)c, (2)a and b. The objections must be received by the commission not earlier than 180 days or later than 60 days before the third anniversary of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Code 1985, § 160.17; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-97. - Annexed landmarks. 
(a)  Where the Historic Preservation Commission of South Bend and St. Joseph County has designated a historic landmark in St. Joseph County, and the real estate on which the landmark is situated or comprised is subsequently annexed to and brought within the boundaries of the city, such landmark shall upon annexation to the city, continue its local historic district status within the city subject to regulation under this article. Development standards and other restrictions as may be included within the previously adopted ordinance shall be continued unless otherwise amended by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the word "landmark" shall also signify the word "district." 
(Ord. No. 4987, §§ 1, 2, 10-17-2005) 
Secs. 125-98-125-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 125-123. - Interested parties. 
(a)  An interested party means one of the following: 
(1)  The mayor of the city. 
(2)  The common council. 
(3)  The historic preservation commission of the city. 
(4)  A neighborhood association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, a majority of whose members are residents of a historic district under this chapter. 
(5)  An owner or occupant owning or occupying property in an historic district or conservation district established by an ordinance adopted under this chapter. 
(6)  Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, Inc., or any of its successors. 
(7)  The state historic preservation officer designated under IC 14-21-1, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Every interested party has a private right of action to enforce and prevent violation of a provision of this chapter or an ordinance adopted by a unit under this chapter, and with respect to any building, structure or site within an historic district, has the right to restrain, enjoin, or enforce by restraining order of injunction, temporarily or permanently, any person from violating a provision of this chapter or an ordinance adopted by a unit under this chapter. 
(c)  The interested party does not have to allege or prove irreparable harm or injury to any person or property to obtain relief under this section. 
(d)  The interested party bringing an action under this section does not have to post bond unless the court, after a hearing, determines that a bond should be required in the interest of justice. 
(e)  The interested party that brings an action under this section is not liable to any person for damages resulting from bringing or prosecuting the action unless the action was brought without good faith or without a reasonable belief that a provision of this chapter, or an ordinance adopted by a unit under this chapter, had been, or was about to be violated or breached. 
(f)  An interested party who obtains a favorable judgment in an action under this section may recover reasonable attorneys' fees and court costs from the person against whom judgment was rendered. 
(g)  An action arising under this section must be brought in the circuit or superior court of the county in which the historic district lies and no change of venue from the county shall be allowed in the action. 
(h)  The remedy provided in this section is in addition to other remedies that may be available at law or in equity. 
(Code 1985, § 160.30; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-124. - City may institute suit for injunction for violation. 
(a)  The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, demolition, color change, moving or maintenance of a building, structure, site or appurtenance which is begun, continued or maintained contrary to any provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and in violation of this chapter. The city may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court or superior court of the county to restrain any person or governmental unit from violating any provisions of this chapter and to cause such violation to be prevented, abated or removed. Such action may also be instituted by any property owner who is adversely affected by the violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The remedies provided for in this subchapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1985, § 160.31; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993) 
Sec. 125-125. - Judicial review. 
    Any person or party aggrieved by a decision or action taken by the commission shall be entitled to a judicial review thereof in accordance with IC 4-21.5. 
(Code 1985, § 160.32; Ord. No. 3444, 11-19-1990; Ord. No. 3793, 12-6-1993; Ord. No. 4343, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 125-126. - Removal of classifications. 
    Regardless of any other provision, in the case of a building or structure owned by the city that is classified by the city historic preservation commission as historic and for which the classification is approved by the common council, the commission may remove the historic classification of the building or structure without the adoption of an ordinance by the common council if the commission determines that removal of the classification is in the best interest of the city and any affected political subdivision. 
Chapter 129 - ON-PREMISES SIGN STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 129-1. - Purpose. 
    It is recognized that certain land uses have a legal right to advertise through the use of on-premises signage, and it is recognized that the city has the legal authority to present a set of reasonable nonarbitrary, and noncapricious standards in order to regulate the location, size, type and placement of on-premises signs within the corporate boundaries of the city, in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare; to ensure that on-premises signs are compatible with the particular zoning district in which they are located; and to ensure that on-premises signs do not interfere with the safe movement of traffic. 
(Code 1985, § 157.01; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-2. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens. 
(b)  Where conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than any other law or ordinance, the law or ordinance which is more restrictive or which imposes higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter are most restrictive or impose higher standards, the higher standards shall govern. 
(d)  The provisions in this chapter are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances, heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 157.03; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-3. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, arranged, or designed be used or occupied; the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator. The sign code administrator shall be the city planner or his designated representative for sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76 and the building commissioner or his designated representative for sections 129-37-129-47 and 129-96 through 129-99. 
    Alteration means any act or process, normal maintenance and painting, which changes one or more of the exterior features of a sign. 
    Ascender means the tall stroke of lower case letters b, d, f, h, k, l, t, or an upper case letter when used with lower case letters. 
    Awning means a structure made of cloth, metal, or other light materials attached to a building and supported entirely from the exterior wall of the same building which may be so erected as to permit its being raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use, and which may have electric backlights to illuminate. 
    Background area means the entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed. 
    Board of public works and safety means the board of public works and safety of the city. 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board of zoning appeals of the city. 
    Building means a structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel. 
    Building code means the Uniform Building Code promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by this jurisdiction. 
    Building commissioner means the director of the department of buildings. 
    Building facade means that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation, and which may also be referred to as the "building face." 
    Canopy means a roof structure supported from an open structure and made of cloth, metal, or other light materials, and which may have electric backlights to illuminate. 
    City engineer means the director of the department of engineering. 
    City planner means the director of the department of city planning. 
    Commission means the city planning commission. 
    Copy area means the sum of the area of the words and numbers endorsed by forming imaginary straight lines, but excluding pictorials, trademarks, symbols, ascender letters and numbers, and descender letters and numbers. 
    Council means the common council. 
    Descender means the portion of the lower case letters that extends below the line, f, g, m, p, q, y, z or upper case letters J and Y when used with lower case letters. 
    Display area means the sum of the area of the sign on which copy may be placed, which is enclosed by four imaginary straight lines, but excluding structural members, nonstructural trim and sign support bases. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, inscribe, suspend or affix, and shall include the painting of wall signs. 
    Frontage means the length of the property lines of any one lot along the shortest legally accessible public right-of-way it borders. In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest street frontage dimension from the street. 
    Good repair means a condition which meets the minimum standards of health and safety; and which guarantees continued attractiveness, usefulness and structural soundness. 
    Ground level means the average elevation of the premises, or the elevation of the centerline of the adjacent right-of-way at the point closest to the sign. 
    Height of a sign means the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the sign to the ground level immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface of the nearest curb of a street, alley or highway, whichever measurement permits the greater elevation of the sign. 
    Illuminated sign means any sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one main building or use, together with its accessory buildings or uses, and including the open spaces required. A lot shall be held under common ownership and shall be so recorded in the office of the county recorder. A lot may include contiguous parts of lots or a combination of more than one lot, when contiguous to one another and used as one parcel. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot at the junction of two streets. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal difference between the front and rear lot line. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot with frontage on one street. 
    Lot line means the property boundary lines of a lot. 
    Lot line, exterior side, means a lot line which is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line which separates the longest street frontage dimension of a corner lot from the street. 
    Lot line, front, means in the case of an interior lot, a lot line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, the lot line separating the narrowest street frontage of a lot from the street. 
    Lot line, interior side, means a lot line which is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line which separates two lots. 
    Lot line, rear, means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular- or triangular-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length, within the lot parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Noncombustible as applied to building construction material, means material which, in the form in which it is used, is either one of the following: 
(1)  Material of which no part will ignite and burn when subjected to fire. Any material conforming to Uniform Building Code (U.B.C.) Standard No. 4-1 shall be considered noncombustible within the meaning of this section. 
(2)  Material having a structural base of noncombustible material, as defined in subsection (1) of this definition, with a surfacing not over one-eighth inch thick, which has a flame-spread rating of 50 or less. 
    Nonstructural trim means the molding, batten, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms, which are attached to the sign structure, and are nonstructural in nature, and do not contribute to the support of the sign. 
    Owner means a person recorded as such in the records of the county recorder, and includes a duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary; or any person having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question. 
    Plastic materials, approved, means those having a self-ignition temperature of 650 degrees Fahrenheit or greater when tested in accordance with U.B.C. Standard No. 52-3 and smoke-density rating not greater than 450 when tested in accordance with U.B.C. Standard No. 42-1, in the way intended for use, or a smoke density rating no greater than 75, when tested in the thickness intended for use by U.B.C. Standard No. 52-2. Approved plastics shall be classified as either CC1 or CC2, in accordance with U.B.C. Standard No. 52-4. 
    Premises means an area of land, with its appurtenances and buildings, which because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit; usually a lot with the principal building and accessory buildings. 
    Projection means the horizontal distance by which the furthermost point used in measuring the area of a sign extends beyond a building wall. A sign placed flat against a wall of a building parallel to a street or alley shall not be deemed to project for purposes of this chapter. A sign on and parallel to an awning, canopy or marquee shall not be deemed to project to the extent that such sign extends beyond a street property line or a building setback line. 
    Public right-of-way width means the perpendicular distance across a public street, measured from property line to property line. When property lines on opposite sides of the public street are not parallel, the public right-of-way width shall be determined by the city engineer. 
    Roof means the uppermost part of the building or structure; that part of the building on which rain would normally fall. 
    Roof eave means the lowest part of a roof which has no parapet; that part of the roof from which the rain would drain. 
    Roofline means the upper edge of any building wall or parapet, exclusive of any tower, chimney, ventilation equipment or utility equipment. 
    Semipublic body means any organization operating a nonprofit activity and serving a public purpose or service and shall include such organizations as noncommercial clubs, lodges, theater groups, recreational associations, neighborhood associations, cultural associations and schools. 
    Shopping center means a group of three or more stores, offices or shops selling merchandise or services and served by a common off-street automobile parking area which is located on private property. 
    Sign means an announcement, identification, image, description display, illustration or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which advertises products or services, on- or off-premises, which is located on private property and is visible from any public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, whether permanently or temporarily installed. 
    Sign types. 
    Animated sign means any sign which includes action, motion, or color changes on all or any part of the sign facing, requiring electrical energy, or set in motion by movement of the atmosphere. An animated sign does not include revolving signs, any type of automatic changing signs, banners, moving signs, marquee signs or chaser signs. 
    Automatic changing sign means a sign, such as an electronically or electrically controlled message center or reader board, where different automatic changing messages of an information or communicative nature are shown. Automatic changing signs include only the following: 
(1)  Message center. A sign, which contains a changing message within the copy area, which remains on for specified minimum period of time, and blacks out for a specified minimum period of time between messages. Messages contained on the copy area of the sign do not travel or appear to travel in any direction. 
(2)  Electrical reader board. A sign, which contains a traveling message, or a message which appears to be traveling, and usually in a horizontal manner. The characters incorporated into any message remain constant, and do not change in hue or intensity or appear to change in hue or intensity as they travel or appear to travel across or through the automatic changing copy area of the sign. 
(3)  Multivision board. A sign with a number of panels which rotate in sequence, so as to be capable of presenting a minimum of three different visual presentations. Copy contained on the individual visual presentations does not travel in any manner or direction or appear to travel in any manner or direction nor does it change in hue or intensity or appear to change in hue or intensity. 
    Banner sign means any nonilluminated sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied only to paper or fabric. 
    Beacon light means any light with one or more beams, capable of being directed in any direction or capable of being revolved automatically, and used for attracting attention. 
    Bench sign means an off-premises sign which is attached to or painted upon a bench or seat which is located outside a building or structure. 
    Billboard. See Off-premises sign. 
    Canopy or awning sign means a sign attached or applied to a canopy or awning. 
    Changeable copy sign means an on-premises, freestanding sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged manually, electronically, or by painting without physically altering the surface of the sign. 
    Chaser sign means a sign that creates a running effect in a bank of lamps or tubes. 
    Construction sign means a sign of 32 square feet or less and ten feet high or less, giving the names of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign is placed, together with other information included thereon. Construction signs shall not be illuminated and shall be removed immediately after the certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner. 
    Directional sign means any sign of no more then eight square feet and/or 31/2 feet high, which is designed and erected solely for the purpose of directing automobile traffic and placed on the property to which or on which traffic is directed; and no more than two signs per curb cut. 
    Directory sign means a sign of one square foot or less per occupant on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a commercial building is given. 
    Double-face sign means a sign with two parallel faces normally mounted to a structure or building, to be read from opposite directions. 
    Fascia sign. See Wall sign. 
    Flashing sign means any sign which contains a continually intermittent light or sequential flashing light source. The term "flashing sign" does not include signs which give the illusion of intermittent light or flashing light nor does it include flashing or intermittent light or the outlining of a pictorial scene as in an animated sign. The term "flashing sign" also does not include signs that use intermittent lighting changes for the purpose of changing the graphics or copy within the copy area of a sign. Time and temperature signs and electronically controlled message devices are also excluded from this category. 
    Freestanding sign means any permanently installed sign which is supported wholly by a foundation, uprights, braces and/or poles in the ground. 
    Ground and/or pole sign. See Freestanding sign. 
    Inflatable display means any three-dimensional, ambient, air-filled object depicting a container, figure, product or product trade dress. 
    Institutional bulletin means a freestanding sign of any governmental agency, semipublic body, religious group, hospital, or school, located on the premises and bearing only the information related to the activities conducted on the premises, persons involved, or other such information. 
    Integral sign means memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface on the wall of a building, or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials mounted on the wall of a building. 
    Mansard roof sign. See Wall sign. 
    Marquee sign means a sign attached parallel to and made part of a marquee, but not a canopy sign. 
    Mobile sign means a temporary, freestanding sign, mobile sign, or trailer sign which is not set in a permanent base or foundation that will withstand wind pressure or wind forces. 
    Monument sign means an illuminated or unilluminated sign in which the area between the bottom horizontal edge of the display area and the ground level, and between the vertical edges of the display area if extended to the ground level, is filled with a wall constructed of brick, and/or natural stone, or decorative metal panels. 
    Moving sign means a sign which moves or gives the visual impression of rotation or movement or has any moving or animated parts, whether machine driven or wind-powered; including, but not limited to, rotating signs, revolving signs, and strings of flags or streamers, but excluding automatic changing signs. 
    Multiface freestanding sign means a freestanding sign with more than two faces. 
    Nameplate means a nonilluminated sign of one square foot per occupied unit which is flush-mounted to the wall of a building and identifies only the name and occupation or profession of the occupants of the premises on which the sign is located. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this chapter and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all the applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter as may be amended from time to time. 
    Obsolete sign means any sign which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed, or a sign which is not in good repair. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign permanently attached to a building, the ground or to a permanent structure having a location upon the ground advertising a business, product, service or event not necessarily available on the premises where the sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products or services located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained, also known as appurtenant or accessory signs. 
    Painted graphics means any mosaic, mural, painting or graphic art technique or combination, or grouping of mosaics, murals or painting or graphic art techniques, applied, implanted or placed directly onto a wall by a brushing or spraying process or by some similar process, and containing no copy, advertising, symbols, lettering, trademarks or other references to the premises or to any products and/or services offered for sale on the premises on which any such mosaic, mural or painting or graphic art technique is placed. 
    Portable sign. See Temporary sign. 
    Projecting sign means any multifaced sign other than a wall sign affixed to any exterior wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall more than 12 inches. A projecting sign shall not project into the public right-of-way unless approved by the board of public works and safety. 
    Public interest sign includes signs containing any of the following messages: 
(1)  Official signs and notices. Official signs and notices placed by public officials or public agencies pursuant to and in accordance with federal, state, or local law for the purposes of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. Historical markers and commemorative plaques authorized by federal, state, or local law shall be considered as official signs. 
(2)  Public utility signs. Signs, markers and notices placed for warning, informational or other purposes which are customarily placed by public utilities as essential to their operations. 
(3)  Public directional signs. Signs and notices containing directional information about public places owned and operated by federal, state, or local governments or their agencies, natural phenomena, historic, religious, cultural, scientific or educational sites owned and/or operated by public or nonprofit private agencies, and outdoor recreational areas owned and/or operated by public or nonprofit private agencies. 
(4)  Holiday decorations. Religious, patriotic, or commemorative decorations, flags, signs, notices, symbols, or displays related to a holiday or other celebration. 
    Public service message sign means a nonflashing, freestanding electronically or electrically controlled public service message sign which conveys only information such as time, date, temperature, atmospheric conditions or general news information, where different alternating copy changes are shown on the same lamp bank matrix. 
    Real estate sign means an unilluminated on-premises sign announcing the name of the owner, manager, realtor, or other person directly involved in the sale, lease, or rental of the property or announcing the purpose or conditions for which it is being offered. A real estate sign in residential R-1, R-2 and R-4 districts shall be no greater than 4.5 square feet and in all other districts shall be no greater than 32 square feet. 
    Religious notices means one freestanding sign or a sign flush-mounted to the wall of a building containing identification of a religious organization and containing information relating to worship services, meetings, locations, fund raising or other religious activities. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected or painted, in whole or in part, upon, against, or directly above a roof, or roof eave, or on top or above the parapet, or on a nonfunctional architectural appendage above the roof or roof eave, excluding signs mounted on or above a canopy, providing there is a roofline or parapet which projects higher than the top of the sign. A roof sign does not include mansard signs. 
    Sign means a sign which moves or gives the visual impression of rotation. 
    Single-face sign means a sign with copy on one face only, normally mounted on a building, wall, or structure to be seen from one direction only. 
    Snipe sign means any sign, made of any material whatsoever, that is attached in any way to a utility pole, tree, or any object or situated on public property. 
    Street banner sign means any banner sign which is stretched across or hung over a public right-of-way, and shall be approved by the board of public works and safety. 
    Temporary sign means any sign, portable sign, pennant, valance, inflatable display or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plastic, metal or other light materials, with or without structural frames. Temporary signs may be displayed for no more than 15 days only as regulated by the provisions of this chapter. Decorative displays for the holidays are not temporary signs. 
    Trailer sign. See Temporary sign. 
    Wall sign means any sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to the wall of or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall or highest vertical projection of a mansard roof of any building and supported by such wall or mansard roof. 
    Wind sign means any attention-arresting device, other than banners, with or without copy, or a series of devices such as streamers, and/or pennants, with or without copy, designed and fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to pressure by the atmosphere. 
    Window identification sign means a sign visible from the exterior of a building, which sign may be painted on a window for the purpose of directing the attention of persons outside the building to a sale of merchandise, a service or event. 
    Sign structure means any structure which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign, including the sign area. 
    Street means a public highway, road or thoroughfare, excluding alleys and serviceways, which affords the principal means of access to adjacent lots. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed in some definite manner. 
    Uniform Building Code Standards means the Uniform Building Code Standards, promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, as adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Use means the purpose for which a building, lot, sign or other structure is arranged, intended, designed, occupied or maintained as established by the common council. 
(Code 1985, § 157.07; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 3913, 1-3-1995) 
Sec. 129-4. - Administration. 
    Administration of sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76 shall be vested with the city planner or his designated representative and sections 129-37-129-47 and 129-96 through 129-99 shall be vested with the building commissioner or his designated representative. 
(Code 1985, § 157.05; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-5. - Amendment of chapter. 
    The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter. An amendment to this chapter may only be initiated by; 
(1)  Common council for all sections; 
(2)  City plan commission for sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76; 
(3)  Department of city planning for sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76; and 
(4)  Department of buildings for sections 129-37-129-47 and 129-96 through 129-99. 
(Code 1985, § 157.06; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-6. - Reference of established zoning districts. 
    In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the following districts are hereby referenced from chapter 137, zoning. 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  R-1 single-family residential district. 
b.  R-2 two-family residential district. 
c.  R-3 multiple-family residential district. 
d.  R-4 manufactured home residential district. 
(2)  Commercial districts. 
a.  C-1 general commercial district. 
b.  C-2 shopping center commercial district. 
c.  C-3 city center commercial district. 
d.  C-4 automobile oriented commercial district. 
e.  C-5 neighborhood commercial district. 
f.  C-6 linear office commercial district. 
g.  C-7 automobile oriented restaurant commercial district. 
h.  C-8 high-density suburban commercial district. 
i.  C-9 automobile-oriented sales commercial district. 
j.  C-10 filling stations commercial district. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 
a.  I-1 light industrial district. 
b.  I-2 heavy industrial district. 
(4)  Special districts. 
a.  S-1 extensive open space and public use district. 
b.  S-2 planned unit development district. 
(Code 1985, § 157.08; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4354, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 129-7. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All signs erected hereafter, all structural alterations, enlargement, or relocation of existing signs hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  Where a building permit for a sign has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and diligently prosecuted to completion, said sign may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, subject thereafter, if applicable, to the provisions herein for nonconforming signs. 
(Code 1985, § 157.09; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Secs. 129-8-129-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 129-33. - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Notification of nonconformity. After the enactment of this chapter, the city planner shall, as soon as practicable, survey the city for signs which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter. Upon determination that a sign is nonconforming, the city planner shall use reasonable efforts to so notify either personally or in writing the user or owner of the property on which the sign is located of the following: 
(1)  The sign's nonconformity; and 
(2)  Whether the sign is eligible for characterization either as legal nonconforming or unlawful. 
Failing determination of the sign owner, user or owner of the property on which the sign is located, the notice may be affixed in a conspicuous place to the sign or to the business premises with which the sign is associated. 
(b)  Signs eligible for characterization as legal nonconforming. Any sign located within the city limits on the date of adoption of this chapter, or located in an area annexed to the city thereafter, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, is eligible for characterization as a legal nonconforming sign and is permitted, provided it also meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The sign was covered by a sign permit or variance on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, if one was required under applicable law; or 
(2)  If no sign permit was required under applicable law for the sign in question, the sign was in all respects in compliance with the applicable law on the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(c)  Loss of legal nonconforming status. 
(1)  A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming designation if: 
a.  The sign is not kept in good repair and in a safe condition. 
b.  The sign is demolished by any natural force to the extent of 50 percent of its use. 
c.  The structure of the sign is altered (except for normal maintenance). 
d.  The sign is relocated, unless the relocation moves the sign further from the public right-of-way. 
e.  The sign is replaced. 
f.  The permit, variance, or condition under which the sign was allowed expires. 
(2)  On the happening of any one of the sign conditions in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the sign shall be immediately brought into conformance with this chapter with a new permit secured therefor, or shall be removed. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs; provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify in any way the sign structure. 
(Code 1985, § 157.10; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-34. - Improvement location permit required. 
    No sign permit shall be issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative for the erection, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement to a sign, unless an improvement location permit shall have been issued by the city planner or his designated representative. 
(1)  An application for an improvement location permit shall be accompanied by a simple site plan showing the following: 
a.  The boundaries of the subject property, all existing easements, property lines, existing streets and buildings. 
b.  Location and dimension of the proposed sign, including total height, area, setbacks and type of sign illumination. 
(2)  The city planner or his designated representative shall approve or deny an application for an improvement location permit and issue the permit or address the reasons for its denial in writing to the applicant. 
(3)  An improvement location permit shall become null and void unless the building permit shall have been issued and work thereon is substantially underway within one year of the issuance of said improvement location permit. 
(Code 1985, § 157.11; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-35. - Powers and duties of city plan commission. 
    The city plan commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Initiate proposals to amend, supplement, change or repeal sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76. 
(2)  Review an ordinance for amendment, supplement, change, modify or repeal of sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76 proposed by other than the plan commission. 
(3)  Initiate, direct and review from time to time, studies of the provisions of sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76. 
(4)  To hold public hearings in matters pertaining to amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal of sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76 and submit reports to the city council setting forth its findings and recommendations. 
(Code 1985, § 157.12; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-36. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall hear and determine appeals to sections 129-3, 129-6, 129-7, 129-33 through 129-36, and 129-72 through 129-76 as follows: 
(1)  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official, hearing officer, or staff member under chapter 137, zoning. 
(2)  Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative board or other body, except the city plan commission, in relation to the enforcement of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards. 
(3)  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative board or other body, except the city plan commission, in relation to the enforcement of an ordinance requiring the procurement of an improvement location permit. 
(4)  The board shall approve or deny variances from the standards of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards. A variance may be approved under this section only upon a determination in writing that: 
a.  The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; 
b.  The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and 
c.  Strict application of the terms of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals is not permitted and shall not hear variances for sections 129-37-129-47 and 129-96 through 129-99. 
(Code 1985, § 157.13; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-37. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building commissioner or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building commissioner, or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect same. If such building or premises is occupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building commissioner or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign or sign structure in this jurisdiction, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 157.18; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-38. - Permits; application. 
(a)  Permits required. A sign shall not be erected, reerected, constructed, altered or maintained, except as provided by this chapter and after a sign permit for the same has been issued by the building commissioner. A separate sign permit shall be required for a sign for each business entity, and a separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single supporting structure. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for electric signs. 
(b)  Application for permit. Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building commissioner. Such application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. Plans may be filed with the building commissioner. 
(Code 1985, § 157.19; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-39. - Exemption from permitting requirement. 
    The following signs shall not require a sign permit. These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of other sections of this chapter or any other ordinance. 
(1)  The changing of the advertising copy or message on a painted or printed sign only. Except for theater marquees and similar signs, specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, electric signs shall not be included in this exception. 
(2)  Painting, repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure or the changing of the advertising copy or message thereon shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires a sign permit unless a structural change is made. 
(Code 1985, § 157.20; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-40. - Fees. 
(a)  A sign permit fee and a plan-checking fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule established by the council. 
(b)  A construction permit fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule established by the council. 
(Code 1985, § 157.21; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-41. - Maintenance. 
    All signs and sign support structures, together with all of their support, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in a proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. 
(Code 1985, § 157.22; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-42. - Inspections. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building commissioner. 
(b)  Footing inspections may be required by the building commissioner for all signs having footings. 
(c)  All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing electrical code, and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. 
(d)  The building commissioner may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of sections 129-37 through 129-47 and 129-96 through 129-99. 
(Code 1985, § 157.23; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-43. - Permit required. 
(a)  No sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected, altered, mounted, or suspended from any building or structure, or placed upon the round for the public display of posters, reading material, painted signs, or any advertising, unless the person owning, or having control of the sign first obtains a permit for the sign from the building commissioner as provided herein. 
(b)  This requirement shall not apply to any sign painted on the side of a building if the painted sign constitutes on-premises advertising of the owner or occupant of the building. No permit shall be required to change the advertising copy or message on a painted, printed or changeable letter sign. Painting, repainting, cleaning or repair maintenance shall not be considered an erection or alteration which requires a permit, unless a structural change in the sign or sign support is made. 
(Code 1985, § 157.28; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-44. - Permit application and fee. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits shall be made to the building commissioner upon forms furnished by him. Such applications shall contain the location by street address of the proposed sign, the name and address of the owner, and the name and address of the person erecting the sign. The building commissioner may require the filing of plans or other information relative to the erection and placement of the sign as he sees fit. 
(b)  No permit for the erection or alteration of a sign shall be issued until the fee for the sign permit is paid to the building commissioner based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  Freestanding signs shall be calculated for each face measured on the skeleton framework at the rate of $0.40 per square foot, with a minimum permit fee of $15.00. 
(2)  Signs flat against a building shall be calculated per square foot measured as a total area of display surface at the rate of $0.40 per square foot, with a minimum permit fee of $15.00. 
(3)  All installations of new off-premises signs shall require a fee of $50.00. 
(Code 1985, § 157.29; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 4535, 11-9-2000) 
Sec. 129-45. - License required. 
    A sign erector license shall be required of any person erecting, reerecting, constructing, altering, attaching or mounting signs in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 157.30; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-46. - License fees. 
    The sign erector license shall be issued by the building commissioner for a period of one year from July 1 to June 30 upon payment of an annual license fee of $15.00 and proof of the filing of a bond as required in section 129-47. 
(Code 1985, § 157.31; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-47. - Bond. 
    Every person erecting, altering or removing any sign within the city shall file annually with the building commissioner, a bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00, conditioned that the person shall comply with the provisions of this Code with respect to alterations, locations, permit and construction requirements, and conditioned further to indemnify the city and its officials from any claims or damages sustained, brought, or obtained against the city or its officials because of the alteration, construction, removal or any accident caused by or resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1985, § 157.32; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-48. - Notice of violation. 
    When written notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has been served on the property owner, agent, occupant, contractor or builder, such violation shall be discontinued immediately. 
(Code 1985, § 157.33; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-49. - Right of injunction. 
    The city planner or his designated representative and/or the building commissioner or his designated representative may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court or superior court of the county to restrain an individual from violating the provisions of this chapter and may also institute a suit for a mandatory injunction directing the removal of any structure or improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 157.34; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Secs. 129-50-129-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC ON-PREMISES SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 129-72. - Prohibited signs in all zoning districts. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain: 
(1)  Any sign which is not included in section 129-73, permitted signs by zoning district. 
(2)  Off-premises signs, except as permitted in chapter 137, zoning. 
(3)  Any sign which looks similar to any emergency vehicle warning light. 
(4)  Any sign which looks similar to any traffic control sign. 
(5)  Animated signs. 
(6)  Beacon lights, except as permitted under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(7)  Flashing signs. 
(8)  Roof signs. 
(9)  Moving signs. 
(10)  Obsolete signs. 
(11)  Snipe signs. 
(12)  Temporary signs, except as permitted under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(13)  Wind signs. 
(14)  Signs which interfere with the vision clearance area of chapter 137, zoning. 
(15)  Signs which project into, or are constructed on the public right-of-way without approval of the board of public works and safety and recorded with the county recorder's office. 
(16)  Wall signs which block any door/window or ventilation facility, or extend above a roof eave or parapet. 
(Code 1985, § 157.14; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-73. - Permitted signs by zoning district. 
    Only the following signs shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: 
(1)  R-1 single-family residential district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per subdivision. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One monument sign for places of religious worship with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by six feet wide horizontal and 24 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level. 
f.  One unilluminated monument sign at each street entrance to a platted subdivision with ten or more buildable lots, with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by eight feet wide horizontal and 32 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level; however, no such sign shall be so placed as to obstruct the view of motorists. 
(2)  R-2 two-family residential district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per subdivision. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One monument sign for places of religious worship with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by six feet wide horizontal and 24 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level. 
(3)  R-3 multiple-family residential district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One wall sign of no greater than ten square feet and installed no higher than the interior ceiling of the first floor level. 
f.  One monument sign for places of religious worship with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by six feet wide horizontal and 24 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level. 
g.  One monument sign for each multiple-family residential complex with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by eight feet wide horizontal and 32 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level. 
(4)  R-4 manufactured home residential district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per subdivision. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One monument sign for places of religious worship with a display area of no greater than four feet high vertical by six feet wide horizontal and 24 square feet total, and with a vertical height of the sign of no greater than five feet above the ground level. 
(5)  C-1 general commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Automatic changing sign. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(6)  C-2 shopping center commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign per street frontage on lots of ten acres or more from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Automatic changing sign. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide, the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet, and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign pet lot, except lots of ten or more acres located on the corner of two intersecting streets shall be permitted one sign per street frontage and each sign shall be subject to the above height and square footage regulations. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(7)  C-3 city center commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade or the sidewalk and the lowest point or the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Automatic changing sign. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height or a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
p.  Street signs as approved by the board of public works and safety. 
(8)  C-4 automobile oriented district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Automatic changing sign. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 square feet of display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot, except lots of five or more acres located on the corner of two intersecting public streets shall be permitted one sign per street frontage and each sign shall be subject to the above height and square footage restrictions. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(9)  C-5 neighborhood commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade or the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height or a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(10)  C-6 linear office district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identification signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards; only one sign for each lot shall be allowed with the following restrictions: 
(i)  Monument sign type only; 
(ii)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be eight feet; and 
(iii)  Seventy five hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 60 square feet, and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 36 square feet. 
(11)  C-7 automobile oriented restaurant commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet, six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy sign. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Automatic changing sign. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One temporary sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(12)  C-8 high-density suburban commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding sign. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(13)  C-9 automobile-oriented sales commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(14)  C-10 filling stations commercial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(15)  I-I light industrial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(16)  I-2 heavy industrial district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(17)  S-1 extensive open space and public use district. 
a.  One nameplate. 
b.  One real estate sign per smallest street frontage. 
c.  One construction sign per principal building. 
d.  One integral sign. 
e.  One painted graphic. 
f.  Banner signs. 
g.  Canopy or awning signs. 
h.  Directional signs. 
i.  Directory signs. 
j.  Marquee signs. 
k.  Wall signs. 
l.  Window identifications signs. 
m.  Projecting signs; and projecting signs as approved by the board of public works and safety with a minimum clearance of eight feet six inches between the grade of the sidewalk and the lowest point of the sign, and shall be located at the center of the building facade. 
n.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  One freestanding sign from the following sign type list, or one sign which is a combination of the sign types from the following list: 
(i)  Changeable copy signs. 
(ii)  Institutional bulletins. 
(iii)  Public service message signs. 
(iv)  Electronic reader board. 
(v)  Multiface freestanding signs. 
2.  The freestanding sign shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  One foot of vertical height of sign structure per ten feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. The maximum vertical height of a sign structure shall be 35 feet. If the lot frontage is less than 150 feet wide the maximum vertical distance between the existing grade and the top of the sign may be 15 feet. 
(ii)  Seventy-five-hundredths square foot of sign copy area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way and 1.25 feet of sign display area per three linear feet of lot frontage on the public right-of-way. If the lot frontage is less than 80 feet wide, the maximum sign copy area may be 20 square feet, and the maximum sign display area may be 33 square feet. The maximum display area shall be no greater than 450 square feet and the maximum copy area shall be no greater than 270 square feet. 
(iii)  One freestanding sign per lot. 
o.  One temporary sign as approved under section 129-75, temporary sign permits. 
(18)  S-2 planned unit development district. All signage within a planned unit development that is adopted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall conform to the sign standards of the most restrictive zoning district in which the various land use would otherwise be permitted. The plan commission shall not deviate from these regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 157.15; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990; Ord. No. 3913, 1-3-1995; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4164, 5-5-1997; Ord. No. 4354, 11-16-1998) 
Sec. 129-74. - Freestanding sign corridor overlay districts. 
(a)  Intent. Due to the city's desire to maintain attractive gateways and streetscapes within the city; certain corridors have required special land use and transportation access planning. Aspects of individual corridors may include elements such as high-quality building design restrictions and construction, a physical location in a prime redevelopment area along a major transportation corridor, inclusion of structures identified as historically relevant based on the Mishawaka Historic Sites and Structures Inventory, and/or being located in an area that is predominantly undeveloped and is adjacent to existing or proposed corridors. All of these characteristics present a need for an attractive streetscape appearance potentially serving as gateways or entrances to the city. The following overlay sign restrictions identified under subsection (d) of this section shall apply to all freestanding signs in the areas described under subsection (b) of this section. These restrictions shall also apply to off-premises signs within all districts excepting only the areas identified under subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  District areas. The districts shall be described as areas of land 300 feet parallel to and on either side of the right-of-way of the following described corridors excepting any portions of right-of-way or area not within the corporation limit: 
(1)  Main Street extended district. Gumwood Road from the northernmost corporation limit south to the intersection of Main Street and State Road 23. Main Street from the intersection of State Road 23 and Gumwood Road south to the intersection of Church Street and Main Street. Church Street from the intersection of Church Street and Main Street south to the intersection of Church Street and Union Street. Union Street from the intersection of Church Street and Union Street south to the intersection of Union Street and Bremen Highway. Bremen Highway from the intersection of Union Street and Bremen Highway south to the southmost corporation limit. 
(2)  Edison Lakes district. Edison Lakes Parkway between the east right-of-way line of North Main Street and east right-of-way line of Grape Road. Day Road between the east right-of-way line of North Main Street and the easternmost corporation limit. Park Place between the south right-of-way of Day Road to the west right-of-way of Filbert Road. Division Street from the intersection of Division Street and McKinley Highway to the northernmost limit of Division Street. 
(3)  Lincolnway district. Lincolnway between the east right-of-way of Logan Street and the west right-of-way line of Capital Avenue. 
(4)  State Road 23/Edwardsburg Highway district. State Road 23/Edwardsburg Highway between the east right-of-way line of Main Street to the eastern most city limit. 
(5)  Cass Road/University Drive district. University Drive between the east right-of-way line of Main Street to the west right-of-way line of Fir Road. Cass Road from the south/east right-of-way line of University Drive to its terminus west of Fire Road. 
(c)  Exceptions for the development of off-premises signs within certain overlay districts. Development of off-premises signs in the following areas shall not be subject to the overlay restrictions, but shall be subject to all other applicable restrictions on the development of off-premises signs identified by chapter 137. 
(1)  Main Street extended district exception. Main Street from a point 300 feet south of the south right-of-way line of Guam Avenue to the north right-of-way line of Russ Street. Union Street from the intersection of Church Street and Union Street south to the intersection of Union Street and Bremen Highway (at the intersection, south right-of-way line, of Dragoon Trail). 
(2)  State Road 23/Edwardsburg Highway district. State Road 23/Edwardsburg Highway between the eastern edge of the Main Street extended overlay district to the easternmost city limit. 
(d)  Overlay sign restrictions. 
(1)  The number and area of any sign shall be limited by the standards identified by this article and shall be further supplemented by the following: 
a.  Individual sign display height shall be no greater than five-foot high/vertical. 
b.  Individual sign display width shall be no greater than 15-foot wide/horizontal. 
c.  Individual sign display area shall be no greater than 60 square feet. 
d.  The vertical height of the sign with base/support shall be no greater than eight feet above the ground level. 
(2)  For all new construction, sign bases/support shall be solid/opaque, void of open areas, and shall be faced or constructed of masonry materials to match the construction of the principal building. Existing buildings replacing or installing new signage may submit alternatives to the masonry as needed to match the appearance of existing construction, subject to the review and approval of the city planner. 
(Code 1985, § 157.15A; Ord. No. 3913, 1-3-1995; Ord. No. 3923, 3-6-1995; Ord. No. 4358, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 4583, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 129-75. - Temporary sign permits. 
    The city planner or his designated representative shall be authorized to issue an improvement location permit for the temporary installation and maintenance of one temporary sign per lot or shopping center, either for one period not to exceed 15 days during the calendar year, or for three periods not to exceed five days per period during the calendar year. Such signs shall be located at least ten feet from the property line and shall not be located on public property or within a vision clearance area; the sign shall not rotate, shall not flash, and shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
(1)  A bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00 shall be filed with the building commissioner, conditional that the person shall comply with the provisions of this code and to indemnify the city and its officials from any claims or damages sustained, brought or obtained against the city or its officials because of the placement, removal or any accident caused by or resulting therefrom. The bond shall be returned after the sign is removed. 
(2)  The sign shall be tied down in order to withstand a 60-mile-per-hour wind, and if electrified, shall be approved by an independent testing laboratory such as Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall include underground metal conduit or approved underground wire, and adhere to all electric code requirements. Aerial wire, or ground wire, and extension cords shall be prohibited. 
(3)  An improvement location permit for the sign shall be issued only for property in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, C-7, I-1 and I-2 districts. 
(4)  Temporary signs in existence on the date of approval of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which do not conform to the provisions of this article, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs, which shall be either removed or modified to conform to the provisions of this article within six months. 
(Code 1985, § 157.16; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-76. - Temporary signs not to become permanent signs. 
    Because of the added structural needs of permanent mounted signs, and the usual lack of a proper internal structure in temporary signs, temporary signs may not become permanent canopy or awning, directional, directory, marquee, wall, projecting and/or freestanding signs and neither an improvement location permit nor sign permit may be issued for such installation. 
(Code 1985, § 157.17; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Secs. 129-77-129-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ON-PREMISES SIGN SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 129-96. - Design and construction. 
(a)  Generally. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(b)  Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in the Uniform Building Code. 
(c)  Seismic loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the Uniform Building Code. 
(d)  Combined loads. 
(1)  Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing the larger stresses need be used. 
(2)  Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads. 
(e)  Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete, steel or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the Uniform Building Code. 
(Code 1985, § 157.24; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-97. - Construction. 
(a)  Generally. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Materials. 
(1)  Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the Uniform Building Code, Standards No. 27-1 and 27-9. 
(2)  Anchors and supports when of wood and embedded in the soil, or within six inches of the soil, shall be all heartwood of a durable species or shall be pressure-treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be marked or branded by an approved agency. 
(c)  Restrictions on combustible materials. 
(1)  Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting requirements of this chapter. Combination signs, roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs and signs on marquees shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs. 
(2)  Nonelectric wall signs may be constructed of unprotected combustible materials on walls permitted to be unprotected combustible construction. 
(d)  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surfaces may be of wood, metal, approved plastics or any combination thereof. 
(e)  Anchorage. 
(1)  Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil for an effective resistance to pullout amounting to a force 25 percent greater than the required resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line (36 inches in this area). 
(2)  Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws. 
(f)  Display surfaces. Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal, glass or approved plastics. Plastic wall signs shall not exceed 225 square feet in area. 
(Code 1985, § 157.25; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-98. - Projection and clearance. 
(a)  Generally. Signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this section and Table No. 4-B and 4-C of the Uniform Sign Code. 
(b)  Clearance from high voltage lines. Signs shall be located not less than six feet horizontally or 12 feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of 750 volts. 
(c)  Clearance from fire escapes, exits or standpipes. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. 
(d)  Obstruction of openings. 
(1)  No sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by this chapter. 
(2)  Signs erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be of noncombustible material. 
(e)  Projection. Signs and sign structures, as approved by the board of public works and safety, shall not project into any public alley below the height of 16 feet above grade, nor project more than 36 inches into the public alley if the sign is located 16 feet or more above grade. 
(f)  Clearance from street. Signs and sign structures, as approved by the board of public works and safety, shall not protect more than two feet of the curbline off a street. 
(Code 1985, § 157.26; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Sec. 129-99. - Sign types. 
    All signs shall be erected as outlined in the Uniform Sign Code. 
(Code 1985, § 157.27; Ord. No. 3350, 1-15-1990) 
Chapter 133 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Subdivision control, IC 36-7-4-700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 133-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide minimum rules, regulations, and standards in order to achieve orderly development in the city through land subdivision; to provide for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing or planned streets; to promote the utilization of land to assure to the residents of the city the best possible environment; to cause land subdivision and resubdivision to be made in accordance with the zoning regulations; and to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. Any land which is improved or unimproved and which is to be divided into two or more lots for the purpose of sale, lease, or development, using varying types of financing methods, shall be subdivided. This chapter shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and development, conservation, protection, and proper use of land by adequate provision for circulation, utilities, and services. 
(Code 1985, § 158.02; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator. The designated administrator is the city planner or his designated representative. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets and any combination of boundary lines of public or institutionally owned lands, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, lakes, and other lines of demarcation. 
    Board means the city board of public works and safety. 
    Bond means any form of security, including cash, surety bond, or financial instrument of credit, as approved by the board of public works and safety, for the purpose of guaranteeing that improvements will be made in a subdivision according to the standards as adopted by the board. 
    Building setback lines means lines which are parallel to the lot lines in which no building may project closer to the lot lines. 
    Cemetery means an area set apart for and/or containing graves or tombs, and not bound by the regulations of this chapter. 
    Commission means the city plan commission. 
    Comprehensive plan means a plan for the physical development of the community, prepared and adopted by the plan commission, pursuant to state law, and including any part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to the plan, or parts thereof. 
    Crosswalk means a right-of-way dedicated to public pedestrian use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access between streets and sidewalks. 
    Developer means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided, or his representative. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner to the general public, a public utility, a drainage district, or a private party for the use of land for a specifically stated purpose. 
    Flood protection regulations means chapter 121, as amended, which sets forth standards as recommended by the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Frontage means in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest street frontage dimension from the street. 
    Gradient means the slope of a lot, street, or other public right-of-way in terms of percentage. 
    Improvement means any permanent physical construction associated with subdivision and building site development. 
    Infrastructure means the fixed public works and facilities necessary in a community, such as, but not limited to, sewers, water systems, streets, sidewalks, street lights, fire hydrants, street name signs, and traffic control signs. 
    Interested parties means property owners within 300 feet of a proposed subdivision, the staff of the plan commission, and the subdivider. 
    Lot means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision of record or survey map for purposes of sales, leases, or separate use. The term "lot" includes the terms "parcel" and "tract." 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot, which fronts on two streets. 
    Major subdivision means any land, vacant or improved, which is subdivided into two or more lots for the purpose of sale, lease, or development, using varying types of financing methods, and includes construction of infrastructure that will be publicly or privately owned. 
    Minor subdivision means any land, vacant or improved, which is divided into two or more lots for the purpose of sale, lease, or development, using varying types of financing methods, and does not include construction of any infrastructure. 
    Model home means a dwelling unit used initially for display purposes, which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision. 
    Monument means any permanent marker used to identify the boundary lines of any lot, parcel, tract, street lines, or survey control point for streets. 
    Owner means any person, firm, association, syndicate, sole proprietorship, corporation, or any other legal entity having title to the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations. 
    Planned unit development means residential, commercial, or industrial development, or combination thereof, of a tract of land under single ownership or control according to an approved final site development plan. 
    Plat of subdivision means the drawing on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the plan commission for approval, and which, if approved, shall be submitted to the county recorder for filing. 
    Public utility company means a firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish or furnishing under regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communication, central antenna television, transportation, drainage, sewer, or water. 
    Registered engineer means an engineer who is licensed in compliance with the laws of this state. 
    Registered land surveyor means a surveyor who is licensed in compliance with the laws of this state. 
    Replat means the process of allowing for an adjustment of a lot line or lines and/or easements, as shown on a recorded subdivision, which may or may not affect any street layout, whether existing or proposed, and may or may not increase the total number of lots within the area proposed to be replatted. 
    Rerecording means the process allowing for an adjustment of an easement or easements, or correction of a drafting or typographical error, as shown on an approved and recorded subdivision, which does not affect the size or configuration of the lot in question. 
    Reserve strip means an area of land adjacent to a public right-of-way which is retained in ownership by an individual for the purpose of denying access to adjacent land. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other special public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the developer of the property on which the right-of-way is established. 
    Should means the act referred to is a preferred requirement. 
    Staff means the staff of the city plan commission. 
    Standards means a specific and detailed listing of materials and construction methods for subdivision improvements, standards of construction and design, and performance bond schedules as adopted by the board of public works and safety. 
    Street means a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way. The term "street" also includes the terms highway, parkway, road, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, lane, court, place, drive, trail, terrace, way, and other such terms. 
(1)  Arterial means those major streets which serve major centers of activity, have the highest traffic volume, and service a large geographic area. 
(2)  Collector means those streets which are used to carry traffic from local streets to arterials, including the principal entrance streets to a residential development and circulation streets within such developments; have a minimum of 60 feet of right-of-way, and are built to current board standards. 
(3)  Local means those streets used primarily for access to the abutting property; have a minimum of 50 feet of right-of-way and are built to current board standards. 
(4)  Service means streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, which provide access to abutting property and protection from through traffic, and have a minimum of 40 feet of right-of-way and are built to current board standards. 
(5)  Alley means minor ways which are used as a convenience primarily for public utility service at the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac means a short local or service street of not more than 600 feet in length having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround built to current board standards. 
    Subdivider means the owner, or duly authorized representative for the owner, of a piece of property either proposed for subdivision or an existing subdivision. 
    Subdivision means any land, vacant or improved, which is divided into two or more lots for the purpose of sale, lease, or development, using varying types of financing methods. These regulations do not apply to: 
(1)  The willing or unwilling sale of land as a result of legal condemnations as defined and allowed by state statutes. 
(2)  Widening of existing streets to conform to the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The acquisition of street rights-of-way by a public agency in conformance with the comprehensive plan. 
    Traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices placed or erected by authority of the board, the county department of highways, or the state department of highways for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
    Used or occupied includes the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Variance means a modification of the strict terms of the relevant regulations of this chapter where modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Variances in subdivision regulations are granted only by the plan commission as set forth in section 133-201. 
    Zoning regulations means chapter 137 of the municipal code of the city, as amended. 
(Code 1985, § 158.10; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3258, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 133-3. - Administrative authority. 
    The city plan commission, as established by virtue of Acts of 1947, Chapter 174, of the Indiana General Assembly, as amended, is established as the administrative agency for this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 158.03; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-4. - Interpretation. 
    In interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 158.04; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-5. - Effect of judgments. 
(a)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this chapter or amendments thereto to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter or amendment thereto, not specifically included in the judgment. 
(b)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter or amendments thereto to a particular subdivision, that judgment shall not affect the application of that provision to any other subdivision not specifically included in that judgment. 
(Code 1985, § 158.05; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-6. - Applicability; compliance. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the city as now or hereafter established, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  All lots in a recorded subdivision at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not be required to meet the regulations of this chapter. 
(2)  All recorded single lots described by metes and bounds at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not be required to meet the regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  No new subdivision, or replat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, shall be affected, nor shall any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facility in connection therewith be laid out, constructed, opened, or dedicated for public use or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  No lot shall be sold, nor shall an improvement location permit or a building permit to erect any building upon land be issued, unless and until a final plat has been approved and recorded, and until the infrastructure and improvements required by the city in connection therewith have been constructed or guaranteed by posting a performance bond or an irrevocable letter of credit with the board of public works and safety for 100 percent of the public infrastructure construction costs. However, if a new subdivision or subdivision replat has received preliminary plat approval, an improvement location permit and building permit may be issued for two model homes, provided that those homes shall not be occupied until the subdivision has been approved by the plan commission and recorded. 
(d)  All planned unit developments as adopted by the plan commission shall also be platted in accordance with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 158.06; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Sec. 133-7. - Minimum lot width and area. 
    All lots in a subdivision shall meet the zoning regulations of the district in which the use is permitted. 
(Code 1985, § 158.07; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-8. - Privately owned infrastructure to remain privately owned. 
    All privately owned infrastructure, including sewer, water, sidewalk, curb, roadway, and street light systems, shall remain in private ownership in perpetuity, unless the systems are built to current board of public works and safety standards or have been rebuilt to meet current board standards. The board may accept privately owned infrastructure as public infrastructure only if those facilities meet the current board standards. 
(Code 1985, § 158.08; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-9. - Financing of infrastructure costs. 
(a)  All infrastructure construction and dedication costs shall be financed by the person developing the subdivision, unless the state utility regulatory commission requires otherwise. The city and the municipal utilities shall not finance or pay for infrastructure construction and dedication costs unless the state regulatory commission requires otherwise. 
(b)  Infrastructure oversizing in anticipation of future new development outside the subdivision may be financed by the city and/or municipal utilities. 
(Code 1985, § 158.09; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-10. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $25.00 and not more than is prescribed by IC 36-1-3-8 as may be amended from time to time. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 158.99; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-11-133-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 133-41. - Conformance to zoning and flood protection regulations. 
    The subdivision shall conform to all regulations as set forth in the zoning regulations, chapter 137, as amended, and to all regulations as set forth in the flood protection regulations, chapter 121, as amended. 
(Code 1985, § 158.20; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-42. - Streets. 
(a)  Street rights-of-way and pavement widths shall adhere to the appropriate classification under the definition of streets in section 133-2, if the street is to become publicly owned. 
(b)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be correlated to existing and planned streets, existing topography, public safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. 
(c)  Local streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(d)  No new street shall have a name which duplicates or so nearly duplicates so as to be confused with any existing street within the city, unless the new street is to be an extension of an existing street. Continuous local and collector streets which have major directional changes may require a change in street name for each directional change. 
(Code 1985, § 158.21; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-43. - Alleys. 
    New alleys are prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 158.22; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-44. - Easements. 
    Easements centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary, and shall be 7.5 feet wide on both sides, unless the board of public works and safety approves an easement of no less than five feet wide on both sides of the property line. Easements shall be continuous to the street at the end of the block to connect with adjoining blocks in the shortest direct route. Easements on end lot lines shall be a minimum of ten feet wide. 
(Code 1985, § 158.23; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-45. - Electrical, communication, and central antenna television distribution lines. 
(a)  Underground installation is required in residential areas. 
(b)  Underground installation is recommended but not required in commercial and industrial areas. 
(Code 1985, § 158.24; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-46. - Blocks. 
(a)  The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots, except where double frontage on a major thoroughfare is required. 
(b)  In the event of a block length exceeding 1,000 feet, a crosswalk easement of not less then ten feet in width may be required near center and entirely across any block, should it be determined that pedestrian access to a school will be impeded. Crosswalks shall be constructed according to sidewalk standards as adopted by the board of public works and safety, and dedicated to the public use. 
(Code 1985, § 158.25; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-47. - Lots. 
(a)  Lot sizes shall be platted according to the minimum regulations as set forth in the zoning regulations, chapter 137, as amended. 
(b)  Every lot shall abut and front on a public or private street. 
(c)  Lots should be consecutively numbered, and addresses shall be assigned by the city plan commission, or its designated representative, in accordance with the uniform address grid system of the city. 
(d)  Lot closure calculations shall be provided to the city planner or city engineer. 
(Code 1985, § 158.26; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Sec. 133-48. - Drainage. 
    So as not to negatively affect surrounding property owners, storm runoff from the developed subdivided land should not be greater than the natural runoff of the undeveloped land. Runoff calculations to support design shall be required. 
(Code 1985, § 158.27; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-49-133-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NEW SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 133-70. - Consultation required. 
    Prior to the submission of an application for a new subdivision, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and consult with the city planner. The consultation will foster an understanding between the subdivider and the staff which will help alleviate future misunderstandings and reduce the possibility of extensive revisions. If the preliminary plat meets the provisions of this chapter, the city planner shall recommend to the subdivider that an application for new subdivision be submitted to the plan commission. 
(Code 1985, § 158.30; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-71. - Planned unit development encouraged. 
    The imaginative and creative use of planned unit developments is encouraged. The subdivision standards as set forth in this chapter shall not be altered by a planned unit development ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 158.31; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-72. - Name of subdivision. 
    To avoid confusion, the name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 158.32; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-73. - Preliminary plat contents. 
    The drawing shall include: 
(1)  A properly drafted drawing of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(2)  The name of the subdivision. 
(3)  North arrow and graphic scale. 
(4)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision, all existing easements, and property lines in exact dimensions. 
(5)  Location, width, and names of prior subdivided streets and lots, and shall show all previously recorded streets and lots in dotted lines. 
(6)  Layout, bearings, and dimensions of the proposed lots and streets. 
(7)  Parcels to be dedicated for the public use. 
(8)  Existing topographic contours at vertical intervals of five feet or less. 
(9)  The layout of streets, curbs, and sidewalks in the area 300 feet distant from and parallel to the boundary of the proposed subdivision. 
(10)  A conceptual subdivision plan for adjacent property owned by the subdivider but not included as part of the proposed subdivision application at hand. 
(11)  Preliminary plans for street, curb, sidewalk, and sewer and water installation. 
(12)  Name, address and signature of the property owner. 
(Code 1985, § 158.33; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3683, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 133-74. - Procedures for preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  Within one working day after filing of the plat of subdivision and the requisite fees with the staff, the staff shall refer the prints to the electric department, the water department, the engineering department, the fire department, the public utility companies, and the department of natural resources, if the subdivision lies within a designated flood hazard area as defined in the flood protection regulations contained in chapter 121. 
(b)  The staff of each agency shall review the proposed plat of subdivision and submit a report to the plan commission staff. 
(c)  The staff shall incorporate these reports into the site analysis report and make recommendation to the commission. 
(d)  If the subdivision complies with the regulations of this chapter, the staff shall place the subdivision on the agenda of the first available meeting of the commission for public hearing. 
(e)  The staff shall then notify the subdivider in writing of the time, date, and place of the commission hearing. 
(f)  The staff shall notify all property owners within 300 feet of the edge of the subdivision of the time, date, and place of the commission hearing. 
(g)  The staff shall place a legal notice, at least ten days prior to the hearing, in a local newspaper of general circulation, stating the time, place, and date of the hearing, a legal description and a common description of the location of the subdivision. Notification shall be on a form as prescribed by the commission and in a method prescribed by IC 5-3-1-2. 
(h)  Commission action. 
(1)  If, after the public hearing, the commission finds that the subdivision complies with all regulations as set forth in this chapter, the commission shall approve the subdivision with or without modifications, and make written findings of fact which shall include the modifications and conditions imposed. 
(2)  If, after the public hearing, the commission finds that the subdivision does not comply with all standards regarding approval of subdivisions, the commission shall deny approval of the subdivision and make written findings of fact and decision which set forth its reasons for disapproval. The staff shall then release the original drawing to the subdivider. 
(i)  Preliminary approval of a subdivision shall be effective indefinitely. 
(Code 1985, § 158.34; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-75. - Preliminary plat site analysis by staff. 
    The following shall be used as a basis for staff site analysis and recommendation: 
(1)  The drawing requirements as set forth in section 133-73. 
(2)  Natural features such as wooded areas, swamps, wetlands, streams, and natural drainage courses. 
(3)  Existing public utilities and capacities. 
(4)  The comprehensive plan. 
(5)  The zoning regulations. 
(6)  The flood protection regulations. 
(7)  The property list showing names and addresses of property owners within 300 feet of the edges of the proposed subdivision, as provided by the subdivider. 
(8)  A completed application form, letter to the plan commission, stating that the subdivider is the owner or agent for the owner of the land, and/or a copy of a purchase agreement. 
(9)  The appropriate application fees as prescribed by the commission. 
(Code 1985, § 158.35; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-76. - Final plat contents. 
(a)  An original ink drawing on not less than 81/2-inch by 14-inch vellum, linen, or Mylar film at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, with six prints of the drawing. A one-inch border shall be incorporated into the drawing. 
(b)  The drawing shall show: 
(1)  Name of subdivision. 
(2)  Location of subdivision by section, range, township, and boundary legal description. 
(3)  Name and address of subdivider. 
(4)  Name, address, seal, and signature of the registered surveyor preparing the subdivision. 
(5)  Scale, graphic bar scale, north arrow, and date. 
(6)  Boundary line of proposed subdivision, all existing easements and property lines in exact dimensions of feet and hundredths thereof; all boundary lines shall have length and bearing designated on the plat. 
(7)  Location, width, and names of prior subdivided streets and lots in the proposed subdivision, and showing all previously recorded streets and lots in dotted lines on the preliminary submittal. 
(8)  Layout and dimensions of proposed lots to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. 
(9)  Layout and elevations of proposed streets, which include the classification of each street, street names, street widths, walkways, crosswalks, and easements. 
(10)  Parcels of land to be dedicated for public use shall be shown and labeled as to use. 
(11)  Dimensioned building setback lines. 
(12)  Vertical control data which shall be based on United States Geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum. 
(13)  An area four inches vertical by nine inches horizontal, within which the plan commission shall affix its certificate of approval. 
(14)  Name, address and signature of the property owner. 
(Code 1985, § 158.36; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3683, 5-3-1993) 
Sec. 133-77. - Procedures for final plat approval. 
(a)  Within one working day after the filing of the final plat and the requisite fees with the staff, the staff shall place the subdivision on the agenda of the first available meeting of the plan commission. 
(b)  Public hearing is not required. 
(c)  Commission action. 
(1)  If the commission finds that the final plat, together with the modifications or conditions, complies with all regulations as set forth in this chapter, the commission shall approve the final plat. The staff shall then provide the subdivider with the original drawings with the commission's seal affixed thereto after the drawing has been recorded. 
(2)  After the subdivision has been recorded, the staff shall distribute copies to the county assessor, county surveyor, county health department, the appropriate township assessor, the city engineer and city municipal utilities. 
(3)  If the commission finds that the final plat together with the modifications or conditions does not comply with all regulations as set forth in this chapter, the commission shall deny approval of the final plat and make written findings of fact and decision which set forth its reasons for disapproval. The staff shall then release the original drawing to the subdivider. 
(Code 1985, § 158.37; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-78. - Final plat site analysis by staff. 
    The following shall be used as a basis for staff site analysis and recommendation: 
(1)  The approved preliminary plat with modifications and conditions. 
(2)  The drawing requirements as set forth in section 133-76. 
(3)  The appropriate application fees as prescribed by the plan commission. 
(Code 1985, § 158.38; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-79. - Recording. 
    Within one week of plan commission approval of the final plat, the staff shall record the subdivision in the county recorder's office at the subdivider's expense. 
(Code 1985, § 158.39; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-80. - Final plans, deeds of easement, and deeds of dedication. 
    Final engineering plans and cross-sections for public streets, sewers, water lines, and electric lines shall be submitted to the board of public works and safety for approval and acceptance. Deeds of easement and deeds of dedication shall be submitted to the board for approval and acceptance. 
(Code 1985, § 158.40; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-81-133-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION REPLATS 

Sec. 133-104. - Consultation required. 
    In order to make substantial changes to a previously approved subdivision, a subdivision replat may be submitted to the plan commission. Prior to the submission of an application for a subdivision replat, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and consult with the city planner. The consultation will foster an understanding between the subdivider and the staff which will help to alleviate future misunderstandings and reduce the possibility of extensive revisions. If the preliminary plat meets the provisions of this chapter, the city planner shall recommend to the subdivider that an application for subdivision replat be submitted to the commission. 
(Code 1985, § 158.50; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-105. - Planned unit development encouraged. 
    The imaginative and creative use of planned unit developments is encouraged. The subdivision standards as set forth in this chapter shall not be altered by a planned unit development ordinance. 
(Code 1985, § 158.51; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-106. - Name of subdivision. 
    The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision within the city. 
(Code 1985, § 158.52; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-107. - Preliminary plat contents. 
    Plat approval shall be in conformance with section 133-73. 
(Code 1985, § 158.53; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-108. - Procedures for preliminary plat approval. 
    Procedures shall be in conformance with section 133-74. 
(Code 1985, § 158.54; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-109. - Preliminary plat site analysis by staff. 
    Site analysis shall be made in conformance with section 133-75. 
(Code 1985, § 158.55; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-110. - Final plat contents. 
    The drawing shall be prepared in conformance with section 133-76. 
(Code 1985, § 158.56; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-111. - Procedures for final plat approval. 
    Procedures shall be in conformance with section 133-77. 
(Code 1985, § 158.57; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-112. - Final plat site analysis by staff. 
    Site analysis shall be made in conformance with section 133-78. 
(Code 1985, § 158.58; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-113. - Recording. 
    Recording shall be made in conformance with section 133-79. 
(Code 1985, § 158.59; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-114. - Final plans, deeds of easement, and deeds of dedication. 
    Approval and acceptance shall be in conformance with section 133-80. 
(Code 1985, § 158.60; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-115-133-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBDIVISION RERECORDINGS 

Sec. 133-142. - Application. 
(a)  Subdivision rerecording may be submitted at the convenience of the subdivider in order to correct minor technical errors to a previously recorded subdivision or subdivision replat. The name of the subdivision shall not be altered. 
(b)  The submission shall include: 
(1)  The original drawing and six copies of the recorded subdivision with a revision date drafted onto the original plat. 
(2)  A written comment in detailed form of the technical changes performed. 
(3)  The seal and certification of the surveyor preparing the drawing changes. 
(4)  Proof of ownership. 
(5)  The applicable fee as prescribed by the plan commission. 
(Code 1985, § 158.70; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-143. - Procedures for approval. 
(a)  After filing, the staff may, if necessary, refer the prints of the subdivision to the appropriate agencies as listed in section 133-74. The agencies shall review the subdivision and submit a report to the staff. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the reports from those agencies, the staff shall review the subdivision. 
(c)  If the staff finds that the subdivision complies with all regulations as set forth in this chapter, the plan commission president shall sign the plat. The staff shall then provide the subdivider with the original drawing with the commission's seal affixed thereto after the drawing has been rerecorded. 
(d)  If the staff finds that the subdivision does not comply with all standards regarding approval of subdivisions, the commission president shall not sign the plat. The staff shall then release the original drawing to the subdivider. 
(Code 1985, § 158.71; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-144. - Rerecording. 
    Within one week of staff approval and signature by the commission president, the staff shall rerecord the subdivision in the county recorder's office at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Code 1985, § 158.72; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-145-133-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 133-172. - Standards for infrastructure construction, inspection, and acceptance. 
(a)  All required public infrastructure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the latest standards as adopted by the board of public works and safety. 
(b)  Construction of public infrastructure shall commence only after construction documents have been approved and accepted by the board of public works and safety. 
(c)  Inspection of the construction of all required public infrastructure shall be approved by the city engineer, and then accepted by the board. 
(d)  As-built plans for public infrastructure shall be accepted and approved by the board before the board shall accept the public infrastructure. 
(e)  A one-year maintenance bond shall be submitted to the board for ten percent of the market value of the public infrastructure. The maintenance bond shall take effect on the date the board accepts the public infrastructure. 
(Code 1985, § 158.80; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-173. - Required improvements. 
(a)  All lot corners shall be marked by a monument constructed of ferrous pipe or bar at least 24 inches in length and one-half inch in diameter. The top of the monument is to be set level with the established grade of the ground. 
(b)  Proper and adequate provision shall be made by the subdivider for drainage to provide for the disposal of stormwater. The developer shall sod all drainage swales that exceed a two percent gradient. The city engineer shall review the subdivision plans in order to assist in determining the location, capacity, and extent of drainage swales. 
(c)  The subdivision shall be provided with a complete public or private sewer and water system. If the sewer system is to become part of the public system, the work shall be done in conformance with plans, profiles, and specifications prepared by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, and all work shall meet the construction standards as adopted by the board and the state board of health prior to the commencement of construction. 
(d)  If publicly owned sidewalks are to be constructed, the sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of the street in conformance with standards as adopted by the board. The board may temporarily waive construction of public sidewalks in order to prevent damage to the sidewalks during construction of the buildings in the subdivision. 
(e)  If publicly owned street lights are to be installed, the system shall be installed with underground wiring and shall be constructed in accordance with standards as adopted by the board. 
(f)  Trees of a variety approved by the board may be planted in the tree lawn if the street will be publicly owned. Trees shall be spaced no closer than 40 feet apart. The trees shall be no less than two inches in caliper diameter, and shall be located so as not to interfere with public lighting once the trees are mature. 
(g)  If streets are to become publicly owned, they shall be constructed according to specifications and profiles designed by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, and shall meet the latest standards as approved by the board. Horizontal and vertical alignment shall be reviewed with the city engineer. 
(h)  If streets are to become publicly owned, curbs and gutters shall be constructed according to specifications and profiles designed by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor and meeting the latest standards as approved by the board. Privately owned streets shall be paved. 
(Code 1985, § 158.81; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Secs. 133-174-133-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 133-200. - Amendments. 
    The plan commission may from time to time recommend changes to this chapter to the common council, in accordance with state statutes. 
(Code 1985, § 158.90; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-201. - Variances. 
(a)  Where the plan commission finds that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, the commission may approve variances to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that variances shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; and further provided the commission shall not approve variances unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that: 
(1)  Granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property. 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property. 
(3)  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out. 
(b)  Financial hardship does not constitute grounds for a variance. 
(c)  The variance shall not in any manner vary the regulations of the zoning regulations, the flood control regulations, the publicly owned infrastructure construction standards as adopted by the board, or the tree variety standards as adopted by the board. 
(d)  A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the same time the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by the staff. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. 
(e)  It is not within the jurisdiction of the board of zoning appeals to grant variances to the subdivision regulations. 
(Code 1985, § 158.91; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-202. - Appeals. 
(a)  Every decision of the plan commission shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the commission may present to the circuit or superior court of the county a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the entry of the decision of the commission that is being challenged. 
(Code 1985, § 158.92; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-203. - Notice of violation. 
    When written notice of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has been served by the city planner or his designated representative on the property owner, agent, occupant, contractor, or builder, the violation shall be discontinued immediately. 
(Code 1985, § 158.93; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Sec. 133-204. - Right of injunction. 
    The city planner or his designated representative may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court or superior court of the county to restrain an individual from violating the provisions of this chapter, and may also institute a suit for a mandatory injunction directing the removal of any structure or improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 158.94; Ord. No. 3065, 7-20-1987) 
Chapter 137 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning ordinance, IC 36-7-4-601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 137-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for commerce, industry, residence, and for institutions and open spaces, or other specified uses; to regulate and limit the height and area of buildings and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards and open spaces; to regulate and limit density of population; for these purposes, to divide the city into districts, and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of those districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement; and imposing penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 159.001; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-2. - Preamble. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by Acts 1947, Chapter 174 of the State of Indiana, the acts amendatory thereto, in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial, and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; providing adequate light, air, and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provision of transportation, water, sewer, schools, recreation, and other public requirements; and by other means all in accordance with a comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1985, § 159.002; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-3. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of land or buildings, or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of the chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. 
(d)  The provisions in this chapter are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter, governing any subject matter in this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 159.004; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
    Access means the way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have adequate and suitable ingress and egress to and from a land use. 
    Accessory building or use . 
(1)  The term "accessory building or use" means one which: 
a.  Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; 
b.  Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served; 
c.  Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and 
d.  Is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot with the building or use served. 
(2)  The term "accessory building" or "accessory use" includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  A children's playhouse, garden house, gazebo, private greenhouse, and doghouse. 
b.  A garage, shed, or building for domestic storage. 
c.  Incinerators. 
d.  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with any retail service or business use, unless that storage is prohibited by the district regulations. 
e.  Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities, on the same lot or parcel of ground with those activities, unless that storage is prohibited by the district regulations. 
f.  A nonpaying guesthouse or rooms for guests within an accessory building, if those facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of occupants of the principal building and not for permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units. 
g.  Servants' quarters if part of an accessory garage, and solely for occupancy by a servant or household employee of the occupants of the principal dwelling, and the family of that servant or employee. 
h.  Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and unloading facilities. 
i.  Signs, other than advertising signs as permitted and regulated in each district incorporated in this chapter. 
j.  Carports. 
k.  Boathouse, if not more than ten feet high as measured from normal water level. 
l.  Swimming pool, if private, being incidental to use by the owner and guests. 
m.  Public utility communication, electric, gas, water, and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment. 
n.  Athletic courts such as volleyball, softball, tennis, badminton and horseshoe. 
o.  Wood decks if detached from the principal building. 
p.  Antennas, including, but not limited to, AM, FM, UHF, VHF, CB, HAM, microwave, satellite dish, and all devices used for the reception of electronic communications of whatever nature. 
q.  Amateur radio antennas. 
    Adult bookstore means any establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines, other periodicals, videotapes, or motion pictures which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale, rental, or display of such material. 
    Adult business means and includes the following: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult mini motion picture theater; 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater; and 
(4)  Class B cabaret. 
    Adult care home means the legal residence of a person in which accommodation, board, care, supervision, instruction, and/or maintenance of adult people unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner of the residence is provided for any part of the day for two or more consecutive weeks; provided, however, that the number of adults so provided for does not exceed four; and the number of people employed on the premises, by the adult care home, shall not exceed one at any one specific time. All adult care homes shall be inspected annually by the fire department, building department, and health department for fire, structural, and health safety. The owner of an adult care home, upon passing inspections by the fire, building, and health departments, shall be registered and licensed by the controller's office. The city licensing fee of $75.00 shall be paid to the office of the city controller. Fees charged by the health department shall be paid directly to the health department. 
    Adult day care center means a commercial facility, other than an adult care home, which is used by a person to provide care and maintenance of adults, other than their own family for a part of the day for two or more consecutive weeks. 
    Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 150 or less persons, and predominantly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of more than 150 persons, and predominantly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. 
    Alley means a public right-of-way which affords only secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property, and which is not over 20 feet in width. 
    Amateur radio antennas means any system of electrical conductors designed to receive and transmit on amateur radio frequencies as described by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Amusement device means any mechanical or electrical device, which upon insertion of money, token slug, plate, disc or coin may be operated for use as a game, contests of skill or amusement, whether or not registering a score and which is neither a gambling device nor a device which tends to encourage gambling. This definition shall include, but not be limited to electronic video games, football game machines, basketball game machines, bowling game machines, shuffleboard game machines, card game machines, skill ball game machines, marble game machines, mechanical grab machines, or devices similar thereto under whatever game they may be indicated. This definition does not include jukeboxes, public telephones, or machines that sell consumable merchandise. 
    Antenna means any system of electrical conductors designed to receive communications from a broadcasting transmitter, transmitter relay, or a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
    Apartment means a suite of rooms in a two-family dwelling, duplex, apartment complex, apartment house, or commercial building, in which each suite is arranged, intended, and designed to be occupied as a residence of a single family or individual, and which has only one complete kitchen and at least one complete bathroom. 
    Apartment complex means two or more apartment houses which are built on the same parcel of land. 
    Apartment house means a building or structure arranged, intended, and designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, and each including its own separate kitchen and bathroom accommodations. Rowhouses shall be considered as an apartment house. 
    Assembly hall means a building or portion of a building used for the gathering together of 50 or more persons for such purposes as entertainment, amusement, drinking or dining. Assembly halls include, but are not limited to, auditoriums, clubs, lodges, community centers, gymnasiums, and places of worship. 
    Automobile body shop means a facility which provides collision repair services, including body frame straightening, replacement of damaged parts and painting. 
    Automobile detailing means a facility which provides automobile-related services such as applying paint protectors, interior and exterior cleaning and polishing as well as the installation of after-market accessories such as tinting, auto alarms, spoilers, sunroofs, headlight covers, and similar items. Engine degreasing or similar automobile cleaning services shall not be included under this definition. 
    Automobile maintenance facility (quick service) means a facility which provides engine tune-ups and servicing of brakes, air conditioning, exhaust systems, oil change or lubrication; wheel alignment or balancing; or similar servicing, rebuilding or repairs that normally do not require significant disassembly of automobiles or the overnight storage of automobiles. 
    Automobile service shop means a facility which provides general repair, rebuilding or reconstruction of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair, overall painting or paint shop, steam cleaning or detailing. 
    Awning means a rooflike cover which projects from the wall of a building. 
    Balcony means a raised, railed platform projecting from the wall of a building. 
    Basement means a portion of the building located below the main story, partly underground, but having more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
    Bed and breakfast means a dwelling providing lodging with meals, and having accommodations for less than 25 guests. 
    Best practical technology means the best practical technology as defined by the state department of environmental management and/or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Beverage shop means a retail store which sells packaged alcoholic or packaged nonalcoholic beverages. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by any combination of the following: 
(1)  Streets. 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way, when located at or above ground level, but not including sidings or spurs in the same ownership as the zoning lot. 
(3)  Corporate boundary lines. 
(4)  Major natural features such as a river or lake. 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board of zoning appeals of the city. 
    Boiling point means the boiling point of a liquid at a pressure of 14.7 psia (pounds per square inch absolute) and as defined in the state fire prevention code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Branding establishment means any room or space where strike or draw branding is performed for compensation. Strike branding means a placement in, upon or under the skin of any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or other mark placed with the aid of a steel or sheet metal pattern that is warmed, then struck against the skin. Draw branding means a placement in, upon or under the skin of any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or other mark placed with the aid of steel surgical wire that is warmed and then used to draw upon the skin. 
    Buffer means an opaque fence, wall, earthen berm, or dense landscaping that moderates possible adverse impacts between two differing land uses. 
    Building means any structure designed or intended for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. When separated by party walls, without openings, from the ground up, each portion of a building, so separated, shall be deemed a separate building. 
    Building area means that portion of a lot remaining after required setbacks have been provided. 
    Building, attached, means a building which has any part of its exterior or bearing wall in common with another building or which is connected to another building by a roof. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade opposite the middle of the front wall of the building to the highest point of the roof. Whenever a building is located upon a terrace or slope, height may be measured from the average grade level of the building wall. 
    Building permit means a permit issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative for the erection or alteration of a building or structure. 
    Bulk storage tanks means storage tanks used for dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids or gases into smaller containers or for use in industrial processes and distributed to the process by closed circuit piping. Storage and use of fuel oil tanks and containers connected with oil-burning equipment as defined in the state fire prevention code are exempt. 
    Business means engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services. 
    Business school means a privately-owned school, not conducted by or under the sponsorship of a charitable organization, which teaches secretarial, bookkeeping, accounting, or other similar office or clerical skills. 
    Cabaret. 
(1)  Class A means any establishment, not including a class B cabaret, where persons congregate for the purpose of eating, drinking, dancing, or singing, and where musical or live entertainment is provided. 
(2)  Class B means any cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
    Campground means any tract of land used, designed, or designated to accommodate two or more camping parties, including cabins, tents, recreational vehicles, campers, or travel trailers. 
    Canopy means a rooflike cover which projects from the wall of a building. 
    Carport means a roofed structure designed and intended to shelter motor vehicles on residential property, with at least one of the four sides open to the weather. 
    Cellar means a portion of the building located below the main story, partly underground, but having more than half of its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative, authorizing occupancy of buildings or land under this chapter. 
    Child care home means a residential structure in which at least six children, not including the children for whom the provider is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian or other relative, at any time receive child care from a provider: 
(1)  While unattended by a parent, legal guardian or custodian; 
(2)  For regular compensation; and 
(3)  For more than four hours but less than 24 hours in each of ten consecutive days per year, excluding intervening Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
A child care home shall be allowed any combination of up to 16 fulltime and parttime children at any one time. A child for whom a provider of care in the child care home is a parent, stepparent, guardian, custodian or other relative, and is at least seven years of age, shall not be counted in determining whether the child care home is within the limit set forth in this definition. 
    Clinic for humans means a professional or medical office serving outpatients, and dealing with human physical, emotional, or psychological problems. 
    Clinic, medical, dental, or optical. See Clinic for humans. 
    Combustible liquid means a liquid having a flash point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit and as set forth in the state fire prevention code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Commercial means engaging in the purchase, sale, barter, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services. 
    Commercial storage means the storage of goods or materials for sale in a business located on the premises. 
    Commission means the plan commission of the city. 
    Community center. See Community recreational building. 
    Community recreational building means a building built to the commercial building codes, which includes one or more of the following facilities: meeting rooms, recreation rooms, dining rooms, kitchen facilities, or day nurseries; all for the common use of the residents of the development. 
    Comprehensive car care center means a building which shall be fully enclosed and include full-service carwash, detailing, and lube/oil change combined under one contiguous roof with all washing, drying, detailing and lube/oil change performed inside the fully enclosed building. The facility is to consist of no less than 1.5 acres of land and at least 50 spaces of vehicle queuing before the carwash entrance. The carwash conveyor is to begin and end no closer than 40 feet from the inside of the entrance and exit doors of the facility so as to avoid unattractive display of washing and drying equipment and to assure appearance quality. 
    Comprehensive plan means a composite, or portion thereof, of the written and mapped proposals and recommendations relative to the growth and development of the city as adopted by ordinance of the common council. 
    Compressed gas means gas or mixture of gases or liquids as defined in the state fire prevention code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Controlled uses means those uses of property which are recognized as having serious objectionable characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas; and shall include the following: 
(1)  Adult book store; 
(2)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(3)  Adult mini motion picture theater; 
(4)  Class A cabaret; 
(5)  Class B cabaret; 
(6)  Establishment for the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises; 
(7)  Pawnshop; and 
(8)  Public dance hall. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround. 
    Curb means a structure located on either edge of the roadway, but within the right-of-way line, which is designed to channel stormwater to drainage inlets. 
    Curb cut means a lowered curb level which allows motorized vehicular ingress to, and egress from, property. 
    Day care center means a commercial facility, other than a child care home, which is run by a person licensed by a department of the state to provide care and maintenance for any number of children, other than the person's own children and the children of close relatives, for a part of the day for two or more consecutive days. 
    Development plan means a specific final site plan for the development of real property and approved in accordance with section 137-35 final site plan approval, as may be amended from time to time. 
    District means a section of the city for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size, bulk, and density of buildings and land are herein established. 
    Drive-in restaurant means any establishment designed, constructed, altered, or used for the primary purpose of catering to those persons driving autos, where provisions are made for customers to drive across curb or sidewalk lines so as to be served food and beverages for consumption while seated in the auto on the drive-in restaurant premises. Inside restaurant facilities may be provided by drive-in restaurants. 
    Drive-through restaurant means any establishment wholly or partially designed, constructed, altered, or used for the purpose of catering to those persons driving automobiles, where provisions are made for customers to drive across curb or sidewalk lines so as to order and be served food or beverages while seated in the automobile; consumption takes place in the automobile on the drive-through restaurant premises or off the premises. Inside restaurant facilities may be provided by drive-through restaurants. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, duplex, means a building designed for occupancy by no more than two families, in which separate living quarters are arranged side by side. 
    Dwelling, multiple, means an apartment house designed for occupancy by more than two families. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for occupancy by no more than one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means an apartment house designed for occupancy by no more than two families, in which separate living quarters are arranged one over the other. 
    Easement means a portion or strip of land which is part of a lot or parcel, but which has been reserved for a specific use for access for persons, utilities, or services. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for the construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Family means one or more persons living in the same housekeeping accommodations. The term "family" also means one or more individuals occupying premises as a single household with single kitchen accommodations. 
    Fence means a structure partially or completely surrounding a part of or the whole of a lot, which is intended to prevent intrusion from without and straying from within the area controlled. 
    Filling station means a building or other structure used primarily for the storage and sale of gasoline or other motor fuels, and for any uses accessory thereto. 
(1)  The sale of lubricants, accessories, or supplies, the lubrication of motor vehicles, the minor adjustment or repair of motor vehicles, or the washing of motor vehicles are permitted accessory uses. 
(2)  A public parking lot or public parking garage is not a permitted accessory use. 
(3)  Uses permitted at a filling station do not include motor vehicle sales, major mechanical or body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in automotive service stations. 
(4)  An automotive service station is not a body shop. 
(5)  Aboveground storage tanks containing flammable liquids, LP gas and compressed gases for use as motor vehicle fuel and for uses other than motor vehicle fuels are permitted when constructed, installed and dispensed in accordance with the state fire prevention code and/or the National Fire Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Fire department means the fire department of the city. 
    Fixture means the assembly that houses the lamp or lamps, and can include all or some of the following parts: housing, mounting bracket or pole socket, lamp holder, ballast, reflector or mirror and/or refractor of lens. 
    Flammable liquid means any liquid having a flash point at or above 100 degrees Fahrenheit and as subdivided in the state fire prevention code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Flash point means the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives off vapors in sufficient concentrations for an ignitable mixture with air near the surface of the liquid and as defined in the state fire prevention code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Flood area ratio means the floor area of a building on a zoning lot divided by the area of the zoning lot, or, in the case of a planned unit development, by the net site area. The floor area ratio requirements set forth in each zoning district shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for the building. 
    Floodplain means land subject to inundation by the maximum flood of reasonable regional expectancy (100-year flood) as determined by the state department of natural resources, division of water. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the floodplain which are reasonably required to efficiently carry and discharge the floodwater of the river or stream, so designated by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
    Floodway fringe means that portion of a flood hazard area outside the limits of the floodway, so designated by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
    Fraternity, sorority means a building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or university or other recognized institution of higher learning, and when regulated by the institution. 
    Freestanding sign means any permanently installed sign which is supported wholly by a foundation, uprights, braces, or poles in the ground. 
    Frontage means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, the line separating the narrowest street frontage dimension from the street. 
    Game arcade means any establishment, owned and/or operated by a person, in which the principal business is to provide a location for the operation of amusement devices. 
    Garage, commercial, means any building or premises, except those defined herein as a private garage, used for the storage or servicing of vehicles. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building which is no greater than 24 feet by 30 feet and 720 square feet, which is used for storage of automobiles, and has at least one automobile access door. 
    Garage sale. See Rummage sales, private and Rummage sales, public. 
    Gas bulk storage and wholesale distributing means bulk storage tanks of flammable and combustible liquids, compressed gases or liquefied petroleum gas (LP gas) for business use, retail sale, wholesale, and/or wholesale distributing; and which tanks shall be installed in accordance with the state fire prevention code and/or the National Fire Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
    Glare means light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see and in extreme cases to cause momentary blindness. 
    Grade, established, means the elevation of a street grade in front of a property as fixed by the city engineer. 
    Greenbelt or buffer strip means a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Gross floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all the floors of all buildings on the lot, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating the buildings, including any area used for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes, but not including a basement or portion of a basement used for storage or housing of mechanical or central heating or air conditioning equipment, unfinished attics, garages, outside balconies, or any floor area within a building which is used for off-street parking. 
    Gross weight means the net weight of a vehicle plus the net design cargo weight from the manufacturer's specifications for the vehicle. 
    Group home means a residential facility licensed by a department of the state that provides residential services for not more than eight developmentally-disabled persons, and such staff, not to exceed two at any one time, as are necessary to adequately manage the home. 
    Half story means a story which is situated in a sloping roof; or a basement in which half of the vertical distance is below the established grade. 
    Hardwood trees includes oak, walnut, ash, hickory, beech, hard maple, sycamore, and birch trees. 
    Health facility. 
(1)  The term "health facility" means any building, structure, institution, or other place for the reception, accommodation, board, care, or treatment extending beyond a continuous 24-hour period in any week of five or more individuals in need or desire of such services by reason of physical or mental illness, infirmity, or impairment. 
(2)  For purposes of this chapter, the terms "health facility" and "adult care home" do not include the following uses: 
a.  In the case of reception and accommodation, board, care or treatment in a household or family, for compensation, of a person related by blood to the head of household or family (or to the spouse of the head of household or family) within the degree of consanguinity of first cousins, the premises in which the person received, boarded, accommodated, cared for, or treated do not constitute a health facility; 
b.  Hotels or motels when used as such; 
c.  Hospitals; 
d.  Day care centers; and 
e.  Residential facility for the developmentally disabled. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance, measured from the established grade opposite the middle of the front wall of the building to the highest point of the roof. Whenever a building is located upon a terrace or slope, height may be measured from the average grade level of the building wall. 
    Historic review board means the historic review board of the city. 
    Home occupation means an occupation or profession carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other than a nameplate of no more than one square foot in area that is flush-mounted to an outside wall. A home occupation is one in which no commodity is stored or sold on the premises; no person is employed there other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used, except such as is permissible for purely domestic or household purposes. A residential building shall not be structurally altered or physically altered in order to accommodate a home occupation. The exterior of a residential building shall not be painted, structurally altered, or physically altered to indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a residential dwelling. 
    Hospital means a facility in which patients are rendered medical or surgical care on an episodic basis with the standard provision of continuous 24-hour medical care on an inpatient basis. 
    Hospital, animal, means a medical facility for the treatment of domestic animals and birds. For purposes of this chapter, an animal hospital shall also be considered a veterinary clinic. 
    Hotel means a building designed or occupied as a temporary abode and where lodging is provided with or without meals for 25 or more guests; a building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests. 
    Improvement location permit means a permit issued by the city planner or his designated representative stating that the proposed erection, construction, enlargement, or moving of a building or structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Indirect light means direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off other surfaces. 
    Indoor shooting gallery means a building open to the general public wherein the shooting of firearms is permitted for the practice of marksmanship, except indoor shooting galleries maintained or operated by any police department, which are not available to the general public. 
    Industry means any use in which the major activity is the treatment, processing, rebuilding, repairing, or bulk storage of material, products, or items, and where the finished product is not acquired by the ultimate user on the premises. 
    Institution means a building or premises occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use. 
    Kennel means any lot or premises on which four or more animals, at least four months of age, are kept. 
    Lamp means the component of a luminaire that produces the actual light. 
    Light trespass means the shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Liquefied petroleum gas (LP gas) means any material which is composed predominantly of the following hydrocarbons or mixture of the following hydrocarbons: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes. 
    Loading space, off-street, means space logically and conveniently located for both pick-ups and deliveries, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in the computation of required off-street parking space. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one main building or use, together with its accessory buildings or uses, and including the open spaces required under these regulations. A lot shall be held under common ownership and shall be so recorded in the office of the county recorder. A lot may include contiguous parts of lots or a combination of more than one lot when contiguous to one another and used as one parcel. Open spaces necessary for compliance with these regulations for one building or use shall not be again counted as open space required for any other building or use. The word "lot" includes the words "parcel" and "tract." 
    Lot, corner, means a lot at the junction of two streets. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal difference between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot with frontage on one street. 
    Lot line means the property boundary lines of a lot. (See diagrams in the appendix to this chapter.). 
    Lot line, exterior side, means a lot line which is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line, which separates the longest street frontage dimension of a corner lot from the street. 
    Lot line, front, means, in the case of an interior lot, a lot line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, the lot line separating the narrowest street frontage of a lot from the street. 
    Lot line, interior side, means a lot line which is perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line, which separates two lots. 
    Lot line, rear, means a lot which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot of record no. means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map or plat of the subdivision having been recorded in the office of the county recorder, for which a deed has been recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
    Lot, through, means a lot having frontage on two parallel or two approximately parallel streets. 
    Luminaire means a complete lighting system and includes a lamp and a fixture. 
    Manufactured home means a residential dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more modules at a location other than the homesite, by assembly-line type production techniques. 
(1)  Manufactured home, type I. A manufactured home which is more than 23 feet wide, at least 950 square feet of occupied area, is installed on a permanent masonry foundation, meets the required aesthetic standards for roofing and siding, and exhibits stick-built single-family design characteristics. 
(2)  Manufactured home, type II. A manufactured home which does not meet one or more of the requirements for a type I manufactured home as defined in this section. 
(3)  Manufactured home, type III. A manufactured home which does not meet any of the requirements for a type I manufactured home as defined in this section. 
    Manufactured home park means a business which provides rented or leased space for the placement of type II and/or type III manufactured homes for residential purposes. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means a subdivision providing lots for sale for the placement of type II and/or type III manufactured homes for residential purposes. 
    Medical clinic means a professional or medical office serving outpatients and dealing with human physical, emotional, or psychological problems. 
    Mobile home. See Manufactured home . 
    Motel means a building designed or occupied as a temporary abode and where lodging is provided with or without meals for 25 or more guests. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is open to transient guests and catering primarily to the public traveling by vehicle. 
    Nonconforming means any building or land use which at the time of the passing of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or an amendment thereto does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming lot means a lot of record which does not conform to the lot area or lot width regulations of this chapter. 
    Noxious matter means offensive to the human senses. 
    Nursing facility means a facility licensed by the state and/or the United States for the accommodation, board, care, supervision, instruction and/or maintenance of five or more people. 
    Official zoning map means the official maps showing the location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter. The official zoning map, together with all the explanatory matter thereon and all amendments thereto, is adopted by reference and is a part of this chapter. The official zoning maps shall be quarter-section maps which are kept and maintained by the city planner or his designated representative. 
    Off-premises sign means any structure or part thereof on which lettered or pictorial matter is displayed for off-premises advertising purposes. 
    On-premises sign means any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, good, product, or service located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained; also known as appurtenant or accessory signs. 
    Open space means the portion of the lot that is landscaped or that is usable and maintained for recreational purposes, including lawns and patios. 
    Outdoor lighting means the illumination of an outside area or object by any manmade device located outdoors that produces light by any means. 
    Parking lot means a durable, paved parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces for vehicles for compensation or otherwise. 
    Parking space means a durable, paved, surfaced area enclosed in a principal building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed, which is sufficient in size to store one standard automobile, and which comprises an area of not less than 180 square feet. 
    Pavement means a uniform, hard, and durable material composed of cementations concrete or asphaltic concrete. 
    Plan commission means the plan commission of the city. 
    Planned unit development (PUD) means a residential, commercial, or industrial development unit, or combination thereof, of a tract of land under single ownership or management, according to an approved final site development plan. 
    Plot means a parcel of land occupied or suitable for occupancy by one main building or use, together with its accessory buildings or uses, and including the open spaces required under these regulations. A lot shall be held under common ownership and shall be so recorded in the office of the county recorder. A lot may include contiguous parts of lots or a combination of more than one lot when contiguous to one another and used as one parcel. Open spaces necessary for compliance with these regulations for one building or use shall not be again counted as open space required for any other building or use. 
    Pool hall or billiard hall means any establishment, the principal business of which is to provide a location for individuals to engage in the games or practice of the game of pool, billiards, or similar games played on a pool table or a billiard table. 
    Porch means a roofed-over structure projecting out from the wall of a principal structure and open to the weather. 
    Principal use means the main use of a building, distinguished from an accessory building or accessory use. 
    Professional office means an office used in the practice of a profession. 
    Public right-of-way means land which is subject to use by the general public for general transportation purposes or conveyance of utilities, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys, boulevards, highways and roads, and other easements and rights-of-way, whether or not, in fact, improved or actually used for such purposes. 
    Public utility means any person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board, or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public natural gas, steam, electricity, sewage, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water. 
    Recreational vehicle includes boats, motor homes, travel trailers, campers, and other similar items designed and intended specifically for temporary living such as travelling, camping, and vacationing, whether self-propelled or towed. All recreational vehicles shall be stored in the rear yard area in all zoning districts, and shall not be used for residential purposes. 
    Right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot and a right-of-way. 
    Rummage sales, private, means a temporary sale of used clothing or household items conducted only by the immediate members of one or two families, in a residence, private garage, porch, or yard. 
    Rummage sales, public, means a temporary sale, conducted by a nonprofit organization such as a church or club, where the members of the group bring articles or items to a central building to be sold to raise money for use by the organization. 
    Salvage material storage yard means an open-air lot where any solid waste, salvage metals, salvage electrical, plumbing, heating, or air conditioning equipment, salvage materials, house or building salvage materials, salvaged structural steel, vehicles in an inoperable condition, vehicle parts, and salvaged machinery is stored, bought, sold, exchanged, baled, cleaned, or processed. 
    Scarifying establishment means any room or space where scarifying is performed for compensation. Scarifying means a placement in, upon or under the skin of any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or other mark placed with the aid of a surgical scalpel or other instruments. 
    School means an elementary school, middle school, high school, college, or university. 
    Screening means a berm, hedge, fence, or wall, or any combination thereof, used to reduce visual and audible effects of adjoining uses. 
    Self-service storage facility, mini storage means a building consisting of individual, compartmentalized, self-contained and controlled-access stalls or lockers of various sizes that are leased or owned for the storage of business or household goods. 
    Setback line means lines which are parallel to the lot lines, in which no building may project closer to the lot lines. (See diagrams in the appendix to this chapter.) 
    Setback line, exterior side, means the minimum horizontal distance between the exterior side lot line and the facia board or parapet of the side wall of a building, excluding open steps and stoops. 
    Setback line, front, means the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the facia board or parapet of the side wall of a building, excluding open steps and stoops. 
    Setback line, interior side, means the minimum horizontal distance between the interior side lot line and the facia board or parapet of the side wall of a building, excluding open steps and stoops. 
    Setback line, rear, means the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the facia board or parapet of the rear wall of a building, excluding open steps and stoops. 
    Shopping center means a group of three or more contiguous stores or buildings which are planned and developed, owned, or managed as a unit, with off-street parking and loading provided on the premises. 
    Should indicates a preferred requirement. 
    Sign means a name, identification, description, display, or illumination which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building (including window area), structure, or land which is in view of the general public and which directs attention to a person, place, commodity, activity, institution, organization, or business. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes the following: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
    Story means that portion of a building between the surfaces of a floor and the surface of the floor above, and, if there is no floor above, to the ceiling above. 
    Story, half, means a story which is situated in a sloping roof; or a basement in which half of the vertical distance is below the established grade. 
    Street means a public right-of-way other than an alley. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure means an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. Advertising signs, billboards, backstops, tennis courts, antennas, spires, belfries, cupolas, water towers and tanks, chimneys, ventilators, swimming pools, and other appurtenances shall be included in this definition. 
    Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, selling immediately or in the future. 
    Swimming pool means a structure built up as an artificial or semiartificial basin or tank, including all appurtenant equipment and facilities, for the purpose of impounding water to a depth of more than 21/2 feet for the immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings. 
    Tattoo establishment means any room or space where tattoing is performed for compensation. 
    Tattooing means a placement in human tissue of any indelible design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or other mark placed with the aid of needles or other instrument; or any design, letter, scroll, figure or symbol done by scarring upon or under the skin. 
    Tavern means a public establishment where food is sold and served, but where the principal business is the selling and serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Temporary means a period of time less than or equal to 365 consecutive days. 
    Temporary building means a building which is used by a contractor during the construction or reconstruction of a principal building, and which is located on the same lot as the principal building under construction or reconstruction. 
    Toxic materials means those pollutants or combinations of pollutants, including disease-causing agents as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency and/or the state, which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information available, cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunction in reproduction), or physical deformations in those organisms or their offspring. 
    Trade school means a privately-owned school not conducted by or under the sponsorship of an organization, which teaches industrial or technical arts. 
    Truck terminal means any place where trucks are stored, serviced, or dispatched, or where freight is brought and dispatched by truck. 
    Used or occupied includes the words, "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Variance means a variation of the use, lot size, or width requirements, yard requirements, height restrictions, sign regulations, parking and loading requirements, or other development standards from those set forth in this chapter, granted by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, where strict enforcement of the terms of this chapter would create undue hardship, owing to the unique characteristics of the property for which the variance is sought. 
    Vehicle means any device used for carrying passengers, goods, or equipment. 
    Vehicle wrecking yard means any place where two or more motor vehicles not in running condition or otherwise legally operable on public ways, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building, or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, including farm machinery stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition. 
    Vehicles sales lot means any premises where three or more motor vehicles are offered for sale or sold during any calendar year. 
    Yard means an open space area between the lot lines and the required setback lines. (See diagrams in the appendix to this chapter.). 
    Yard, exterior side, means an open space area between the exterior side lot line and the required exterior side building setback line, extending between the front building setback line and the rear building setback line. 
    Yard, front, means an open space area between the front lot line and the required front building setback line, extending across the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, interior side, means an open space area between the interior side lot line and the required interior side building setback line, extending between the front building setback line and the rear building setback line. 
    Yard, rear, means an open space area between the rear lot line and the required rear building setback line, extending across the full width of the lot. 
    Yard sale. See Rummage sales, private and Rummage sales, public. 
    Zone means a section of the city for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size, bulk, and density of buildings and land are herein established. 
    Zone map. See Official zoning map. 
(Code 1985, § 159.012; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3160, 5-6-1988; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3614, 8-3-1992; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3725, 8-2-1993; Ord. No. 3838, 6-20-1994; Ord. No. 3934, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 4098, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 4170, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4303, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4401, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 137-5. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All buildings or structures erected hereafter, all uses of land, buildings, or structures established hereafter, all structural alteration, enlargement, or relocation of existing buildings or structures occurring hereafter, shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which the buildings, structures, uses, or land shall be located. 
(b)  Where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, that building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further may, upon completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter, if applicable, to the provisions herein for nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses. 
(Code 1985, § 159.006; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-6. - Establishment and control. 
(a)  New uses. In all districts, all buildings or structures erected hereafter, all uses of land, buildings, or structures established hereafter, all structural alteration, enlargement, or relocation of existing buildings or structures occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which the buildings, structures, uses, or land shall be located, unless a variance is granted by the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  Existing uses. In all districts, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the existing use of any existing lot, building, or other structure may be continued, changed, enlarged or extended, reconstructed, or relocated only in accordance with all applicable regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 159.007; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Secs. 137-7-137-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 137-35. - Final site plan approval. 
(a)  Applications for final site plan approval of all new structures in all zoning districts shall adhere to the following criteria and approval process, with the exception of the following structures and districts: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or duplex dwellings; 
(3)  Detached single-family type II and III manufactured dwellings; 
(4)  Accessory buildings or uses; 
(5)  The S-2 planned unit development district; 
(6)  New paved parking lots or new additions to existing paved lots with an area not to exceed 9,600 square feet in all zoning districts; 
(7)  New additions with an area of 7,500 square feet or less if the existing structure is 15,000 square feet or less in all industrial districts; and 
(8)  New additions to existing structures if the area of the addition is: 
a.  50,000 square feet or less; or 
b.  Ten percent or less of the area of the existing structures. 
Subsection (a)(8)a of this section shall only be applicable to the multiple-family residential district, the extensive open space and public use district, all commercial districts, and all industrial districts. 
(b)  In order to decrease time delays for certain projects, applications for final site plan approval for the following listed structures shall not be required to be filed with the plan commission but shall be submitted to the city planner for administrative review. The final site plan shall include the written and graphic information listed in subsections (c)(1) through (15) and (d)(1) through (4) of this section. If the final site plan adheres to those written and graphic information requirements, the city planner shall approve the final site plan and shall issue an improvement location permit. All administrative approvals shall be reported by memorandum to the plan commission at the next regularly scheduled plan commission meeting. The applicant may seek final site plan approval from the plan commission, but the decision rests solely with the applicant. The following is a list of structures that shall adhere to this approval. 
(1)  New structures of 8,000 square feet or less in the C-1 general commercial district, C-3 city center commercial district, C-5 neighborhood commercial district, and C-6 linear office commercial district. 
(2)  New structures of 15,000 square feet or less in all industrial districts. 
(3)  New additions to existing structures if the area of the addition is greater than 50,000 square feet and less than or equal to 100,000 square feet in the multiple-family district, the extensive open space and public use district, all commercial districts, and all industrial districts. 
(c)  All applications shall be submitted to the plan commission and shall be accompanied by a site plan with the following written and graphic information required. 
(1)  Current and correct description of property. 
a.  Site plan drawings must be to scale not less than 1 inch = 100 feet and submitted in standard drawing format of not less than 18 inches by 24 inches or greater than 30 inches by 42 inches. 
b.  Site plan drawings must show the following information. 
1.  Property boundary lines with dimensions, dimension setback lines, street rights-of-way lines, and any known existing easements. 
2.  Vicinity map showing surrounding streets. 
3.  Location, size and other pertinent data of all proposed improvements, including location and size of buildings, parking and drives, open areas, screening/fencing, and landscaping. 
4.  Tabulated land use data, including at least: 
(i)  Land coverage. 
A.  Buildings. 
B.  Parking and drives. 
C.  Open space. 
(ii)  Parking ratio. 
5.  Name, address and telephone number of property owner. 
6.  Name, address and telephone number of person preparing site plan drawing. 
(2)  The documented height, area, and developmental standards as required by the pertinent zoning district. 
(3)  A statement detailing the location, size, and material to be used for both sanitary sewer disposal and water supply. 
(4)  A storm drainage system designed to retain all stormwater on site, with a minimum storage capacity based on a 100-year storm frequency, 24-hour duration with post-developmental discharge not exceeding undeveloped discharge and time of travel. In the event a natural waterway is accessible to the site as a stormwater outlet and all approvals are obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies, a ten-year undeveloped release rate will be allowed with the greatest storage volume of the 100-year storm iteration being satisfied in the stormwater management design. 
(5)  The location, legal description, and legal documents of all rights-of-way or utility easements to be dedicated to the city. 
(6)  Locations and dimensions of proposed curb cuts, driveways, private entrances, acceleration/deceleration lanes, passing blisters and documentation that the curb cut, driveway, private entrances, acceleration/deceleration lanes, and passing blisters shall be constructed according to section 54-19, as may be amended from time to time. 
(7)  Plans, profiles, and typical sections of required service roads, passing blisters, or acceleration/deceleration lanes. 
(8)  Location and description of any traffic hazard or existing curb cut located on either side of the roadway within 100 feet of the property line of the subject property. 
(9)  Location and description of all publicly-owned fire hydrants, storm inlets, utility poles, and the like that are located on the proposed site or within 100 feet of the property line of the subject property. 
(10)  Location of existing and proposed plant materials and landscaping. 
(11)  A uniform grid of existing and finish grade elevations and contours based on U.S.G.S. sea level datum for all parcels and/or lots. 
(12)  Delineation of all phases of proposed developments. 
(13)  Building facade rendering, in order to assure that the building design and the type of construction shall reasonably relate to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(14)  Payment of filing fees as prescribed by the plan commission. 
(15)  Nine copies of the site plan shall be filed. 
(16)  All final site plans shall meet the provisions of the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  The department of city planning staff shall distribute the site plan to the following agencies and in accordance with the following. 
(1)  Fire protection information must be approved in writing by the division of fire prevention in the following manner: 
a.  Discuss with the division of fire prevention requirements for fire protection; 
b.  Determine whether any new fire hydrants are required; and 
c.  Determine whether additional water main capacity is required. 
(2)  Water service information must be approved in writing by the city water department in the following manner: 
a.  Discuss with the city water department requirements for water service; 
b.  Determine whether existing, city-owned water mains have adequate capacity to handle the development's load; 
c.  Determine if the city will require the developer to oversize a new water line extension; and 
d.  Determine whether existing easements are adequate to handle the new main or whether new dedicated easements will be required; 
e.  If the new main will be deeded to the city, as-built plans shall be provided if constructed by a private contractor. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer service information must be approved in writing by the department of city engineering in the following manner: 
a.  Discuss with the department of city engineering requirements for service, including tap-in fees and applicable land improvement charges; 
b.  Determine that existing city-owned sewers have adequate capacity to handle the development's load by submission of information on the projected volume of waste to be generated by proposed project; 
c.  Determine whether the city will require the developer to oversize a new sanitary sewer extension; 
d.  Discuss whether existing easements are adequate to handle the new sewer or whether new dedicated easements will be required; 
e.  Submit as-built plans and infiltration/exfiltration and deflection test results, acceptable to the city engineer, for all sanitary sewers; and 
f.  Obtain the required state department of environmental management permits prior to commencing construction of sanitary sewers. 
(4)  Electrical service information must be approved in writing by the electric department in the following manner: 
a.  Discuss with the electric department requirements for electric service; 
b.  Determine whether existing city-owned electric lines have adequate capacity to handle the development's load; 
c.  Determine if the city will require the developer to oversize a new electric line extension; and 
d.  Discuss whether existing easements are adequate to handle new lines or whether new dedicated easements will be required. 
(e)  No site plan shall be placed on the agenda of the plan commission for consideration until all of the foregoing requirements of the applicant and of the city planning staff have been fully met. 
(f)  Written findings of fact must be completed for each final site plan. Within one week of plan commission approval of the final site plan, the final site plan shall be recorded with the county recorder's office by the staff of the department of city planning, at the expense of the developer. 
(g)  In all cases where a final site plan is submitted for approval, the person responsible for the payment for construction in conformity with said site plan shall, contemporaneously, submit in a signed statement to the plan commission his specific commitments with respect to lighting, screening, plantings, and all other factors which the applicant has, is, or will be requesting the commission to consider in granting final site plan approval. Any and all final site plan approvals shall be contingent upon the applicant fully completing those written commitments. The plan commission, acting through the city planner, may require a performance bond, money deposit, or other suitable guarantees that written commitments shall be satisfactorily completed. The plan commission may refuse to hear new matters from an applicant in default with respect to completion of previous commitments. The commitment shall be recorded by the city planner or his designated representative with the county recorders office within ten days and all recording fees shall be paid by the individual or corporate entity. 
(Code 1968, tit. 580, art. XIX, § 4; Code 1985, § 159.275; Ord. No. 1378, 11-21-1966; Ord. No. 2364, 5-5-1980; Ord. No. 3159, 5-4-1988; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3429, 10-15-1990; Ord. No. 3459, 2-4-1991; Ord. No. 3774, 11-1-1993; Ord. No. 3935, 5-8-1995; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Sec. 137-36. - Improvement location permit required. 
(a)  An improvement location permit (ILP) shall be required and shall have been issued by the city planner or his designated representative prior to the erection, exterior alteration, exterior reconstruction, change of use, and/or addition to any structure, building, accessory structure or use, billboard, or swimming pool. No building permit shall be issued by the building commissioner or his representative unless an improvement location permit has been issued. 
(b)  An application for an improvement location permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the following: 
(1)  The boundaries of the subject property, all existing easements, section lines, and property lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways, and lakes, and other physical features in or adjoining the property; 
(2)  Location and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures, including height, bulk, setbacks, open space, screening, landscaping, outdoor lighting, and signs; and 
(3)  Location, dimensions, and type of construction of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, and loading and parking areas, including numbers of parking and loading spaces. 
(c)  The city planner or his designated representative shall approve or deny an application for an improvement location permit, and issue the permit or address the reasons for its denial in writing to the applicant. 
(d)  An improvement location permit shall become null and void unless the building permit shall have been issued and work thereon is substantially underway within one year of the issuance of the improvement location permit. 
(Code 1985, § 159.276; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-37. - Certificate of occupancy required for buildings. 
    No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative. The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative unless the building meets all provisions of this chapter, or until the board of zoning appeals has granted a variance from specific requirements to this chapter. If the building meets all provisions of this chapter, or the board of zoning appeals has granted a variance from specific requirements of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten consecutive days. 
(Code 1985, § 159.277; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-38. - Certificate of occupancy required for land. 
    No change of the use of land shall occur until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building commissioner or his designated representative, unless the use of the land meets all provisions of this chapter. If the use of the land meets all provisions of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten consecutive days. 
(Code 1985, § 159.278; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-39. - Administration vested. 
    The administration of this chapter shall be vested with the city planner or his designated representative. 
(Code 1985, § 159.279; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3116, 11-17-1987) 
Sec. 137-40. - Powers and duties of city plan commission. 
    The city plan commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To initiate proposals to amend, supplement, change, or repeal this chapter. 
(2)  To review an ordinance for amendment, supplement, change, or repeal of this chapter proposed by other than the plan commission. 
(3)  To review and approve, modify, or deny the final site plan for a rezoning amendment approved subject to final site plan approval. 
(4)  To review and make a recommendation to the city council relative to petitions for rezoning. 
(5)  To hold public hearings in matters pertaining to applications for amendment, and submit reports to the city council setting forth its findings and recommendations. 
(6)  To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this chapter, and to make reports of its recommendations to the city council. 
(7)  To provide clerical and technical assistance as may be required by the board of zoning appeals in exercise of its duties. 
(Code 1985, § 159.280; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
State Law reference- Establishment of plan commission, IC 36-7-4-202. 
Sec. 137-41. - Amendment of this chapter and the zoning map. 
(a)  The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this chapter, including the zoning map, by proceeding in the manner prescribed herein. 
(b)  A zoning map amendment or an amendment to this chapter may be initiated by: 
(1)  The city council. 
(2)  The plan commission. 
(3)  The department of city planning. 
(4)  Any individual, corporation, or agency, other than those listed in subsection (b)(1), (2), or (3) of this section. 
(c)  Except for subsections (b)(1), (2), and (3) of this section, any request for an amendment shall be submitted in writing to the plan commission, along with payment of fees established herein. 
(d)  The city council shall not consider any proposed amendment to the zoning map which is substantially the same as any other proposed amendments submitted within the previous 12 months and which has been rejected by the city council. 
(e)  Commission hearings on this chapter: The plan commission shall prepare recommendations regarding the boundaries of districts, and the regulations and restrictions to be enforced in all districts. The commission shall prepare the report on its own initiative and submit to the city council. 
(f)  When considering a change to the zoning map or to this chapter, the plan commission and city council shall pay reasonable regard to: 
(1)  Existing conditions; 
(2)  The character of buildings erected in each district; 
(3)  The most desirable use for which the land in each district may be adapted; and 
(4)  The conservation of property values throughout the municipality or county; 
(5)  The recommendation of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1985, § 159.281; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-42. - Board of zoning appeals. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall hear and determine the following: 
(1)  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official, hearing officer, or staff member under this chapter. 
(2)  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative board or other body, except a plan commission, in relation to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative board or other body, except a plan commission, in relation to the enforcement of an ordinance requiring the procurement of an improvement location or occupancy permit. 
(4)  Approve or deny variances of use from the terms of this chapter. The board may impose reasonable conditions as part of its approval. A variance may be approved under this section upon a determination in writing that: 
a.  The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; 
b.  The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; 
c.  The need for the variance arises from some condition peculiar to the property involved; 
d.  The strict application of the terms of this chapter will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the property for which the variance is sought; and 
e.  The approval does not interfere substantially with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Approve or deny variances from the development standards, such as height, bulk, or area, of this chapter. A variance may be approved under this section only upon a determination in writing that: 
a.  The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; 
b.  The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; and 
c.  The strict application of the terms of this chapter will result in practical difficulties in the use of the property. 
(6)  Approve or deny one-year extensions to allow the continuance of a temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings. 
(7)  Approve or deny all conditional use permit applications, but only in the particular situations as specified in each zoning district. The board may impose additional, but reasonable conditions as part of its approval. A conditional use permit may be approved under this section upon a determination in writing that: 
a.  The approval will not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community; 
b.  The use and value of the area adjacent to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially adverse manner; 
c.  Adequate conditions will be stipulated to mitigate any potentially adverse impact of the conditional use permit upon adjacent property; 
d.  Adequate measures have been taken to provide proper utilities, drainage, paved access roads, landscape buffering, fencing, leakproof dikes, safety precautions, and to minimize traffic congestion; and 
e.  The granting of the conditional use permit is in the best interests of the community. 
(Code 1985, § 159.282; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
State Law reference- Board of zoning appeals; establishment, IC 36-7-4-901. 
Sec. 137-43. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  It is recognized that there are certain land uses which, because of their unique characteristics cannot be classified as a permitted use in a particular zoning district without consideration in each specific case the impact of those uses upon surrounding land and neighborhoods, and therefore it is recognized that conditional use permits approved by the board of zoning appeals under the provisions of this chapter and with other reasonable conditions imposed, may ensure that the land use will not negatively impact upon the surrounding land and neighborhoods. 
(b)  A conditional use permit shall not vary the applicable sections on height, area, and developmental regulations. 
(c)  The board of zoning appeals may, from time to time and after the property owner has filed a petition requesting a conditional use permit, grant conditional use permits in the manner prescribed as follows: 
(1)  A request for a conditional use permit shall be submitted in writing on a form prescribed by the board of zoning appeals, along with the payment of fees as prescribed by the board of zoning appeals. A site plan shall be submitted with all conditional use permit requests and become part of the conditional use permit. 
(2)  The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing on the request in accordance with state statute. 
(3)  The board of zoning appeals shall not consider any proposed conditional use permit which is substantially the same as any proposed conditional use permit submitted within the previous 12 months and which has been rejected by the board of zoning appeals. 
(4)  The staff shall distribute a copy of the site plan to the following agencies for review and comment: 
a.  Fire department. 
b.  Water department. 
c.  Electric department. 
d.  Department of engineering. 
e.  County health department. 
The staff of the department of city planning shall utilize comments from those departments, and then prepare and submit a written analysis and recommendation to the board of zoning appeals. 
(5)  The board of zoning appeals shall use the staff analysis, recommendations and other information as a basis from which to impose additional but reasonable conditions, should the board of zoning appeals decide that approval of the request is in order. 
(d)  A conditional use permit shall be held invalid after a period of one year from the date of board of zoning appeals approval unless the facility is completed and in operation, or a building permit has been obtained and construction is diligently being pursued to completion. 
(e)  Whenever the property for which a conditional use permit has been granted by the board of zoning appeals under the terms of this chapter is abandoned or becomes vacant for six months or more, such conditional use permit shall terminate. 
(f)  A conditional use permit shall be valid only for the property as legally described in the approved conditional use permit, and the conditional use permit shall not be valid on any other property, contiguous or otherwise. 
(g)  Should any provisions of the conditional use permit be violated, the city planner or his designated representative shall pursue the violation as required under sections 137-45 through 137-47 which may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1985, § 159.283; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 137-44. - Reversion to previous zoning. 
    Any vacant or undeveloped property, which is rezoned or annexed and zoned, shall be required to obtain an improvement location permit within two years of the date of the passage of an ordinance approving zoning by the common council. If an improvement location permit is not obtained within the specified time, the city planner shall provide written notice of such fact to the common council. Upon receiving the notice, if the common council deems the current zoning classification appropriate, the common council shall take no further action. If the common council deems the zoning classification should otherwise be changed, the common council shall direct the plan commission to prepare the desired change in zoning in accordance with IC 36-7-4-602. 
(Code 1985, § 159.284; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 4563, 1-15-2001) 
Sec. 137-45. - Notice of violation. 
    When written notice of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has been served by the city planner or his designated representative on the property owner, agent, occupant, contractor, or builder, the violation shall be discontinued immediately. 
(Code 1985, § 159.997; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3116, 11-17-1987) 
Sec. 137-46. - Right of injunction. 
    The city planner or his designated representative may institute a suit for injunction in the circuit court or superior court of the county to restrain an individual from violating the provisions of this chapter, and may also institute a suit for a mandatory injunction directing the removal of any structure or improvement. 
(Code 1985, § 159.998; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3116, 11-17-1987) 
State Law reference- Remedies and enforcement; allowable actions, IC 36-7-4-1014; injunctive relief, IC 36-7-4-1015. 
Sec. 137-47. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined according to the provisions of section 1-7 not less than $25.00 and not more than is prescribed by IC 36-1-3-8 as may be amended from time to time. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1985, § 159.999; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
State Law reference- Procedures for amending zoning ordinance, IC 36-7-4-602. 
Secs. 137-48-137-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 137-68. - Continuation of nonconforming structures, uses, and lots. 
    Any lawful building or other structure, or any lawful use of a building or other structure or land, existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered a lawful nonconforming building, structure, or use, and may be continued, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Code 1985, § 159.260; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-69. - Change of nonconforming use. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other use or expanded in size, area, volume or scope, unless the proposed use conforms to the zoning requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(Code 1985, § 159.261; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-70. - Restoration of nonconforming structures. 
    Any lawful nonconforming structure which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, wind storm, or other similar active cause, to an extent of not more than 75 percent of its fair market value, may be reconstructed in the same location, provided that: 
(1)  The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the height, area, or volume of the damaged or destroyed structure. 
(2)  Reconstruction shall begin within six months from the date of damage or destruction and shall be carried on without interruption. 
(Code 1985, § 159.262; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-71. - Abandonment of nonconforming structures, uses, and lots. 
    If a lawful nonconforming structure, use, or lot is abandoned or discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more, subsequent use of that structure or lot shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1985, § 159.263; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Secs. 137-72-137-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP 

Sec. 137-101. - Establishment of districts. 
    In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the following districts are hereby established: 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  R-1 single-family residential district. 
b.  R-2 two-family residential district. 
c.  R-3 multiple-family residential district. 
d.  R-4 manufactured home residential district. 
(2)  Commercial districts. 
a.  C-1 general commercial district. 
b.  C-2 shopping center commercial district. 
c.  C-3 city center commercial district. 
d.  C-4 automobile-oriented district. 
e.  C-5 neighborhood commercial district. 
f.  C-6 linear office commercial district. 
g.  C-7 automobile-oriented restaurant commercial district. 
h.  C-8 high-density suburban commercial district. 
i.  C-9 automobile-oriented sales district. 
j.  C-10 filling stations. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 
a.  I-1 light industrial district. 
b.  I-2 heavy industrial district. 
(4)  Special districts. 
a.  S-1 extensive open space and public use district. 
b.  S-2 planned unit development district. 
(5)  H historic overlay district. 
(Code 1985, § 159.008; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998) 
Sec. 137-102. - Incorporation of maps. 
(a)  The locations and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are shown upon the zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into the provisions of this chapter and which in its entirety, including all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein. 
(b)  The zoning map, and amendments thereto, shall be maintained by the city planner or his designated representative. 
(1)  Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts are lot lines, the centerlines of streets, alleys, roads, or such lines extended, and the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning map there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined upon written application to, or upon its own motion by, the board of zoning appeals. Such changes shall be made to the zoning map by the city planner or his designated representative within five days after the decision has been made by the board of zoning appeals. 
(3)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries of the zoning map, those changes shall be made to the zoning map by the city planner or his designated representative within five days after the amendment has been approved by the city council, signed by the mayor, and all legal publication requirements have been adhered to. 
(4)  No changes of any nature shall be made in the zoning map except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(5)  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the zoning map which shall be located in the city planning office shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
(Code 1985, § 159.009; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-103. - Replacement of zoning map. 
    In the event that the zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the city council may by resolution adopt a new zoning map which shall supersede the prior zoning map. The new zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. 
(Code 1985, § 159.010; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-104. - Zoning of vacated areas and annexed areas. 
(a)  Whenever any street, alley, railroad, or other public right-of-way is vacated by official action, the zoning district adjoining each side of the street, alley, railroad, or other public right-of-way shall be automatically extended to the center of the vacation, and all areas included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
(b)  Any area annexed to the city shall immediately, upon annexation, be classified R-1 residential district, unless the petition for annexation specifically designates a zoning classification. 
(Code 1985, § 159.011; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Secs. 137-105-137-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 137-122-137-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 137-141-137-163. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Residential R-1 District 

Sec. 137-164. - Intent. 
    The residential R-1 district is designed for detached single-family dwellings on individual lots, and vacant land which is to be developed for detached single-family residential neighborhoods. The regulations are designed to keep single-family residential neighborhoods stable and to provide a suitable environment for family living. 
(Code 1985, § 159.025; Ord. No. 2875, 4-7-1986) 
Sec. 137-165. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. Rescue missions or temporary revival tents are not permitted. 
(3)  Elementary and high schools, private parks and playgrounds, public libraries, private or community swimming pools, community recreational buildings, colleges, universities, and accessory buildings incidental to these uses, including athletic fields. 
(4)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(5)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(6)  Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Private garages. 
b.  Customary home occupations, professional offices or day nurseries conducted by the resident only; provided that there be no external evidence of that use except a professional sign not over one square foot in area attached to an outside wall and flush mounted. No electrical signs shall be permitted. 
c.  All signs shall conform with the requirements of chapter 129. 
(7)  Adult care home. 
(8)  Child care home. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned R-1 single-family residential district: Nursing facility. 
(Code 1985, § 159.026; Ord. No. 2875, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3614, 8-3-1992; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3838, 6-20-1994) 
Sec. 137-166. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the residential R-1 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per single-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the building width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than 25 feet in depth. In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided that, the accessory buildings come no nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line, 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line, 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line, 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 45 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Single-family dwellings, two per residential unit. 
2.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
3.  Elementary schools, two per classroom, based upon design capacity. 
4.  High schools, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
5.  Public libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Community swimming pools, ten per 1,000 square feet of water area. 
7.  Community recreation buildings, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots, excluding single-family driveways: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be so located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area, with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings with a height in excess of 36 inches above the ground shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance from 36 inches above the ground to not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. Any fence located within the ten-foot radius shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only on the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire, and razor wire or the equivalents under whatever name or designation shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(Code 1985, § 159.027; Ord. No. 2875, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 2989, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3064, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-167-137-185. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Residential R-2 District 

Sec. 137-186. - Intent. 
    The residential R-2 district is designed for duplex or two-family units so as to ensure their proper location in terms of the social and economic requirements of the community, the need for duplex or two-family units, the effect of two-family units on the value of adjacent residential areas, and the ability of the city, now and in the future, to provide the additional services that may be required in duplex or two-family areas. 
(Code 1985, § 159.035; Ord. No. 2876, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 137-187. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Two-family dwellings or duplex dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places or worship. Rescue missions or temporary revival tents are not permitted. 
(3)  Elementary and high schools, private parks and playgrounds, public libraries, private or community swimming pools, community centers, community recreational buildings, colleges, universities, and accessory buildings incidental to these uses, including athletic fields. 
(4)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of mature will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(5)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(6)  Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Private garages. 
b.  Customary home occupations, professional offices or day nurseries conducted by the resident only; provided that there be no external evidence of such use except a professional sign not over one square foot in area attached to an outside wall and flush mounted. No electrical signs shall be permitted. 
c.  Signs pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building may be placed thereon, provided that the total area of all the signs does not exceed eight square feet. No electrical signs shall be permitted. 
(7)  Detached single-family dwellings. 
(8)  Adult care home. 
(9)  Child care home. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned R-2 two-family residential district: Nursing facility. 
(Code 1985, § 159.036; Ord. No. 2876, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3614, 8-3-1992; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3838, 6-20-1994) 
Sec. 137-188. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the residential R-2 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per family shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply. The exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than 25 feet in depth. In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come no nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line, 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line, 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line, 15,000 square feet. 
Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
b.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 45 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Single-family, two-family, or duplex dwellings: two per residential unit. 
2.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
3.  Elementary schools, two per classroom, based upon design capacity. 
4.  High schools, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
5.  Public libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Community swimming pools, ten per 1,000 square feet of water area. 
7.  Community center, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Community recreation buildings, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots, excluding two-family dwellings or duplex dwellings, and detached single-family dwelling driveways: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be so located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings with a height in excess of 36 inches above the ground shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance from 36 inches above the ground to not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. Any fence located within the ten-foot radius shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited. Electrified fencing, barbed wire, and razor wire or the equivalents under whatever name or designation shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(Code 1985, § 159.037; Ord. No. 2876, 4-7-1986; Ord. No. 2989, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3064, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-189-137-214. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Residential R-3 District 

Sec. 137-215. - Intent. 
    The residential R-3 district is designed to accommodate higher density multiple unit residential areas so as to ensure their proper location in terms of the social and economic requirements of the community, the need for multiple unit residential buildings, the effect of multiple unit residential uses on the value of adjacent areas, and the ability of the municipality, now and in the future, to provide the additional services which may be required for higher density multiple unit residential areas. 
(Code 1985, § 159.045; Ord. No. 2893, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 137-216. - Uses. 
    Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Apartment complex. 
(2)  Apartment house. 
(3)  Nursing facility. 
(4)  Health facility. 
(5)  Clinics for humans. 
(6)  Personal service shops. Personal service shops may be permitted when designed as a structural component of one high-density multiple unit residential building of at least 100 dwelling units, provided that the total shop area does not exceed 5,000 square feet, and that all personal service uses are below the first story ceiling, limited to the following uses: 
a.  Pre-school. 
b.  Day care center. 
c.  Barbershop. 
d.  Beauty shop. 
e.  Self-service laundry facilities. 
f.  Bank, savings and loan, credit union. 
g.  Private community center. 
h.  Pharmacy. 
i.  Dry cleaning, pickup and delivery station. 
j.  Postal substation. 
k.  Travel bureau. 
(7)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. Rescue missions or temporary revival tents are not permitted. 
(8)  Elementary and high schools, private parks and playgrounds, public libraries, private or community swimming pools, community recreational buildings, colleges, universities, and accessory buildings incidental to these uses, including athletic fields. 
(9)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(10)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(11)  Adult day care center. 
(12)  Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Private garages. 
b.  Customary home occupations or professional offices conducted by the resident only; provided that there be no external evidence of the use except a professional sign not over one square foot in area attached to an outside wall and flush mounted. No electrical signs shall be permitted. 
c.  All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(13)  Two-family dwellings or duplex dwellings. 
(Code 1985, § 159.046; Ord. No. 2893, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3838, 6-20-1994; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Sec. 137-217. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the residential R-3 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per multiunit dwelling shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 120 feet or ten stories in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board or parapet to the side lot line. 
2.  For buildings greater than 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height, the minimum width of each side building setback shall be increased by a total of five feet for each additional one story in height. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  On corner lots the front building setback and interior side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the required front building setback. 
2.  Accessory structures shall not be permitted within the established exterior side building setback areas. 
(4)  Rear building setback. 
a.  For buildings up to 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height there shall be a rear building setback on every lot, and that setback shall have a minimum depth of not less than 25 feet. 
b.  For buildings greater than 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height, the minimum rear building setback shall be increased by five feet for each additional one story in height; provided that the rear building setback need not exceed 50 feet in depth. 
c.  In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings not over 15 feet in height may be located in the rear building setback area, provided the accessory buildings come no nearer than five feet to any rear lot line or interior side lot line. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted within the exterior side building setback area. No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for industrial or commercial purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
_____ 
c.  Every lot upon which a four- or more unit apartment building is erected or structurally altered in the residential R-3 district shall have a minimum width of at least 90 feet as measured at the front lot line, and shall have a lot area of not less than 10,000 square feet. The lot area requirements shall be determined by using the arithmetic average number of bedrooms per unit, and then applying that arithmetic average to the following table; in no case shall the minimum lot area be less than 10,000 square feet: 
Average number of 
bedrooms per unit Minimum 
(square feet) Less than 1.5 bedrooms 1,500 Between greater than or equal to 1.5 and less than 2.5 bedrooms 2,500 Between greater than or equal to 2.5 and less than 3.5 bedrooms 4,000 Greater than or equal to 3.5 bedrooms 5,000  
_____ 
d.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 60 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Apartment complex and apartment house, 11/2 per residential unit. 
2.  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, one per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Clinics for humans, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Personal service shops, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
6.  Elementary schools, two per classroom, based upon design capacity. 
7.  High schools, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
8.  Public libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Private or community swimming pools, ten per 1,000 square feet of water area. 
10.  Community recreation buildings, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
11.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area, with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings with a height in excess of 36 inches above the ground shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance from 36 inches above the ground to not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. Any fence located within the ten-foot radius shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire, and razor wire or the equivalents under whatever name or designation shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(Code 1985, § 159.047; Ord. No. 2893, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 2989, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3064, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-218-137-242. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Residential R-4 District 

Sec. 137-243. - Intent. 
    The residential R-4 district is designed to provide a healthy and attractive atmosphere for detached single-unit, manufactured home parks. The regulations are designed to keep these areas stable and to promote a suitable environment for family living. 
(Code 1985, § 159.055; Ord. No. 2894, 6-2-1986) 
Sec. 137-244. - Uses. 
    Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Detached single-family type II or type III manufactured dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. Rescue missions or temporary revival tents are not permitted. 
(3)  Elementary and high schools, private parks and playgrounds, public libraries, private or community swimming pools, community recreational buildings, colleges, universities, and accessory buildings incidental to these uses, including athletic fields. 
(4)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(5)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(6)  Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Private garages. 
b.  Customary home occupations or professional offices conducted by the resident only; provided that there be no external evidence of the use except a professional sign not over one square foot in area attached to an outside wall and flush mounted. No electrical signs shall be permitted. 
c.  All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(7)  One permanent building for each 100 manufactured homes, of not more than 5,000 square feet, may be erected, which is necessary for management offices, self-service laundry, or maintenance use, only when designed as an integral part of a manufactured home park. 
(Code 1985, § 159.056; Ord. No. 2894, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990) 
Sec. 137-245. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the residential R-4 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per detached single-family manufactured dwelling shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No manufactured dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 15 feet as measured from the finished grade. 
(2)  Front building setback. There shall be a minimum front building setback of not less than 20 feet. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply. However, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than 25 feet in depth. In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come no nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 24 feet by 30 feet, and 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a manufactured dwelling is erected or structurally altered shall have a minimum frontage of 40 feet at the front lot line and a minimum area of 4,000 square feet. 
b.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 50 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Detached single-family, type II or type III manufactured dwellings, two per residential unit. 
2.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
3.  Elementary schools, two per classroom, based upon design capacity. 
4.  High schools, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
5.  Public libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Community swimming pools, ten per 1,000 square feet of water area. 
7.  Community recreation buildings, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon capacity. 
9.  One permanent building for each 100 manufactured homes, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots, excluding detached single-family type II or type III manufactured dwelling driveways: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  A parking lot shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire, and razor wire or the equivalents under whatever name or designation shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(Code 1985, § 159.057; Ord. No. 2894, 6-2-1986; Ord. No. 2989, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3064, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-246-137-268. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 137-269-137-299. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Commercial C-1 District 

Sec. 137-300. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this general commercial district is to provide convenient retail and service establishments for the day-to-day needs of a large area with minimum impact on surrounding residential areas. This district is designed to provide for freestanding commercial uses which require limited comparison shopping. Customers usually arrive by automobile, making a separate stop for each errand. 
(Code 1985, § 159.065; Ord. No. 2930, 9-2-1986) 
Sec. 137-301. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Adult day care center. 
(2)  Animal hospitals. 
(3)  Animal kennels. 
(4)  Animal veterinarians. 
(5)  Antique shops. 
(6)  Appliance sales and services. 
(7)  Art galleries. 
(8)  Art supply stores. 
(9)  Assembly hall. 
(10)  Auctions. 
(11)  Automobile accessory shops. 
(12)  Automobile leasing offices. 
(13)  Bait shops. 
(14)  Bakery shops. 
(15)  Ballrooms. 
(16)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and loan offices. 
(17)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(18)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(19)  Beverage stores. 
(20)  Bicycle sales and service. 
(21)  Book and stationery stores. 
(22)  Bowling alleys. 
(23)  Candy stores. 
(24)  Carry-out restaurants. 
(25)  Cafeterias. 
(26)  Catering services. 
(27)  Ceramic tile sales. 
(28)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. 
(29)  Clothing and apparel stores. 
(30)  Clubs and lodges. 
(31)  Coin-operated laundries. 
(32)  Colleges and universities. 
(33)  Community centers, private or public. 
(34)  Community welfare or health centers. 
(35)  Comprehensive car care centers. 
(36)  Computer sales. 
(37)  Confectionery stores. 
(38)  Controlled uses as defined in section 137-4. 
(39)  Convents or rectories. 
(40)  Dairy stores. 
(41)  Dance schools. 
(42)  Day nurseries or day care centers. 
(43)  Delicatessens. 
(44)  Department stores. 
(45)  Design studios. 
(46)  Detective agencies. 
(47)  Driving schools. 
(48)  Drug stores. 
(49)  Dry cleaning, pick up and delivery. 
(50)  Eating and drinking establishments without drive-in or drive-through service. 
(51)  Floor covering sales. 
(52)  Florist shops. 
(53)  Furnace and air conditioning sales and service. 
(54)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(55)  Furniture stores. 
(56)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(57)  Glass sales. 
(58)  Gift shops. 
(59)  Grocery and food stores. 
(60)  Governmental buildings. 
(61)  Gymnasiums and gymnastic schools. 
(62)  Handicraft shops. 
(63)  Hardware stores. 
(64)  Health clubs. 
(65)  Health facility. 
(66)  Hobby shops. 
(67)  Home improvement retail stores. 
(68)  Hospitals. 
(69)  Hotels. 
(70)  Household pest extermination shops. 
(71)  Ice cream shops. 
(72)  Janitorial offices. 
(73)  Jewelry stores. 
(74)  Laundries, pick up and delivery. 
(75)  Lawn mower sales and service. 
(76)  Libraries. 
(77)  Liquor stores. 
(78)  Locksmiths. 
(79)  Marine accessory shops. 
(80)  Medical clinics. 
(81)  Medical laboratories. 
(82)  Motels. 
(83)  Motor bus terminals. 
(84)  Motorcycle accessory shops. 
(85)  Museums. 
(86)  Music stores. 
(87)  Newspaper offices. 
(88)  Nursing facility. 
(89)  Office buildings. 
(90)  Office supply and equipment sales. 
(91)  Offices. 
(92)  Optical shops. 
(93)  Paint, wallpaper, and decorating stores. 
(94)  Parking garages. 
(95)  Parking lots. 
(96)  Personal service establishments. 
(97)  Pet shops. 
(98)  Philanthropic institutions. 
(99)  Photocopy duplicating shops. 
(100)  Photographic studios. 
(101)  Photography supplies, equipment, and photofinishing. 
(102)  Pool and billiard supplies. 
(103)  Post offices. 
(104)  Printing shops. 
(105)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
(106)  Professional offices: 
a.  Advertising agencies. 
b.  Accountants. 
c.  Architects. 
d.  Attorneys. 
e.  Chamber of commerce. 
f.  Chiropractors. 
g.  City planning. 
h.  Dentists. 
i.  Engineering consultants. 
j.  Government. 
k.  Health agencies. 
l.  Insurance agencies. 
m.  Interior decorating. 
n.  Labor organization. 
o.  Manufacturing agent. 
p.  Market research. 
q.  Mortgage brokers. 
r.  Music instructors. 
s.  Optometrists. 
t.  Osteopaths. 
u.  Personnel management counselors. 
v.  Physicians and surgeons. 
w.  Podiatrists. 
x.  Public relations. 
y.  Real estate brokers. 
z.  Social service organizations. 
aa.  Stock and bond brokers. 
(107)  Publishers. 
(108)  Radio or television studios. 
(109)  Railway stations. 
(110)  Required off-street parking. 
(111)  Restaurants without drive-in or drive-through service. 
(112)  Retail stores. 
(113)  Schools, public, parochial, or business. 
(114)  Shoe repair shops. 
(115)  Shoe stores. 
(116)  Social service organizations. 
(117)  Sporting goods stores. 
(118)  Storm window and storm door sales. 
(119)  Studios: art, music, ceramics, drama, speech, dance, and similar skills. 
(120)  Tailoring and alterations. 
(121)  Tanning salons. 
(122)  Taxicab dispatching. 
(123)  Taxidermy services. 
(124)  Tire sales and service. 
(125)  Tobacco stores. 
(126)  Transit transfer centers. 
(127)  Travel agencies. 
(128)  Union halls. 
(129)  Upholstery shops. 
(130)  Utility offices. 
(131)  Vending machine sales and service. 
(132)  Water softener sales and service. 
(133)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of the buildings permitted by this section. 
(134)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned C-1 general commercial district: 
(1)  Bingo hall. 
(2)  Branding establishment; provided, however, that it is at least 750 feet away from any residentially zoned or legal nonconforming residential property, public and private elementary, middle or high school, parks and churches as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the branding establishment. 
(3)  Scarifying establishment; provided, however, that it is at least 750 feet away from any residentially zoned or legal nonconforming residential property, public and private elementary, middle or high school, parks and churches as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the scarifying establishment. 
(4)  Tattoo establishment; provided, however, that it is at least 750 feet away from any residentially zoned or legal nonconforming residential property, public and private elementary, middle or high school, parks and churches as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the tattoo parlor. 
(Code 1985, § 159.066; Ord. No. 2930, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 4098, 10-7-1996; Ord. No. 4303, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 137-302. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-1 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 48 feet in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory building shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Ballrooms, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Bowling alley, five per alley. 
3.  Carry-out restaurants, ten per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
5.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
6.  Convents and rectories, one per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Eating and drinking establishments, ten per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  Libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
9.  Hotels/motels: one parking space per room, one parking space per employee based on the maximum employment level per shift, one parking space per 150 square feet in conference or convention rooms, and ten parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of eating and drinking space. 
10.  Bed and breakfast: one parking space per room, and two parking spaces for the resident/owners. 
11.  Assembly halls, one per every three persons based upon the maximum design capacity. 
12.  All other uses, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  Screening. An opaque seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any commercial C-1 property line which is contiguous to any residentially zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security and also to contain paper products and debris within the property. 
(13)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(14)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks, this requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.067; Ord. No. 2930, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 137-303. - Controlled uses. 
(a)  In order to prevent the development of a blighted area, no building or premises may be used and no building may be erected, moved, structurally altered, or enlarged for any controlled use, if such building or premises is located within 1,000 feet of any two controlled uses, as such use is defined in section 137-4. 
(b)  No building or premises may be used and no building may be erected, moved, structurally altered, or enlarged for any adult business use within, or within 500 feet of, any of the following use districts: 
(1)  In the City of Mishawaka: 
a.  Residential R-1 district; 
b.  Residential R-2 district; 
c.  Residential R-3 district; 
d.  Residential R-4 district; 
e.  Commercial C-2 district; 
f.  Planned unit development S-2 district; or 
(2)  In the City of South Bend: 
a.  A residence district; 
b.  A-1 residence district; 
c.  A-2 planned residential development district; 
d.  A-3 high priority residential office and professional district; 
e.  B residence district; 
f.  B-1 residence district; 
g.  C-1 commercial, limited use district; 
h.  C-2 planned shopping center district. 
(3)  In St. Joseph County: 
a.  C-2 planned shopping center district; 
b.  R single-family residence; 
c.  R-1 mobile home park; 
d.  R-2 multifamily. 
(Code 1985, § 159.068; Ord. No. 3160, 5-6-1988; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993) 
Secs. 137-304-137-324. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Commercial C-2 District 

Sec. 137-325. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-2 shopping center district is established to promote the grouping of contiguous buildings, stores, offices and other uses on a lot in a manner which constitutes an organized, architecturally harmonious, efficient, and convenient shopping center, and to provide a means for permitting the establishment of such centers as part of the development of the city. The commercial C-2 district is created in order to secure in such a facility, traffic safety through provision for proper traffic routing and automobile parking, control of traffic on public streets through provision for adequate off-street parking and off-street loading, and protection of the surrounding neighborhood and promotion of the general welfare of the city. Commercial developments which contain any combination of three or more contiguous uses from section 137-326 shall constitute a shopping center and shall be zoned commercial C-2 district. 
(Code 1985, § 159.075; Ord. No. 2915, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-326. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Antique shops. 
(2)  Appliance sales and service. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Art supply stores. 
(5)  Automobile leasing offices. 
(6)  Bakery shops. 
(7)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and loan offices. 
(8)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(9)  Bicycle sales and service. 
(10)  Book and stationery stores. 
(11)  Candy stores. 
(12)  Ceramic tile sales. 
(13)  Clothing alteration shops. 
(14)  Coin-operated laundries. 
(15)  Colleges and universities. 
(16)  Confectionery stores. 
(17)  Custom tailoring shops. 
(18)  Delicatessens. 
(19)  Department stores. 
(20)  Drug stores. 
(21)  Dry cleaning, pick up and delivery. 
(22)  Florist shops. 
(23)  Furniture stores. 
(24)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(25)  Grocery stores and food supermarkets. 
(26)  Gymnasiums. 
(27)  Hardware stores. 
(28)  Hobby shops. 
(29)  Indoor golf. 
(30)  Jewelry stores. 
(31)  Libraries. 
(32)  Liquor stores. 
(33)  Locksmiths. 
(34)  Marine accessory shops. 
(35)  Medical clinics. 
(36)  Museums. 
(37)  Music stores. 
(38)  Office supply and equipment stores. 
(39)  Optical shops. 
(40)  Paint, wallpaper and decorating stores. 
(41)  Parking garages. 
(42)  Photocopy duplicating shops. 
(43)  Photographic studios. 
(44)  Photography supplies, equipment and photofinishing. 
(45)  Professional offices: 
a.  Advertising agencies. 
b.  Accountants. 
c.  Architects. 
d.  Attorneys. 
e.  Chamber of commerce. 
f.  Chiropractors. 
g.  City planning. 
h.  Dentists. 
i.  Engineering consultants. 
j.  Government. 
k.  Health agencies. 
l.  Insurance agencies. 
m.  Interior decorating. 
n.  Labor organization. 
o.  Manufacturing agent. 
p.  Market research. 
q.  Mortgage brokers. 
r.  Music instructors. 
s.  Optometrists. 
t.  Osteopaths. 
u.  Personnel management counselors. 
v.  Physicians and surgeons. 
w.  Podiatrists. 
x.  Public relations. 
y.  Real estate brokers. 
z.  Social service organizations. 
aa.  Stock and bond brokers. 
(46)  Restaurants, without drive-in or drive-through service. 
(47)  Retail stores. 
(48)  Sporting goods stores. 
(49)  Tanning salons. 
(50)  Theatres, enclosed. 
(51)  Tire sales and service. 
(52)  Tobacco stores. 
(53)  Travel agencies. 
(54)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(55)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned C-2 shopping center commercial district: Bingo hall. 
(Code 1985, § 159.076; Ord. No. 2915, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 137-327. - Height, area, and development regulations. 
    In the commercial C-2 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per shopping center shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height. 
(2)  Setbacks. There shall be a 50-foot building setback from all property lines. 
(3)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every parcel of land in which a new shopping center is erected shall have a minimum of 200 feet in width as measured at the front lot line and an area of not less than two acres. 
b.  No center shall be erected or structurally altered in ground floor area so that more than 25 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(4)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
2.  Libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Restaurants, ten per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  Theaters, enclosed, one per three seats. 
5.  All other uses, five per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum 25-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and/or public road right-of-way and edge of the parking lot pavement. Where adjacent to public road right-of-way, excepting limited-access highways, this area shall be bermed/mounded a minimum of three-feet above the elevation of the adjacent roadway pavement measured at the centerline. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(5)  Off-street loading. At least one off-street loading or unloading berth shall be provided in the ratio of one berth per 25,000 square feet of gross floor area, including basement storage space. Each berth shall be at least ten feet by 45 feet with a 14-foot vertical clearance. The required berth shall be suitably graded, drained, and paved with a durable, dust-free hard surface. 
(6)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(7)  Fences and landscape screening. 
a.  A seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any shopping center property line which is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain paper products and debris within the shopping center property. 
b.  Along any shopping center property line which is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property, the area between the property line and the required parking lot setback shall be sodded, planted, and landscaped with at least six-foot-high bushes, shrubs, or trees in order to form a permanent opaque, landscaped screen. 
(8)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(9)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(10)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks, this requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.077; Ord. No. 2915, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 2989, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3066, 7-20-1987; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-328-137-357. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Commercial C-3 District 

Sec. 137-358. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-3 district is designed for the city center, which is usually comprised of retail, service, cultural, high-density residential, and government uses. The city center is the focal point of the community and comprises a relatively small, geographically-centered, and wholly contiguous core area. Typically, the city center services the entire community by providing a diversity of complementary and compatible land uses. Outside storage, display, or sales shall not be permitted outside a completely enclosed, substantially constructed, and weathertight building. 
(Code 1985, § 159.085; Ord. No. 2916, 8-4-1986) 
Sec. 137-359. - Uses. 
(a)  Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the commercial C-2 district. 
(2)  Any use permitted in the commercial C-5 district. 
(3)  Apartment buildings. 
(4)  Ballrooms. 
(5)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, loan offices. 
(6)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(7)  Bus stations. 
(8)  Business services. 
(9)  Boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
(10)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship; rescue missions or temporary revival tents are not permitted. 
(11)  Class A cabaret. 
(12)  Clinics for humans. 
(13)  Clubs and lodges. 
(14)  Colleges and universities. 
(15)  Convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged. 
(16)  Convents and rectories. 
(17)  Eating and drinking establishments, without drive-in or drive-through services. 
(18)  Furniture stores. 
(19)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(20)  Governmental buildings. 
(21)  Health clubs. 
(22)  Health facility. 
(23)  Hospitals. 
(24)  Hotels. 
(25)  Libraries. 
(26)  Medical clinics. 
(27)  Medical laboratories. 
(28)  Mortuaries and funeral homes. 
(29)  Newspaper offices. 
(30)  Nursing facility. 
(31)  Office buildings. 
(32)  Office supply and equipment stores. 
(33)  Parking garages. 
(34)  Parking lots. 
(35)  Post offices. 
(36)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
(37)  Railway stations. 
(38)  Tanning salons. 
(39)  Transit transfer centers. 
(40)  Union halls. 
(41)  Utility offices. 
(42)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(b)  Any use permitted in the residential R-1, residential R-2, and residential R-3 zoning districts shall be a permitted use in the commercial C-3 district. Such residential use shall conform to the height, area, and developmental regulations of the residential zoning district that permits that use. If more than one residential zoning district permits that residential use, then the use shall conform to the regulations of the most restrictive residential district in which it is a permitted use. In the case of a conflict between such residential district regulations and those of section 137-358, the residential requirements and regulations shall control, except in the case of apartment restrictions, in which case section 137-360(2) shall control. 
(c)  Apartments shall be permitted in conjunction with a commercial establishment, but shall be prohibited below a commercial establishment. 
(d)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned C-3 city center commercial district: Bingo hall. 
(Code 1985, § 159.086; Ord. No. 2916, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996) 
Sec. 137-360. - Height, area, and development regulations. 
    In the commercial C-3 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 120 feet or ten stories in height. 
(2)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come no nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(3)  Off-street parking. Parking areas, if provided, shall be properly graded drained, paved with a durable, dust-free surface, and shall be suitably lighted, if the facility operates after sunset. 
(4)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. However, on corner lots that adjoin an intersecting street right-of-way which has a signalized traffic control system, no vision clearance shall be required. 
(5)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(6)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(7)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(8)  Controlled uses. In order to promote the use of the downtown city center as a regional retail business center, any class A cabaret or restaurant which sells beer, wine and/or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises is exempt from location spacing restrictions. 
(9)  Design/development plan review. Subject to all requirements identified by chapter 105, design review/development plan. 
(Code 1985, § 159.087; Ord. No. 2916, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4470, 12-21-1999; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001) 
Secs. 137-361-137-378. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Commercial C-4 District 

Sec. 137-379. - Intent; uses. 
(a)  The commercial C-4 district is designed for commercial uses that are automobile or vehicular in nature and which, by their very nature, do not readily lend themselves into inclusion in the other commercial districts within the city. Outside storage and display of new and used vehicles for sale, lease, or rent; large parking areas for parking, storage, and display; queuing lanes for vehicles purchasing restaurant food; and off-premises advertising targeted toward vehicular traffic in the public right-of-way are typical characteristics of uses in the commercial C-4 district. 
(b)  Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the commercial C-1 district. 
(2)  Automobile and truck auctions. 
(3)  Automobile and truck tire dealers. 
(4)  Automobile body shop. 
(5)  Automobile glass, seat, and upholstery shops. 
(6)  Automobile sales. 
(7)  Automobile service shop. 
(8)  Automobile washing and polishing. 
(9)  Boat and boat motor sales or service. 
(10)  Carwash, automatic. 
(11)  Carwash, self-service. 
(12)  Commercial parking lots. 
(13)  Farm implement and supply stores. 
(14)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
(15)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(16)  Light trailer sales and service shops. 
(17)  Light truck sales and service shops. 
(18)  Mobile home sales and service. 
(19)  Motorcycle sales and service. 
(20)  Recreational vehicle sales and service. 
(21)  Vehicular rental equipment shops. 
(22)  Wheel and frame alignment shops. 
(Code 1968, tit. 580, art. X, § 1; Code 1985, § 159.095; Ord. No. 1378, 11-21-1966; Ord. No. 2848, 12-16-1985; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998) 
Sec. 137-380. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-4 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a front building setback of at least 25 feet. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconforming structures, uses and lots. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a side building setback of at least five feet in width as measured from the eave, overhang or farthest protrusion to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots, the principal building shall meet the front and side building setback regulations set forth in subsections (1) and (3) of this section; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with an accessory building shall be erected or expanded so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied with an improvement. 
(7)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(8)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire and razor wire are prohibited. 
(9)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  All uses listed as permitted uses in the commercial C-4 district, 51/2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(10)  Screening. An opaque seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any commercial C-4 property line which is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain paper products and debris within the property. 
(11)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(12)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(13)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and east of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicular to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(14)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(15)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.096; Ord. No. 2978, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-381-137-403. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Commercial C-5 District 

Sec. 137-404. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-5 district is a very limited retail and service category intended for small commercial lots and small commercial buildings of up to 8,000 square feet in total area in residential neighborhood crossroad areas, for the purpose of supplying day-to-day retail and service needs of the residents, such as food, drugs, and personal services. Outside storage, display, or sales shall not be permitted outside a completely enclosed, substantially constructed, and weathertight building. 
(Code 1985, § 159.100; Ord. No. 2917, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-405. - Uses. 
(a)  Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Adult day care center. 
(2)  Antique shops. 
(3)  Apartments. 
(4)  Art galleries. 
(5)  Art supply stores. 
(6)  Bakery shops or confectionery shops. 
(7)  Bait shops. 
(8)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, loan offices. 
(9)  Barbershops or beauty shops. 
(10)  Beverage shops. 
(11)  Book or stationery stores. 
(12)  Camera shops. 
(13)  Candy stores. 
(14)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. 
(15)  Clothing stores. 
(16)  Coin-operated laundries. 
(17)  Community centers, private and public. 
(18)  Community welfare or health centers. 
(19)  Computer sales. 
(20)  Convents or monasteries. 
(21)  Custom sewing and millinery shops. 
(22)  Day nurseries and day care centers. 
(23)  Drug stores and pharmacies. 
(24)  Dry cleaning, pick up and delivery. 
(25)  Duplexes. 
(26)  Duplication shops. 
(27)  Eating and drinking establishments, without drive-in or drive-through service. 
(28)  Food stores. 
(29)  Florist shops. 
(30)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(31)  Handicraft shops: ceramic, sculpture, or similar art work. 
(32)  Hardware stores. 
(33)  Hobby shops. 
(34)  Laundries, pick up and delivery. 
(35)  Libraries. 
(36)  Locksmiths. 
(37)  Medical clinics. 
(38)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(39)  Museums. 
(40)  Offices. 
(41)  Optical shops. 
(42)  Paint, wallpaper, and decorating stores. 
(43)  Photography studios. 
(44)  Post offices. 
(45)  Private parks and playgrounds. 
(46)  Rectories. 
(47)  Required off-street parking. 
(48)  Schools, public, parochial, or business. 
(49)  Shoe repair shops. 
(50)  Single-family dwellings. 
(51)  Studios for art, music, ceramics, drama, speech, dance, and similar skills. 
(52)  Tailoring and alteration shops. 
(53)  Tanning salons. 
(54)  Tobacco stores. 
(55)  Townhouses. 
(56)  Travel agencies. 
(57)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(b)  Any use permitted in the residential R-1, residential R-2, and residential R-3 zoning districts shall be a permitted use in the commercial C-5 district. Such residential use shall conform to the height, area, and developmental regulations of the residential zoning district that permits the use. If more than one residential zoning district permits the residential use, then the use shall conform to the regulations of the most restrictive residential district in which it is a permitted use. In the case of a conflict between the residential regulations and those of section 137-404, the residential requirements and regulations shall control, except in the case of apartment restrictions, in which case subsection (c) of this section and section 137-406(1)-(5) shall control. 
(c)  Apartment dwellings shall be prohibited below a retail establishment. One apartment or dwelling unit may be permitted above or upon ground level in connection with a business or retail establishment. Occupancy of garages for residential or commercial purposes shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 159.101; Ord. No. 2917, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3270, 5-1-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3602, 6-15-1992; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Sec. 137-406. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-5 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply. However, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than 25 feet in depth. In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 60 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Single-family or duplex dwellings, two per residential unit. 
2.  Apartments, townhouses, or multiple-family dwellings, 11/2 per residential unit. 
3.  Churches or synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
4.  Community center, private or public, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
5.  Community welfare or health centers, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Libraries, art galleries, or museums, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Elementary schools, two per classroom, based upon design capacity. 
8.  High schools, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
9.  All other uses, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots, excluding duplex and two-family dwelling, and detached single-family dwelling driveways: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner lot the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(13)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.102; Ord. No. 2917, 8-4-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-407-137-425. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Commercial C-6 District 

Sec. 137-426. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-6 district is designed to provide linear areas where office uses and certain public and semi-public uses may be developed. This district serves as a linear transition buffer between low-density residential areas and commercial areas. Because high average daily traffic counts on major thoroughfares can decrease low-density residential desirability, the district can also act as a linear transition buffer between major thoroughfares and low-density residential areas. No principal building shall be greater than 8,000 square feet. Sales of commodities or outside storage are not permitted in this district. 
(Code 1985, § 159.103; Ord. No. 2977, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 137-427. - Uses. 
    Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, loan offices. 
(2)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(3)  Churches, synagogues and similar places of worship. 
(4)  Clinics for humans. 
(5)  Convents and rectories. 
(6)  Medical or dental laboratories. 
(7)  Mortuaries and funeral homes. 
(8)  Offices. 
(9)  Public libraries. 
(10)  Single-unit dwellings. 
(11)  Two-unit dwellings or duplex dwellings. 
(Code 1985, § 159.104; Ord. No. 2977, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 137-428. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-6 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimension of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than 25 feet in depth. In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory buildings shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 60 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Single-family, two-family, or duplex dwellings, two per residential unit. 
2.  Churches or synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
3.  Public libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
4.  All other uses, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots, excluding two-unit dwellings or duplex dwellings, and single-family dwelling driveways: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
9.  Parking lots shall be located behind the rear wall of the principal building. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.105; Ord. No. 2977, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-429-137-454. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Commercial C-7 District 

Sec. 137-455. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-7 district is designed for commercial restaurant uses that are automobile or vehicular in nature and which, by their very nature, do not readily lend themselves into inclusion in the other commercial districts, due to the potential for traffic congestion in queueing lanes, higher noise and pollution levels from running and standing automobiles, and potential for increased off-site litter. Outside storage, display, or sales shall not be permitted outside a completely enclosed, substantially constructed and weathertight building. 
(Code 1985, § 159.115; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 137-456. - Uses. 
    Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the commercial C-1 district. 
(2)  Drive-thru restaurants. 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants. 
(4)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
(5)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(Code 1985, § 159.116; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001) 
Sec. 137-457. - Height, area, and development regulations. 
    In the commercial C-7 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory building shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Drive-thru restaurants, 15 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Drive-in restaurants, 15 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  All other uses, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other planting shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(10)  Screening. An opaque seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any commercial C-7 property line which is contiguous to any residentially zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain paper products and debris within the property. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(13)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and east of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicularly to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(14)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.117; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-458-137-482. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Commercial C-8 District 

Sec. 137-483. - Intent. 
    The commercial C-8 district is designed to permit mixed use, high intensity, and/or high rise regional commercial complexes on tracts of land in developing areas near the intersection of major transportation arterials. Typically, this type of development would be located near the perimeters of the municipal corporation on land that is undeveloped or underdeveloped, and distant from existing, low-density residential neighborhoods. Outside storage, display, or sales shall not be permitted outside of a completely enclosed, substantially constructed and weathertight building. 
(Code 1985, § 159.130; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 137-484. - Uses. 
    Only the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Antique shops. 
(2)  Apartment buildings. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Art supply stores. 
(5)  Bakery shops. 
(6)  Ballrooms. 
(7)  Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and loan offices. 
(8)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(9)  Bed and breakfasts. 
(10)  Beverage stores. 
(11)  Book and stationery stores. 
(12)  Candy stores. 
(13)  Carry-out restaurants. 
(14)  Cafeterias. 
(15)  Catering services. 
(16)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. 
(17)  Clothing and apparel stores. 
(18)  Clubs and lodges. 
(19)  Colleges and universities. 
(20)  Community centers, private or public. 
(21)  Community welfare or health centers. 
(22)  Computer sales. 
(23)  Confectionery stores. 
(24)  Convents and rectories. 
(25)  Dairy stores. 
(26)  Dance schools. 
(27)  Day nurseries or day care centers. 
(28)  Delicatessens. 
(29)  Department stores. 
(30)  Design studios. 
(31)  Detective agencies. 
(32)  Drug stores. 
(33)  Dry cleaning, pick-up and delivery. 
(34)  Eating and drinking establishments without drive-in or drive-through services. 
(35)  Florist shops. 
(36)  Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
(37)  Gift shops. 
(38)  Governmental buildings. 
(39)  Gymnasiums and gymnastic schools. 
(40)  Handicraft shops. 
(41)  Health clubs. 
(42)  Health facility. 
(43)  Hospitals. 
(44)  Hotels. 
(45)  Ice cream shops. 
(46)  Jewelry stores. 
(47)  Libraries. 
(48)  Medical clinics. 
(49)  Medical laboratories. 
(50)  Motels. 
(51)  Motor bus terminals. 
(52)  Museums. 
(53)  Music stores. 
(54)  Newspaper offices. 
(55)  Nursing facility. 
(56)  Office buildings. 
(57)  Office supply and equipment sales. 
(58)  Offices. 
(59)  Optical shops. 
(60)  Paint, wallpaper and decorating stores. 
(61)  Parking garages. 
(62)  Parking lots. 
(63)  Parks and playgrounds (private). 
(64)  Personal service establishments. 
(65)  Philanthropic institutions. 
(66)  Photocopy duplicating shops. 
(67)  Photographic studios. 
(68)  Photography supplies, equipment and photo-finishing. 
(69)  Post offices. 
(70)  Printing shops. 
(71)  Professional offices: 
a.  Advertising agencies. 
b.  Accountants. 
c.  Architects. 
d.  Attorneys. 
e.  Chamber of commerce. 
f.  Chiropractors. 
g.  City planning. 
h.  Dentists. 
i.  Engineering consultants. 
j.  Government. 
k.  Health agencies. 
l.  Insurance agencies. 
m.  Interior decorating. 
n.  Labor organizations. 
o.  Manufacturing agents. 
p.  Market research. 
q.  Mortgage brokers. 
r.  Music instructors. 
s.  Optometrists. 
t.  Osteopaths. 
u.  Personnel management counselors. 
v.  Physicians and surgeons. 
w.  Podiatrists. 
x.  Public relations. 
y.  Real estate brokers. 
z.  Social service organizations. 
aa.  Stock and bond brokers. 
(72)  Publishers. 
(73)  Radio or television studios. 
(74)  Required off-street parking. 
(75)  Restaurants without drive-in or drive-through service. 
(76)  Retail stores. 
(77)  Schools, public, parochial or business. 
(78)  Shoe repair shops. 
(79)  Shoe stores. 
(80)  Social service organizations. 
(81)  Sporting goods stores. 
(82)  Studios: art, music, ceramics, drama, speech, dance and similar skills. 
(83)  Tailoring and alterations. 
(84)  Tanning salons. 
(85)  Tobacco stores. 
(86)  Transit transfer centers. 
(87)  Travel agencies. 
(88)  Union halls. 
(89)  Utility offices. 
(90)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of the buildings permitted by this section. 
(91)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(Code 1985, § 159.131; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3686, 5-3-1993; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
Sec. 137-485. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-8 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per building shall be a follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 120 feet or ten stories in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board or parapet to the side lot line. 
2.  For buildings greater than 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height, the minimum width of each side building setback shall be increased by a total of five feet for each additional one story in height. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  On corner lots the front building setback and interior side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the required front building setback. 
2.  Accessory structures shall not be permitted within the established exterior side building setback areas. 
(4)  Rear building setback. 
a.  For buildings up to 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height there shall be a rear building setback on every lot, and that setback shall have a minimum depth of not less than 25 feet. 
b.  For buildings greater than 35 feet or 21/2 stories in height, the minimum rear building setback shall be increased by five feet for each additional one story in height; provided that the rear building setback need not exceed 50 feet in depth. 
c.  In the case of a through lot, no rear building setback is required, but each street frontage shall be subject to the front building setback requirements of this section. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  No building, with its accessory buildings, shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(7)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. 
1.  Ballrooms, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Carry-out restaurants, ten per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Churches and synagogues, one per four seats or 80 inches of seating length in the main sanctuary or auditorium. 
4.  Colleges and universities, one per five students, based upon design capacity. 
5.  Convents and rectories, one per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6.  Eating and drinking establishments, ten per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
7.  Libraries, two per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
8.  All other uses, four per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line, and may be exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(10)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(11)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.132; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-486-137-508. - Reserved. 
Subdivision X. - Commercial C-9 District 

Sec. 137-509. - Intent; uses. 
(a)  The commercial C-9 district is designed for automobile and vehicle sales uses. These uses shall be limited to outside storage and display of new and used vehicles for sale, lease, or rent and large parking areas for parking, storage, and display. 
(b)  Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the commercial C-1 district. 
(2)  Automobile and truck auctions. 
(3)  Automobile sales. 
(4)  Automobile washing, polishing and detailing; provided, however, the automobiles are being offered for sale or lease on the premises. 
(5)  Commercial parking lots. 
(6)  Farm implement and supply stores. 
(7)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
(8)  Light trailer sales. 
(9)  Light truck sales. 
(10)  Mobile home sales. 
(11)  Motorcycle sales. 
(12)  Recreational vehicle sales. 
(13)  Vehicular rental equipment shops. 
(14)  Watercraft and watercraft motor sales. 
(Code 1985, § 159.135; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998) 
Sec. 137-510. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-9 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 40 feet in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a front building setback of at least 25 feet. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconforming structures, uses and lots. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a side building setback of at least five feet in width as measured from the eave, overhang or farthest protrusion to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots, the principal building shall meet the front and side building setback regulations set forth in subsections (2) and (3) of this section; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage of goods for sale in the business purposes. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with an accessory building shall be erected or expanded so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied with an improvement. 
(7)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(8)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire and razor wire are prohibited. 
(9)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. All uses listed as permitted uses in the commercial C-9 district, 51/2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(10)  Screening. An opaque seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any commercial C-9 property line which is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain paper products and debris within the property. 
(11)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(12)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(13)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and east of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicularly to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(14)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(15)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.136; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-511-137-528. - Reserved. 
Subdivision XI. - Commercial C-10 District 

Sec. 137-529. - Intent; permitted and accessory uses. 
(a)  The commercial C-10 district is designed for the storage and sale of gasoline and other motor fuels; the sale of motor vehicle lubricants, accessories or supplies; the lubrication of motor vehicles; and the repair, washing and detailing of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the commercial C-1 district. 
(2)  Filling stations. 
(3)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
(c)  The following accessory uses shall be permitted on the same lot as the permitted use: 
(1)  Automobile detailing. 
(2)  Automobile maintenance facility (quick service). 
(3)  Automobile service shop. 
(4)  Car wash (automatic or self-service). 
(5)  Light trailer service. 
(6)  Light truck service. 
(7)  Mobile home service. 
(8)  Motorcycle service. 
(9)  Recreational vehicle service. 
(Code 1985, § 159.140; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998) 
Sec. 137-530. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the commercial C-10 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per commercial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a front building setback of at least 25 feet. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconforming structures, uses and lots. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a side building setback of at least five feet in width as measured from the eave, overhang or farthest protrusion to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots, the principal building shall meet the front and side building setback regulations set forth in subsections (2) and (3) of this section; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Accessory buildings not over 15 feet high may be located in the rear half yard area, provided the accessory buildings come not nearer than 30 inches to any rear lot line or side lot line. Additionally, accessory buildings shall not be greater than 720 square feet in floor area. 
b.  No accessory building shall be used in whole or part for living or residential purposes. 
c.  No accessory building or accessory building area shall be used for commercial storage of goods for sale in the business. 
d.  Canopy structures may be built over the vehicle filling area; provided, however, the outer edge of the canopy structure is at least 20 feet from the exterior lot line and the structure is not taller than 35 feet in height. 
(6)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with an accessory building shall be erected or expanded so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied with an improvement. 
(7)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(8)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lot. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; the fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
c.  Prohibited fencing. Electrified fencing, barbed wire and razor wire are prohibited. 
(9)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Ratio requirements. All uses listed as permitted uses in the commercial C-10 district, 51/2 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(10)  Screening. An opaque seven-foot fence shall be mandatory along any commercial C-10 property line which is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain paper products and debris within the property. 
(11)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(12)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(13)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and East of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicularly to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles, a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(14)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(15)  Filling station separation. No filling station shall be permitted within 300 feet of the St. Joseph River as measured by a line between the nearest lot line and the St. Joseph River. 
(16)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented below. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.141; Ord. No. 4302, 8-17-1998; Ord. No. 4565, 2-12-2001; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Secs. 137-531-137-553. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 137-554-137-584. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Industrial I-1 District 

Sec. 137-585. - Intent. 
    This district is designed to provide suitable locations for the development of wholesale distribution, warehousing, industrial research, light assembly, and light manufacturing establishments which shall meet the provisions of chapter 30, article V, pertaining to noise control; shall not emit point-source pollution; if hazardous wastes are generated, that waste shall be disposed of in a manner as prescribed by the state department of environmental management and/or the Environmental Protection Agency; and which shall operate entirely within completely enclosed, substantially constructed and weathertight buildings. The I-1 district is created in order to secure proper traffic routing, truck loading and unloading, and automobile parking; control of traffic on public streets through provision for adequate off-street parking and off-street truck loading; protection of the surrounding neighborhood values; and the promotion of the general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1985, § 159.145; Ord. No. 2931, 9-2-1986) 
Sec. 137-586. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Advertising sign fabrication. 
(2)  Aluminum casters. 
(3)  Aluminum extruders. 
(4)  Apparel manufacturing and wholesale distribution. 
(5)  Appliance wholesale distributing. 
(6)  Automobile parts wholesale distributing. 
(7)  Awning manufacturing. 
(8)  Baked goods production and distributing. 
(9)  Beer, wine, and liquor wholesale distributing. 
(10)  Beverage bottling plants and wholesale distribution. 
(11)  Box and paper product manufacturing. 
(12)  Cabinet manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(13)  Churches, synagogues, and similar places of worship. 
(14)  Cleaning services. 
(15)  Commercial greenhouses. 
(16)  Consumable merchandise wholesale distributing. 
(17)  Contractors with no outside storage: 
a.  Concrete (no batching plants). 
b.  Crane. 
c.  Excavating. 
d.  General. 
e.  Housemovers. 
f.  Landscaping. 
g.  Masonry. 
h.  Paving (no batching plants). 
i.  Sewer. 
j.  Steel erection. 
k.  Wrecking. 
(18)  Dairy goods production and distributing. 
(19)  Dry cleaning central processing. 
(20)  Electric machinery servicing, manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(21)  Electrical equipment wholesale distributing. 
(22)  Electronic equipment manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(23)  Fiberglass molding and winding. 
(24)  Food wholesale distribution. 
(25)  Freestanding, off-premises signs and billboards. 
(26)  Furniture manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(27)  Furniture repair and refinishing. 
(28)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(29)  Glass wholesale distributing. 
(30)  Greenhouses. 
(31)  Hardware goods wholesale distribution. 
(32)  Heating, ventilation or air conditioning supply sales. 
(33)  Ice manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(34)  Industrial design. 
(35)  Industrial painting. 
(36)  Industrial research. 
(37)  Laundry central processing. 
(38)  Light assembling. 
(39)  Light fabricating. 
(40)  Light manufacturing. 
(41)  Lumber sales. 
(42)  Machine shops. 
(43)  Material handling equipment wholesale distributing. 
(44)  Meat and seafood wholesale distributing. 
(45)  Metal plating. 
(46)  Newspaper periodical and book printing. 
(47)  Office buildings. 
(48)  Paper wholesale distribution. 
(49)  Parking lots and garages. 
(50)  Parts manufacturing and assembling. 
(51)  Pharmaceutical products manufacturing. 
(52)  Plastic product molding. 
(53)  Plastic product wholesale distributing. 
(54)  Plumbing supply sales. 
(55)  Product packaging. 
(56)  Rubber product molding. 
(57)  Self-service storage facility, mini-storage. 
(58)  Sheet metal fabricating. 
(59)  Sporting goods manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(60)  Steel product fabrication. 
(61)  Steel stamping. 
(62)  Tool and die makers. 
(63)  Tool manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(64)  Van conversion. 
(65)  Vending machine wholesale distributing. 
(66)  Warehousing. 
(67)  Welding shops. 
(68)  Wholesale distributing. 
(69)  Wood products manufacturing and wholesale distributing. 
(70)  Customary agricultural operations (truck farming); provided, however, that no storage of manure will be permitted within 1,000 feet of any property line. 
(71)  One temporary building for the construction industry which is incidental to erection of buildings permitted by this section. 
(b)  Conditional uses. Subject to the provisions of section 137-587(14), the following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned I-1 light industrial district: Indoor shooting gallery. 
(Code 1985, § 159.146; Ord. No. 2931, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4170, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 4401, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 137-587. - Height, area, and development regulations. 
    In the industrial I-1 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per industrial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 60 feet or five stories high. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. A ten-foot side yard is required if the industrial property is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. 
(4)  Rear building setback. 
a.  There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. 
b.  The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with an accessory building shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(6)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. All permitted uses as listed in section 137-586, one per each employee, based upon the maximum employment level per shift. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(7)  Off-street loading. At least one off-street loading and unloading berth shall be provided in the ratio of one berth per building. Loading, unloading, or truck queuing shall be prohibited on the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences and landscape screening. 
a.  A seven-foot-high opaque fence shall be mandatory along any developed industrial property line that is contiguous to any residentially zoned property. Fencing shall meet the minimum front yard setback requirements of the district in which it is located. In addition. 
b.  Along any developed industrial property line which is contiguous to any residentially zoned property, a ten-foot wide area along the property line shall be sodded, planted, and landscaped with at least seven-foot high shrubs or trees in order to form a permanent, opaque, landscaped screen. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and East of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicularly to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles, a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(13)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(14)  Indoor shooting gallery separation. No indoor shooting gallery shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school, park, church, and/or hospital, as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school, park, church, and/or hospital and the nearest lot line of the indoor shooting gallery. 
(15)  Self-service storage facility, mini storage separation. No self-service storage facility, mini storage use shall be permitted to be placed within 250 feet of any school, park, church, hospital, and/or residentially-zoned property, as measured by a straight line drawn between the nearest lot line of the school, park, church, hospital, and/or residentially-zoned property and the nearest lot line of the self-service storage facility, mini storage use. 
(16)  Business related activities. All business related activities and operations must be conducted within enclosed buildings. All raw materials, finished products, or other incidental materials associated with a given property use shall be stored within enclosed buildings. Outside storage of raw materials, finished products, or other incidental materials are prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 159.147; Ord. No. 2931, 9-2-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4170, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 4401, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-588-137-607. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Industrial I-2 District 

Sec. 137-608. - Intent. 
(a)  This district is designed to provide suitable locations for development of major industrial operations for heavy manufacturing, heavy assembling, processing, and outside storage. These facilities shall meet the provisions of chapter 30, article V, and if hazardous wastes are generated, that waste shall be disposed of in a manner prescribed by the state department of environmental management and/or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(b)  The industrial I-2 district is created in order to secure proper traffic safety through provision for proper traffic routing, truck loading and unloading, and automobile parking; control of traffic on public streets through provision for adequate off-street parking and off-street truck loading; protection of the surrounding neighborhood values; and the promotion of the general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(c)  All permitted and conditional uses as listed below shall be approved by the state department of environmental management, the Environmental Protection Agency, and any other local, state, or federal agency as applicable prior to obtaining a conditional use permit from the board of zoning appeals or an improvement location permit from the city planner. 
(Code 1985, § 159.160; Ord. No. 2945, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 137-609. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any permitted use in the industrial I-1 district. 
(2)  Appliance manufacturing. 
(3)  Automobile manufacturing. 
(4)  Boat manufacturing. 
(5)  Brick, ceramic tile, terra cotta or porcelain manufacturing. 
(6)  Building material storage yard. 
(7)  Cast concrete manufacturing. 
(8)  Cold rolled metal processing. 
(9)  Contractor storage yards. 
(10)  Dye manufacturing. 
(11)  Electrical equipment manufacturing. 
(12)  Farm machinery manufacturing. 
(13)  Flooring manufacturing. 
(14)  Food processing. 
(15)  Foundries. 
(16)  Game arcade and pool hall or billiard hall. 
(17)  Glass manufacturing. 
(18)  Grain storage. 
(19)  Heavy assembling. 
(20)  Heavy manufacturing. 
(21)  Heavy truck or heavy trailer sales or service. 
(22)  Ink manufacturing. 
(23)  Lumber company storage yards. 
(24)  Lumber saw mills or planing mills. 
(25)  Metal stamping. 
(26)  Machinery manufacturing. 
(27)  Manufactured home construction. 
(28)  Mobile building or mobile home manufacturing. 
(29)  Movers of household goods. 
(30)  Paint manufacturing. 
(31)  Pigment manufacturing. 
(32)  Pipe manufacturing. 
(33)  Plastic product manufacturing. 
(34)  Recreational vehicle manufacturing. 
(35)  Rubber manufacturing. 
(36)  Self-service storage facility, mini storage. 
(37)  Soap and detergent manufacturing. 
(38)  Stone products manufacturing. 
(39)  Transportation equipment manufacturing. 
(40)  Truck manufacturing. 
(41)  Well drilling contractors. 
(42)  Wire manufacturing. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned industrial I-2 district: 
(1)  Acid and alkaline manufacturing and storage. 
(2)  Animal by-products processing. 
(3)  Areawide trash incineration plants. 
(4)  Asphalt batching plants. 
(5)  Asphaltic products manufacturing and storage. 
(6)  Automobile used parts storage yards. 
(7)  Chemical bulk storage and wholesale distributing. 
(8)  Chemical manufacturing. 
(9)  Coke manufacturing. 
(10)  Communication broadcasting towers. 
(11)  Concrete batching plants. 
(12)  Creosote manufacturing and treatment. 
(13)  Crematories. 
(14)  Explosives and blasting agents manufacturing and storage. 
(15)  Fireworks manufacturing and storage. 
(16)  Gas bulk storage and wholesale distributing. 
(17)  Hatcheries. 
(18)  Heavy truck and heavy trailer storage. 
(19)  Indoor shooting gallery (but subject to the provisions of section 137-610(14)). 
(20)  Leather tanning. 
(21)  Lime, cement and plaster processing. 
(22)  Livestock yards. 
(23)  Medical waste disposal. 
(24)  Metals smelting. 
(25)  Microwave towers. 
(26)  Mining and extraction operations. Mining and extraction operators shall be operated on a lot of no less than ten acres in area, provided that: 
a.  The operations and uses shall not be conducted within 50 feet of any property line unless a greater distance is specified by the board of zoning appeals, where such is deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent property. Beginning at the required setback, the banks of all excavation areas shall not be excavated to a slope greater than 45 degrees from the horizontal; however, when the adjacent property is being mined for sand or gravel, the setback requirements may be waived along any common property line. 
b.  A continuous fence, comprised of seven feet of woven wire fabric shall be erected and maintained along the property line around the entire site. In addition, an evergreen planting screen shall be required around the entire site within the required setback. Such screen planting shall be comprised of pine seedlings which are staggered six feet on center in two rows which are six feet apart; provided, however, when the adjacent property is used for mining and extraction operations, the fence and screen planting requirements may be waived along any common property line. 
c.  Prior to approval of the conditional use every applicant shall execute an acceptable indemnity agreement in favor of the city in a form approved by the board of zoning appeals, which indemnifying agreement shall be for the purpose of assuring the restoration, rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out areas within a reasonable time and to the satisfaction of the board of zoning appeals and to further assure that the following minimum requirements will be met: 
d.  A uniform rolling contour shall be established throughout all excavation areas. 
e.  The banks of all excavation areas shall be restored to a two-foot horizontal and one-foot vertical ratio and the slopes seeded, landscaped and maintained until a permanent type ground cover is established to prevent erosion. 
f.  Soil, suitable for growing vegetation, shall be replaced over the slopes of a uniform depth of not less than two inches. 
g.  If excavations are made to a water-producing depth, such depth shall not be less than six feet below the low water mark and the areas which are not permanently submerged shall be so graded as to eliminate the collection of stagnant water. 
h.  In addition to the foregoing, the board of zoning appeals may impose such other conditions, requirements or limitations concerning the nature, extent of the use and operation of such excavation operations as the board of zoning appeals may deem necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interests. 
(27)  Nuclear waste disposal. 
(28)  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
(29)  Petrochemical processing. 
(30)  Petroleum bulk storage and wholesale distributing. 
(31)  Petroleum processing. 
(32)  Power generation plants. 
(33)  Primary metals processing. 
(34)  Railroad yards and piggyback operations. 
(35)  Salvage material storage yards. 
(36)  Sanitary landfills. No sanitary landfill shall be approved as a conditional use which does not meet the following minimum standards in addition to whatever additional requirements may be required by the board of zoning appeals: 
a.  No such conditional use shall be operated on a site of less than 40 acres. 
b.  No portion of such site within 50 feet from adjacent property lines shall be utilized for such conditional use; provided, that where a residential district or principal residential use shares contiguous boundaries with the site of the conditional use at the time such conditional use is approved by the board of zoning appeals, no portion of such site within 100 feet of the boundary lines of such residential district or the property lines of such principal residential use shall be utilized for such conditional use. 
c.  No sanitary landfill shall be approved as a conditional use until the applicant therefor and the owner of the proposed site therefor shall execute an agreement in favor of the city by the terms of which such applicant and owner shall agree to maintain the site while being utilized for the conditional use, and to restore and reclaim the site within a time period specified in such agreement following termination of such use, according to the following minimum specifications: 
1.  A uniform contour which blends in with the topography of the surrounding area shall be established and maintained throughout the area. 
2.  Impervious soil and soil suitable for growing vegetation, shall be replaced over the site to permanent uniform depths not less than that then required by applicable state standards and regulations. 
3.  The site shall be seeded, landscaped, and maintained with perennial plant material until a permanent type ground cover is established to prevent erosion. 
(37)  Scrap metal storage yards. 
(38)  Semitruck and semitrailer storage. 
(39)  Slaughterhouses. 
(40)  Toxic and flammable chemical bulk storage and wholesale distributing. 
(41)  Truck transport terminals and dispatching. 
(42)  Vehicle wrecking yards. 
(Code 1985, § 159.161; Ord. No. 2945, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 4170, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 4401, 6-21-1999) 
Sec. 137-610. - Height, area, and development regulations. 
    In the industrial I-2 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per industrial building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 60 feet or five stories high. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line on either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. A ten-foot side yard is required if the industrial property is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. 
(4)  Rear building setback. 
a.  There shall be a rear setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. 
b.  The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer or water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with an accessory building shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 75 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(6)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. All permitted uses as listed in section 137-609, one per each employee, based upon the maximum employment level per shift. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(7)  Off-street loading. At least one off-street loading or unloading berth shall be provided in the ratio of one berth per building. Loading, unloading, or truck queuing shall be prohibited on the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(9)  Fences and landscape screening. 
a.  A seven-foot-high opaque fence shall be mandatory along any developed industrial property line that is contiguous to any residentially zoned property. The fence shall be designed to provide security, and also to contain debris within the developed industrial property. Fencing shall meet the minimum front yard setback requirements of the district in which it is located. In addition. 
b.  Along any developed industrial property line which is contiguous to any residentially zoned property, a ten-foot wide area along the property line shall be sodded, planted, and landscaped with at least seven-foot high shrubs or trees in order to form a permanent, opaque, landscaped screen. 
c.  Outside storage of raw materials, finished products, or other incidental materials associated with a permitted use, if provided, shall be contained/completely surrounded by a seven-foot high opaque fence. In addition, outside storage shall not be visible from any public road right-of-way. If proposed outside storage areas, or modifications to existing, outside storage areas are visible from any public rights-of-way, they shall be screened by shrubs and trees sufficient to provide a permanent opaque landscaped screen. 
(10)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(11)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(12)  Freestanding off-premises signs. 
a.  Separation requirements. Separation between proposed and existing off-premises signs and specified uses along the street shall be measured along the centerline of the street. For this measurement, the location of proposed and/or existing structures and uses shall be considered the center of the proposed structure or closest edge of the property measured perpendicularly to the centerline of the street. Unless otherwise specified, all other separation requirements shall be measured from the closest point of the proposed structure linearly to the specified property, use, and/or structure. For the purposes of this section, a pending completed application or valid improvement location permit shall be considered as an existing sign. The following separation distances shall be required between off-premises signs: 
1.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a non-limited-access highway shall be 750 feet. 
2.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another on a limited-access highway shall be 1,500 feet. 
3.  The minimum separation distance between one sign structure and another sign structure located at intersections, or on different streets from which they are intended to be viewed, shall be 300 feet. 
4.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 100 feet measured from the center of the sign in any direction. 
5.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, residential district or legal nonconforming residential use shall be 200 feet along both sides of the street from which the sign is intended to be viewed. 
6.  The minimum separation distance between a sign structure and the 100-year floodplain of the St. Joseph River as identified by the flood insurance rate maps shall be 300 feet. 
7.  Separation distances shall not be limited by jurisdictional boundaries. Required separation distances for proposed signs located within the jurisdiction of the city shall also be maintained from signs located in adjacent municipalities or jurisdictional areas. 
b.  Permitting. Applications shall not be considered complete unless all applicable information is submitted. The following information shall be submitted concurrently with any application for an improvement location permit for an off-premises sign: 
1.  A signed contract with property owners, or a deed identifying the applicant's property ownership where the sign is intended to be placed. 
2.  Most recent aerial photograph identifying all off-premises signs within a 1,000-foot radius of the proposed sign located along non-limited-access highways. The aerial photograph shall also identify property either zoned or used for a church, school, park, or residential purpose within 250 feet of the proposed sign. 
3.  Construction plans on the proposed sign, documenting the proposed height, area, setbacks, appearance, color and any other developmental requirements identified by this chapter. 
4.  A scaled plan identifying the location of the sign relative to property and right-of-way lines. Plot plan shall identify the location of hard surface paving, drives, sidewalk, easements, utilities, and buildings located within 100 feet of the proposed sign. 
5.  Proposed signs located within 50 feet of any required separation distance shall require a certified survey submitted by a licensed surveyor verifying that the proposed location meets all minimum setback requirements. 
6.  Signs proposed within the required separation distances to an adjacent municipality or jurisdiction area shall submit documentation from the municipality or area that a valid permit has not been issued or is pending for a sign within the required separation distance of the proposed sign. 
c.  Developmental requirements. The following developmental requirements shall apply to the construction of off-premises signs: 
1.  Non-limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a non-limited-access highway shall not exceed 300 square feet. Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 50 square feet per face (a maximum of 350 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
2.  Non-limited-access highways, replacement of legally nonconforming signs. The replacement and/or relocation of any legally nonconforming sign shall meet all the requirements of this chapter; however, signs legally constructed with a greater display area than required by this chapter may be replaced at the existing nonconforming display area provided the following provisions are met: 
(i)  All other applicable provisions of this chapter are met. 
(ii)  The geographic areas that replacement may occur shall be limited to the following non-limited-access highways: Grape Road, north of Catalpa and south of Cleveland Road; Edison Road, beginning 500 feet west of Main Street and east of Hickory Road; McKinley Avenue, west of Fir Road and east of Hickory Road. 
(iii)  An improvement location permit must be approved within 180 days of the removal of the legally nonconforming display area sign. Documentation regarding the removal of the existing nonconforming sign shall be submitted concurrently with the permit request for its replacement. 
3.  Limited-access highways. Only one sign shall be permitted per location based on the separation requirements identified herein. Two-tier signs shall be prohibited. The display area of the face of any sign located on a limited-access highway shall not exceed 14 feet in height by 48 feet in length (672 square feet). Temporary extensions may be added to individual signs based on individual advertising requirements not to exceed 200 square feet per face (a maximum of 872 square feet with extensions). Extensions may project no higher than four feet above the height of the sign, including those of a legally nonconforming height. 
4.  Signs that are located back-to-back shall be considered one sign, provided the interior angle formed by each side of the sign does not exceed 45 degrees. 
5.  The height of any sign shall not exceed 35 feet. 
6.  Setbacks. Setback distances shall be measured from the nearest projection, appendage, board, or structure of the sign perpendicularly to road right-of-way or property lines. 
(i)  The minimum setback for any sign from public road right-of-way shall be 25 feet. 
(ii)  The minimum rear-yard setback for any sign shall be 25 feet. 
(iii)  The minimum side-yard setback for any sign shall be five feet. 
7.  The appearance of off-premises sign structures shall incorporate the use of architectural columns and lattice below the face of the sign. The zoning administrator shall provide examples of signs that meet this requirement on request. Lattice shall not be required only in cases where it would block clear vision or cause other safety concerns as determined by the zoning administrator. 
8.  The color of off-premises sign structures shall be limited to natural earth-tone colors including, but not limited to, beige, brown, brick red, slate blue, and forest green. Bright and contrasting colors including, but not limited to, black, white, red, orange, yellow, purple and sky blue shall be prohibited. 
9.  Lighting for off-premises signs shall not cause any light to be reflected toward a street or adjacent property. 
10.  The use of animation, flashing lights, and beacon lights shall not be permitted as part of any off-premises sign. Any sign that resembles, or includes an element that resembles a traffic control device, sign, or light shall be prohibited. Electrical reader boards, tri-vision boards, and multiple-vision boards shall be permitted for off-premises signage. 
11.  The placement of any off-premises sign shall not cause any conflict with circulation, drainage, parking, landscaping, and/or any other site attribute controlled and/or required by this chapter. Signs may not be placed in any landscape area required by this chapter. 
12.  Off-premises signs shall be continually maintained for both structural integrity and appearance. Appearance includes, but shall not be limited to, issues such as rusting structures, peeling paper, and broken lattice. Empty boards and signs without advertising covering the entire face of the board shall be prohibited. 
13.  Enforcement. The zoning administrator shall notify property owners by certified mail regarding any structure in violation of the chapter. Any sign that is not repaired or modified accordingly within 30 days of notification shall be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(13)  School separation. No game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school lot and the nearest lot line of the game arcade and/or pool hall or billiard hall. 
(14)  Indoor shooting gallery separation. No indoor shooting gallery shall be permitted to be placed within 750 feet of any school, park, church, and/or hospital, as measured by a line between the nearest lot line of the school, park, church, and/or hospital and the nearest lot line of the indoor shooting gallery. 
(15)  Self-service storage facility, mini storage separation. No self-service storage facility, mini storage use shall be permitted to be placed within 250 feet of any school, park, church, hospital, and/or residentially-zoned property, as measured by a straight line drawn between the nearest lot line of the school, park, church, hospital, and/or residentially-zoned property and the nearest lot line of the self-service storage facility, mini storage use. 
(16)  Outside storage of materials associated with property use. Outside storage of raw materials, finished products, or other incidental materials associated with a given property use are permitted. 
a.  The storage area location shall meet the front yard building setback requirements of the industrial 1-2 zoning district. 
b.  The storage area shall be fenced and landscaped in accordance with the landscaping requirements of the industrial I-2 zoning district. 
(Code 1985, § 159.162; Ord. No. 2945, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3466, 3-4-1991; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4170, 5-19-1997; Ord. No. 4401, 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 4568, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-611-137-638. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPECIAL S-1 DISTRICT 

Sec. 137-639. - Intent. 
    This district is designed to help preserve large tracts of land for land extensive uses which are necessary and desirable for the longterm health, use, and enjoyment of the community. 
(Code 1985, § 159.175; Ord. No. 2946, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 137-640. - Uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Only the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Cemeteries. 
(2)  Country clubs or golf courses. 
(3)  Public parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Water pumping plants. 
(b)  Conditional uses. The following uses may be conditionally approved by the board of zoning appeals for property already zoned special S-1 district: 
(1)  Airports. 
(2)  Amusement parks. 
(3)  Campgrounds. 
(4)  Drive-in theatres. 
(5)  Electrical substations. 
(6)  Fair grounds. 
(7)  Open air markets. 
(8)  Penal or correctional institutions. 
(9)  Race tracks. 
(10)  Sewage treatment plants. 
(11)  Stadiums and arenas. 
(12)  Zoos. 
(Code 1985, § 159.176; Ord. No. 2946, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3256, 3-20-1989) 
Sec. 137-641. - Height, area, and developmental regulations. 
    In the special S-1 district, the height of buildings, the minimum dimensions of yards and setbacks, and the minimum lot area per building shall be as follows: 
(1)  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed 35 feet or 21/2 stories high. 
(2)  Front building setback. 
a.  There shall be a front building setback of at least 25 feet for all new principal buildings. Nonconforming buildings shall adhere to the applicable sections regulating nonconformances. 
b.  On through lots the required front building setback shall be provided on both streets. No accessory buildings shall project beyond the front building setback line of either street. 
(3)  Side building setback. 
a.  A side building setback shall not be less than five feet in width as measured from the facia board to the side lot line. 
b.  On corner lots the usual front building setback and side building setback regulations shall apply; however, the exterior side building setback shall not be less than 50 percent of the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the front building setback required for lots facing the street upon which the side yard abuts. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot of record at the time of the passage of this section to less than 25 feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where this regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. A ten-foot side yard is required if the property is contiguous to any residentially-zoned property. 
(4)  Rear building setback. There shall be a rear building setback of not less than ten percent of the depth of the lot for a one-story building. The depth shall be increased to 15 percent of the depth of the lot for any building greater than or equal to two stories; however, the rear building setback need not exceed 30 feet in depth. 
(5)  Minimum lot area and maximum intensity of use. 
a.  Every lot upon which a building is erected or altered shall have a front lot width dimension and area as follows: 
1.  Sewer and water available: 60 feet frontage at front lot line; 6,600 square feet. 
2.  Sewer and water unavailable: 70 feet frontage at front lot line; 10,000 square feet. 
3.  Sewer and water unavailable: 100 feet frontage at front lot line; 15,000 square feet. 
b.  Any lot which has been recorded in a subdivision plat or deed with the office of the county recorder prior to November 21, 1966, and which is 4,000 square feet or more in area, may be used as a building site. 
c.  No building with its accessory building shall be erected or increased in ground area so that more than 45 percent of the area of the lot will be occupied. 
(6)  Off-street parking. 
a.  Ratio requirements. One per each employee, based upon the maximum employment per shift. 
b.  Construction parameters. The following shall apply to all parking lots: 
1.  All parking spaces required to service the principal building shall be located on the same lot as the principal building, or on a separate lot which is within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal building. 
2.  When a principal building undergoes an increase in the gross floor area, seating capacity, or number of units, the required off-street parking availability shall be increased to equal or exceed the off-street parking requirements. 
3.  All parking lots shall be surfaced with an all-weather paving material capable of carrying a wheel load of 4,000 pounds without damaging the pavement. The lot shall be properly maintained at all times. 
4.  All lots shall be lighted if used after sunset. Lights shall be located, shielded, and directed upon the parking lot in such a manner as to not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into the public right-of-way. Lighting shall not exceed three footcandles as measured at that portion of the lot line which abuts residentially-zoned property. 
5.  A minimum five-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between the property line and edge of the parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between any public road right-of-way or private access easement and the edge of parking lot pavement. A minimum ten-foot parking lot setback shall be provided between internal vehicular collector drives and the edge of parking lot pavement. Slag, gravel or any type of pavement shall be prohibited within the setback area. The setback area shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover or grass and/or decorative trees or shrubs. 
6.  Public address systems shall not be permitted in any parking lot. 
7.  Parking spaces shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. Small car parking spaces may be constructed, but shall be no smaller than 130 square feet in area with a minimum width of 81/2 feet. A maximum of 25 percent of the total off-street parking spaces may be used for small cars, and each parking space shall be marked by an above-grade sign as a small car parking space. 
8.  Parking lots shall be properly graded and drained so that stormwater drainage is collected and disposed of on site. 
(7)  Vision clearance. No structure, fence, hedge, or other plantings shall be permitted within a ten-foot radius of the corner of the lot where the corner lot adjoins the intersecting street right-of-way. There shall be a complete vision clearance for a distance of not less than ten feet above the ground on all corner lots. 
(8)  Fences. 
a.  Interior lots. 
1.  No fence over seven feet in height shall be erected between the rear lot line and the front building setback line; along the front setback line between the side wall of the building and the side lot line; or along the rear lot line between the two side lot lines. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the two side lot lines; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
b.  Corner lots. 
1.  A seven-foot-high fence may be erected only along the exterior side building setback line and the rear building setback line and along the exterior side building setback line, if extended, between the rear building setback line and the rear lot line. A seven-foot-high fence may be erected along the interior side lot line between the front building setback line and the rear lot line, and may be erected along the rear lot line between the interior side lot line and the intersection of the rear lot line and the exterior side building setback line, if extended. Four-foot-high fences may be erected in the exterior side yard area between the front setback line and the rear lot line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
2.  No fence over four feet in height shall be erected between the front building setback line and the front lot line, or along the front lot line between the interior side lot line and the exterior side building setback line; such fence shall have a minimum of 75 percent of its surface open to permit visibility through it. 
(9)  Trees. Only hardwood trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk in the tree lawn. No trees shall be planted in tree lawns of less than five feet in width. The spacing of trees in tree lawns shall be not less than 40 feet apart. 
(10)  Signs. All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(Code 1985, § 159.177; Ord. No. 2946, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989; Ord. No. 3297, 8-7-1989; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993; Ord. No. 4576, 4-2-2001) 
Secs. 137-642-137-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT S-2 DISTRICT 

Sec. 137-671. - Intent. 
(a)  Recognizing that there is a need for flexibility in order to meet the needs of the marketplace because of changing preference; to allow a means of keeping abreast of new land planning techniques; and to guide the orderly planning of residential, commercial, or industrial areas, the planned unit development S-2 district is hereby created. 
(b)  It shall be the policy of the city to promote progressive development of land and construction thereon by encouraging planned unit developments to achieve: 
(1)  A maximum choice of living environments by allowing a variety of housing and building types, and permitting an increased density per acre and a reduction in lot dimensions, yards, building setbacks, and area requirements. 
(2)  A more useful pattern of open space and recreation areas, and, if permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory commercial uses and services. 
(3)  A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography and geologic features, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and prevents the disruption of natural drainage patterns. 
(4)  A more efficient use of land than is generally achieved through conventional development, resulting in substantial savings through shorter utility lines and streets. 
(5)  A development pattern in harmony with land use density, transportation facilities, and community facilities objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1985, § 159.185; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-672. - Performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be required of all planned unit developments and shall be addressed in the preliminary PUD petition: 
(1)  All PUDs shall be equal to or greater than five acres in area. 
(2)  The land use mix shall not be of such nature, or so located, so as to be detrimental upon the PUD or upon the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  The PUD shall have direct access to collector, arterial, or thoroughfare streets. 
(4)  A PUD located within a residential area shall only include residential land uses, unless the PUD exceeds 25 acres. 
(5)  There shall be established a property owners association which shall adopt bylaws; the association shall hold title to all recreation, common open space, private streets, private utilities, and common areas. 
(6)  All recreation, common open space, private streets, private utilities, and common areas which are part of the PUD shall be properly maintained; and adequate assessments shall be made by the property owners association to fund the perpetual maintenance of those facilities. 
(7)  All utilities in the PUD shall be placed underground in recorded utility easements. 
(8)  The PUD shall include a complete water system, sewer system, and paved roadway system of adequate capacity to handle the needs of the total development. If those systems are to become public property, then they shall be constructed according to the rules and regulations of the board of public works, which may be amended from time to time. 
(9)  The PUD shall have adequate greenspace. 
(10)  All parking and driving areas shall be properly graded, drained, and paved with a durable, dust-free surface. 
(11)  There shall be stormwater drainage capacity for paved and roofed areas which shall conform to the regulations of the board of public works and safety and/or the stormwater drainage regulations. 
(12)  The PUD shall be designed in such a manner as to constitute an organized, architecturally harmonious, and efficient development. 
(13)  Unless the plan commission deems it necessary, the PUD shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, which may be amended from time to time. 
(14)  If the PUD is to be built in phases, all phases shall be shown. 
(15)  Any land use which is specifically permitted by the PUD ordinance, but the building's location is not delineated on the final PUD site plan, shall adhere to the appropriate height, area, and developmental regulations of the most restrictive zoning district in which the use would otherwise be permitted. 
(16)  The PUD ordinance, site plan, and subdivision plat shall be filed simultaneously. 
(17)  Design review; development plan restrictions. This section shall apply only to new commercial development, new commercial development (separate structures) on existing sites, or total commercial redevelopment or replacement. This section shall not apply to building additions or expansions to existing buildings. All construction shall meet the requirements of chapter 105, design requirements as referenced herein, except that the plan commission shall specifically consider the context of the proposal relative to the nonconforming status of adjacent structures. The plan commission may consider the nonconforming status of adjacent structures in approving waivers in accordance with section 105-39. In accordance with section 105-4, the applicable design requirements are identified as follows: 
a.  Section 105-76, architectural materials, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. At a minimum, two-thirds of each face of the visible portions of the building must use appropriate architectural materials. The remaining third may consist of other materials as may be determined by the owner/developer of the building. Appropriate architectural materials shall be expanded to include glass, exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS), decorative concrete block and similar masonry units, painted/stained lap wood siding, and other high-quality materials as may be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. Metal siding and standard concrete block exterior finishes shall be considered inappropriate architectural materials. The color of all exterior architectural finishes shall meet the requirements of section 105-77 as supplemented in subsection (17)b of this section. 
b.  Section 105-77, architectural color and textures, further limited as to only apply to those portions of the building visible from the public right-of-way and private collector roads serving multiple properties or businesses. Appropriate colors and textures may be expanded to include bold and contrasting colors subject to the review and approval of the plan commission in accordance with the established intent of the ordinance as documented by section 105-2. 
c.  Section 105-108, mechanical equipment. 
d.  Section 105-109, vending machines and newsracks. This requirement shall not apply to newsracks located in conjunction with restaurants which meet the required building setbacks of the district. Newsracks located adjacent to other commercial buildings that are designed in concert with the building may also be deemed appropriate by the plan commission. 
e.  Section 105-116, dumpster/utility service areas. 
f.  The public hearing requirements identified by section 105-31 shall not apply. 
(Code 1985, § 159.186; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 4584, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 137-673. - Procedures for approval. 
    The following procedures shall be adhered to in order to obtain PUD approval: 
(1)  A preliminary PUD and the requisite fees shall be filed with the staff of the department of city planning. 
(2)  The city plan commission shall hold a public hearing on the preliminary PUD, and within 30 days refer the preliminary PUD to the city council with a recommendation. 
(3)  The city council shall hold a public hearing in order to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the preliminary PUD, and refer the approved preliminary PUD to the city plan commission for final PUD approval. 
(4)  If the final PUD meets the provisions of the approved preliminary PUD, the city plan commission shall approve the final PUD without holding a public hearing. 
(5)  The approved PUD shall then be recorded at the office of the county recorder by the staff of the department of city planning within ten days after final approval, and all recording fees shall be paid by the developer. 
(Code 1985, § 159.187; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-674. - Preliminary PUD. 
    At the time of filing a PUD ordinance, a preliminary site plan shall also be filed. The preliminary PUD site plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Legal description. 
(2)  Property boundary lines with dimensions. 
(3)  North arrow. 
(4)  Scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(5)  Vicinity map showing surrounding streets. 
(6)  Location, size, height, and setback, if buildings are proposed. 
(7)  Floor area ratio. 
(8)  Location of parking lots with setbacks from property boundaries. 
(9)  Parking ratio for each differing land use. 
(10)  Location and width of all streets and sidewalks. 
(11)  Curb cut location and width. 
(12)  Existing curb cut approaches, street intersections, and traffic hazards within 100 feet of property boundaries. 
(13)  Delineation of all phases. 
(Code 1985, § 159.188; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-675. - Final PUD. 
    At the time of filing for final PUD approval with the plan commission, the following shall also be included on the final PUD site plan: 
(1)  Building facade rendering. 
(2)  Landscape buffering location, height and materials. 
(3)  Proposed property landscape features. 
(4)  Security lights location and height. 
(5)  All signs shall conform with requirements of chapter 129. 
(6)  Finish topographic elevations on a uniform grid using United States Geodetic Survey (U.S.G.S.) datum. 
(7)  Location and capacity calculations of storm drainage facilities. 
(8)  Location and capacity calculations of water service facilities. 
(9)  Location and capacity calculations of sewer facilities. 
(10)  Location and capacity calculations of electric facilities. 
(11)  Location of fire protection facilities. 
(12)  Curb cut slope and return radii. 
(13)  Legal description of all rights-of-way and easements to be accepted by the board of public works. 
(14)  Sufficient additional data as may be required by the plan commission or city council subsequent to the approved preliminary site plan. 
(Code 1985, § 159.189; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990) 
Sec. 137-676. - Time limits. 
(a)  If after one year from the date of approval of the preliminary PUD by the city council, the developer has not obtained final PUD approval from the plan commission, the property shall automatically revert to residential R-1 district zoning. The preliminary PUD may be continued for one 12-month extension if approved by the plan commission. 
(b)  If after one year from the date of approval of the final PUD by the plan commission, the developer has not obtained building permits, the property shall automatically revert to residential R-1 district zoning. The final PUD may be continued for one 12-month extension if approved by the plan commission. 
(Code 1985, § 159.190; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-677. - Zoning designation binding successors in interest. 
    Whenever a tract of land has been designated as a planned unit development, that zoning designation shall continue in effect irrespective of subsequent changes in ownership, whether all of or a portion of the designated tract; and the uses and regulations of that zoning shall bind and be applicable to any successors in interest to those who were the owners of that tract at the time this zoning was imposed upon that real estate. 
(Code 1985, § 159.191; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-678. - Effective date. 
    Sections 137-671 through 137-677, as amended on October 23, 1986, shall apply to PUD's for which the preliminary PUD was filed after October 23, 1986. Any real property development within a PUD for which the preliminary PUD was filed before that date shall continue to be governed in all respects by the PUD regulations in effect on the date the preliminary PUD was submitted. 
(Code 1985, § 159.192; Ord. No. 2947, 10-6-1986) 
Sec. 137-679. - Nonsubstantial changes to an approved planned unit development. 
(a)  In order to provide a limited amount of flexibility after a PUD has received approval and been recorded, and in order to decrease time delays for the developer, the city planner may approve nonsubstantial changes to a PUD site plan. 
(b)  A nonsubstantial change is a change to the developmental requirements of a specific PUD site plan which does not alter the overall site plan, does not alter the approved list of permitted uses, does not alter the list of required infrastructure to be constructed, and does not alter the plans and specifications of the required infrastructure. 
(c)  Nonsubstantial changes to developmental requirements such as setbacks, number of lots, number of parking spaces, building facades, building size, etc., shall be permitted, but only to the extent of five percent or less of the original requirement. In no case shall a nonsubstantial change deviate from any other requirement of any other city ordinance, state statute, or federal code. 
(d)  The developer shall submit a revised PUD site plan to the city planner with proposed nonsubstantial changes. Upon approval of the nonsubstantial changes to the PUD site plan, the staff of the department of city planning shall record the PUD at the office of the county recorder within ten days, and all recording fees shall be paid by the developer. 
(Code 1985, § 159.193; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Secs. 137-680-137-701. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 137-702-137-730. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SIGNS 

Sec. 137-731. - On-premises signs. 
(a)  All signs erected in all zones shall conform to the requirements of chapter 129. 
(b)  No sign shall in any manner or design resemble any emergency warning device or traffic regulation device. 
(c)  Revolving or stationary beacon lights are prohibited. 
(Code 1985, § 159.215; Ord. No. 3363, 3-19-1990) 
Sec. 137-732. - Commercial and industrial signs. 
(a)  Signs erected in all commercial, industrial and special zones shall conform to the applicable requirements of chapter 129, on-premises sign standards, the state department of transportation, and IC 8-23-20 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  No electrical sign exhibiting the colors, red, green, or amber shall in any manner or design resemble any emergency warning device or traffic regulation signal. Revolving or stationary beacon lights are prohibited. 
(Code 1968, tit. 580, art. XV, § 2; Code 1985, § 159.216; Ord. No. 1378, 11-21-1966; Ord. No. 3703, 6-21-1993) 
State Law reference- Regulation of billboards and junkyards, IC 8-23-20 et seq. 
Secs. 137-733-137-762. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS 

Sec. 137-763. - Regulations. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a principal building, it shall be subject to and must conform to all regulations of this chapter applicable to principal buildings. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any yard, except a rear yard. 
(3)  An accessory building shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height. 
(Code 1985, § 159.230; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-764. - More than one principal building on a lot. 
    There shall not be more than one principal building erected on a lot. 
(Code 1985, § 159.231; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Secs. 137-765-137-781. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCESS; PARKING; UTILITIES 

Sec. 137-782. - Structures to have access. 
    Every structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved private street; and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
(Code 1985, § 159.240; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-783. - Parking, storage, or use of recreational vehicles. 
    No recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored on any lot in any residential district, except in a carport, enclosed accessory building, or in the rear yard; provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere on residential premises not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on any residential lot. 
(Code 1985, § 159.241; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-784. - Parking or storage of certain vehicles in residential areas. 
    Any vehicle, other than a recreational vehicle, having a gross weight greater than 7,000 pounds shall be prohibited in all residential districts. 
(Code 1985, § 159.242; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-785. - Swimming pool safety devices. 
    Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool containing water which is 12 inches or more in depth at any point, shall erect and maintain a fence or wall, at least four feet in height, either surrounding the property or pool area. Gates must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above the ground. Fencing or wall material must be capable of keeping children from passing through the fence or wall. 
(Code 1985, § 159.243; Ord. No. 3263, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 137-786. - Permitted public utilities. 
    The following public utility uses shall be permitted in all districts: poles, cables, wires, conduits, vaults, pipes, mains, and valves, for electric, gas, water, sewer, steam, and communication systems. All utility buildings shall comply with the applicable zoning district regulations in which they are permitted. 
(Code 1985, § 159.244; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-787. - Permitted location of antennas. 
(a)  Freestanding antennas. Freestanding antennas shall be located to the rear of the front wall of the building or to the rear of the front building setback, whichever is greater, shall be no higher than 35 feet above the ground, and set back at least 30 inches from all property lines. 
(b)  Roof antennas. Roof antennas shall be mounted on the roof of the principal building or any accessory building and the aggregate height of the building together with the roof-mounted antenna shall be no higher than the maximum height limitation contained within the zoning district in which the antenna is located. 
(c)  Amateur radio antennas. Every antenna shall be installed to the rear of the rear wall of the principal building and shall not be closer than 30 inches to any lot line in all zoning districts. All applicable building and electrical codes shall be adhered to and the antenna shall be installed according to manufacturer's instructions. The provisions contained in subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to amateur antennas when the amateur antennas are placed to the rear of the rear wall of the building; however, an amateur radio antenna may be placed within the interior side yard setback if the height of the antenna is no greater than 35 feet and is at least 30 inches from the lot line. An amateur radio antenna may also be installed on the roof of the principal building if the antenna is no more than 35 feet above the average level of the ground. 
(Code 1985, § 159.245; Ord. No. 3662, 3-1-1993; Ord. No. 3725, 8-2-1993) 
Sec. 137-788. - Outdoor lighting control. 
    All outdoor lighting fixture lamps on privately owned property shall be so located, directed or shielded in such a manner that no light shines, reflects, causes glare, allows indirect light, or allows light trespass onto adjacent property or into the publicly owned right-of-way. Exemptions to this regulation include: nighttime field sports facilities, such as little league baseball diamonds, high school football fields, high school soccer fields, and municipal street lights. 
(Code 1985, § 159.246; Ord. No. 4078, 8-5-1996) 
Secs. 137-789-137-814. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MINIMUM LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING 

Sec. 137-815. - Landscaping and screening regulations. 
    Landscaping and screening shall be provided for all development in all commercial districts in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Landscaping and screening in yards. 
a.  All required yards shall be landscaped. The landscaping of these yards shall, at a minimum, consist of a combination of living vegetation, such as trees and shrubs as specified in this section and grasses or ground cover materials, planted or transplanted and maintained, or preserved as existing natural vegetation areas. 
b.  Landscaping and screening of the front yard, or in the case of a through lot, all front yards, shall consist of trees planted in accordance with one of the two following alternatives: 
1.  If deciduous shade (overstory) trees are used: 
(i)  There shall be a minimum of one tree planted at every 40 feet on center of linear distance within all front yards. 
(ii)  These required trees may be grouped together in the required front yard; however, in no case shall spacing between the trees exceed 40 feet. 
2.  If deciduous ornamental (under-story) trees are used: 
(i)  There shall be one tree planted at a minimum of every 25 feet on center of linear distance within the required front yard. 
(ii)  These required trees may be grouped together in the required front yard; however, in no case shall spacing between the trees exceed 25 feet. 
(iii)  Deciduous shade trees and deciduous ornamental trees may be grouped together in the required yards; however, in no case shall spacing between a deciduous shade tree and a deciduous ornamental tree exceed 25 feet. 
c.  Screening in the front yard or in the case of a through lot, all front yards, of the project shall consist of one or a combination of the following three alternatives: 
1.  An ornamental or decorative fence of not more than 48 inches in height may be used in conjunction with the required landscaping. 
2.  An earthen berm may be used in conjunction with the required landscaping. The berm shall be a maximum height of 48 inches, have a side-slope of no greater than 3:1, and shall be planted and covered with live vegetation. 
3.  A plant material screen composed of a compact hedge of evergreen or densely twigged deciduous shrubs may be used in conjunction with the required landscaping. 
d.  For all parking areas located in the front yard, there shall be provided and maintained along the front of the parking area, a screen of a minimum height of 36 inches along a minimum of 75 percent of the linear distance of the parking area, excluding the linear width of driveways, with a decorative fence, earthen berm, or plant material screen. 
e.  The ground area between such decorative fence, earthen berm, or plant material screen and the property line shall be planted and maintained in grass or other suitable ground cover. 
f.  A minimum of one-half of the required trees shall also be planted between the property line and the decorative fence, earthen berm, or plant material screen. 
g.  Landscaping and screening in the required side and rear yards shall be provided and maintained according to the following minimum standards: 
1.  Landscaping in the required side and rear yards shall consist of trees planted in accordance with one of the three following alternatives: 
(i)  If deciduous shade (over-story) trees are used there shall be one tree planted at a minimum of every 60 feet on center of linear distance along all required side and rear yards. These required trees may be grouped together in the side and rear yards; however in no case shall be spacing between the trees exceed 60 feet. 
(ii)  If deciduous ornamental (understory) trees are used there shall be one tree planted at a minimum of every 40 feet on center of linear distance along all required side and rear yards. These required trees may be grouped together in the side and rear yards; however, in no case shall spacing between the trees exceed 40 feet. 
(iii)  Deciduous shade trees and deciduous ornamental trees may be grouped together in the required yards; however, in no case shall the spacing between a deciduous shade tree and a deciduous ornamental tree exceed 40 feet. 
2.  Screening in the required interior side yard and rear yard of the project may include: 
(i)  An ornamental or decorative fence of up to a maximum height of seven feet may be used in conjunction with required landscaping. 
(ii)  An earthen berm may be used in conjunction with the required landscaping. It shall have a maximum height of seven feet, have a minimum crown width of two feet, a side-slope of no greater than 3:1, and shall be planted and covered with live vegetation. 
(iii)  A plant material screen consisting of a compact hedge of evergreen or densely twigged deciduous shrubs may used in conjunction with the required landscaping. 
h.  All ornamental or decorative fencing, earthen berms, plant material screens, shrubs, trees, structures or other objects shall permit completely unobstructed visibility within the vision clearance area. 
i.  Barbed wire, razor wire, and electrified fences shall not be permitted on any property within any commercial district. 
j.  The minimum size of all required landscape plant materials, at the time of planting, including replacement trees and shrubs, shall be as follows: 
1.  Deciduous shade (overstory) trees shall be 21/2-inch caliper at six inches above the ground. 
2.  Deciduous ornamental (under-story) trees shall be 11/2-inch caliper at six inches above the ground. 
3.  Multistemmed trees shall be at least eight feet in height. 
4.  Evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height. 
5.  Deciduous or evergreen shrubs shall be at least two feet in height. Shrubs shall be planted at a maximum of four feet on center of linear distance along the property line. 
6.  Shrubs used to screen parking lots shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height. 
k.  All trees and shrubs shall be planted or transplanted in accordance with the standards contained in American Standard for Nursery Stock, copyrighted in 1986 by the American Association of Nurserymen and approved May 2, 1986, by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. or as hereafter may subsequently be amended. All trees and shrubs shall be mulched and maintained to give a clean and weed free appearance. 
l.  Existing trees already located on the property may fulfill the requirements for tree planting in required yards as long as the standards specified above are met. 
m.  The removal of any existing live tree of over four-inch caliper measured at 41/2 feet above the ground or any existing shrub or evergreen tree over six feet in height shall be prohibited except to facilitate the placement of utilities or to provide for necessary easements or drainage improvements. Removal of said tree shall require the replanting of replacement tree so the total number of trees replanted equals the total number of trees removed. Replanting of replacement trees shall occur within six months of removal, or the next planting season, whichever occurs first. 
n.  All existing trees which are to be preserved shall be maintained without injury and with sufficient area for the root system to sustain the tree. Protective care and physical restraint barriers at the drip line, such as temporary protective fencing, shall be provided to prevent alteration, compaction, or increased depth of the soil in the root system area prior to and during groundwork and construction. Heavy equipment traffic and the storage of construction equipment or materials shall not occur within the drip line of the tree. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements for interior of parking lots. 
a.  The purpose of parking lot interior landscaping is to help reduce glare and heat buildup; to promote interior islands for pedestrian safety and traffic separation; to visually break up large expanses of pavement; and to reduce surface runoff. 
_____ 
b.  The interior of any parking lot shall be landscaped based on the following minimum standards: 
Total Number of Parking Spaces Required Interior 
Landscape Area Less than 50 spaces required None required 50 or more spaces required Minimum 15 square feet per parking space  
_____ 
c.  The minimum size of a required interior landscaping area shall be 108 square feet. No planting area shall be less than six feet in dimension, measured from the inside of the permanent barrier to inside of permanent barrier, except those portions created by turning radii or angles of parking spaces. 
d.  Required interior landscaped areas shall be in the ground and not be placed upon a pavement surface. 
e.  A permanent barrier, such as curbing or wheel stops, shall enclose each interior landscaped area in order to minimize damage from vehicles and pedestrians, and improve parking lot maintenance. 
f.  Regardless of any language elsewhere in this section, there shall be at least one tree provided for each 20 parking spaces. 
g.  Trees located at the end of a parking bay shall be deciduous shade (overstory) or deciduous ornamental (understory). 
h.  Trees located in any other portion of the interior landscaped area may be deciduous shade (overstory), deciduous ornamental (understory) or evergreen. 
i.  The minimum size for trees shall be: 
1.  Two and one-half-inch calipers at six inches above the ground for deciduous shade (overstory); 
2.  Two and one-half-inch caliper at six inches above the ground at the time of planting for deciduous ornamental (understory); and 
3.  Six feet in height for evergreen trees. 
j.  Each tree shall be a minimum of 21/2 feet from the outside of any permanent barrier of a landscaped area or edge of the parking area. 
k.  Hardy ground cover or grasses shall be planted to cover each interior landscaped area completely within three years. All ground cover shall have a mature height of not more than 21/2 feet. 
l.  Fifty percent of the required interior landscaped areas shall be installed at the end of parking bays. The balance of the required interior landscaped area may be installed anywhere within the parking lot outside of the parking lot setback areas. 
m.  These requirements do not apply to parking garages or parking decks. 
n.  These requirements shall apply to parking lots legally established after adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. If an existing parking lot is expanded after adoption of this section, then the entire parking lot shall meet all of the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Landscape plan requirements. 
a.  All landscape plans shall be drawn on, or as a part of the final site plan, show dimensions and detailed elevation or section drawings of fences, show all existing elevations and proposed land contour lines having at least one foot intervals. 
b.  Include a tree survey of required yards indicating the exact location of all trees, shrubs, and evergreens. 
c.  Show all proposed planting by labeling the species, size, and spacing on center. 
(4)  Grounds maintenance. The project owner or management shall: 
a.  Maintain the landscaping by keeping lawns mowed, all plants maintained as disease free, and planting beds groomed, except in naturally occurring vegetation areas; and 
b.  Replace any required plantings, which are removed or die after the date of planting. Such replacement shall occur not later then the next planting season. 
(Code 1985, § 159.270; Ord. No. 3836, 6-20-1994; Ord. No. 4020, 2-20-1996) 
Secs. 137-816-137-838. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 137-839. - Permitted in residential districts; restrictions; nonapplicability. 
(a)  Yard sales are a permitted use in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts, but shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No more than three sales may be conducted at a single address during any calendar year. Each sale may be conducted for up to three consecutive days. 
(2)  Only merchandise normally found in a residential household may be sold at the sale. 
(3)  All merchandise shall be placed within a secured structure immediately following the termination of the sale. 
(4)  No more than two signs of not more than four square feet are permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence where the sale is conducted. No more than two directional signs of not more than four square feet are permitted, provided written permission is received from the property owner upon whose property the signs are to be placed. Signs may not be exhibited for more than one day prior to the date of the sale and must be removed immediately following the termination of the sale. 
(5)  Signs shall not be placed on property belonging to the city or to any of the various departments thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following sales: 
(1)  Sales conducted pursuant to the order of authorization of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Public sales conducted by persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Sales conducted by duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auctions. 
(4)  The sale of no more than one motor vehicle titled to a person residing on the property on which the vehicle is offered for sale. 
(Code 1985, § 159.295; Ord. No. 3150, 3-8-1988) 
Secs. 137-840-137-856. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING 

Sec. 137-857. - Placement. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to comply with the state law mandating the placement of type I manufactured homes on residential zoning lots intended for conventional stick-built single-family housing. In order to protect the residents of both type I manufactured houses and of the surrounding neighborhood, the requirements and procedures are set forth in this section to assure acceptable similarity in appearance and soundness of construction between type I manufactured housing and stick-built housing. 
(b)  Permitted placement. The establishment, location, and use of type I manufactured homes as permanent residential units approved individually, by specific materials and by design, shall be permitted in residential R-1 districts, subject to the developmental requirements and limitations which apply to the residential R-1 or residential R-2 districts, and provided those homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations: 
(1)  The dwelling shall meet the appropriate exterior appearance standards as hereinafter set forth in section 137-858. 
(2)  The dwelling shall be sited in residential R-1 or R-2 districts. 
(3)  The dwelling shall receive all required permits and conform with this chapter, chapter 101, article II, and other regulations of the city. 
(c)  Historic districts. Due to the sensitive character of certain areas of the city, the establishment, use, or erection of manufactured homes is not permitted in any area: 
(1)  Which is identified as a proposed historic district, as documented in the historic and architectural survey; 
(2)  Which is designated as a local, state, or federal historic district; or 
(3)  Which may not be a recommended district in the survey, or a designated district, but which may be under consideration for historic district status by the historic review board. 
(d)  Location out of residential R-4 districts. This division shall apply only to manufactured housing located outside of approved manufactured home parks, or manufactured home subdivisions. 
(e)  Year of manufacture. For the purposes of IC 36-7-4-1106, this division shall apply only to manufactured homes constructed after January 1, 1981. 
(Code 1985, § 159.305; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986; Ord. No. 3698, 6-21-1993) 
State Law reference- Manufactured home; standards and requirements, IC 36-7-4-1106. 
Sec. 137-858. - Exterior appearance standards. 
    A type I manufactured home shall: 
(1)  Contain a minimum of 950 square feet of occupied space and exceed a minimum width of 23 feet; 
(2)  Be placed on a solid masonry foundation meeting all the requirements of a conventional single-family home foundation; 
(3)  Have wheels, axles, and hitch mechanism removed; 
(4)  Meet appropriate utility connection standards in accordance with approved home installation standards and rules of the city utilities; 
(5)  Have siding material of type customarily used on site-constructed residences (see section 137-860); 
(6)  Have roofing materials of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences (see section 137-860); and 
(7)  Be placed onto a permanent exterior perimeter retaining wall, in accordance with section 137-859. 
(Code 1985, § 159.306; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-859. - Foundation. 
    Manufactured homes must be set onto an excavated area with footings, foundations, and basement walls constructed in accordance with the terms of the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code. The space between the floor joists of the home and the excavated underfloor grade shall be completely enclosed with the permanent perimeter retaining wall. The wall shall be composed of solid masonry, which shall extend below the frost line. The design by a registered professional engineer or architect shall safely support those loads, as determined by the character of the soil. 
(Code 1985, § 159.307; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Sec. 137-860. - Approved siding and roofing materials list for type I manufactured homes. 
(a)  The following siding materials are approved for usage on residential design type I manufactured homes: 
(1)  Residential horizontal lap siding. 
(2)  Residential horizontal vinyl lap siding. 
(3)  Cedar or other wood siding. 
(4)  Stucco siding. 
(5)  Brick or stone siding. 
(b)  The following roofing materials are approved for usage on residential design type I manufactured homes: 
(1)  Asbestos shingles on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the shingles. 
(2)  Fiberglass shingles on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the shingles. 
(3)  Shake shingles on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the shingles. 
(4)  Asphalt shingles on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the shingles. 
(5)  Tile materials on a roof pitched according to the design specifications of the materials. 
(Code 1985, § 159.308; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
APPENDIX. - DESIGNATION OF LOT LINES 


(Code 1985, ch. 159, app.; Ord. No. 2988, 12-15-1986) 
Appendix A - SCHEDULE OF FEES[1] 
Electrical: Minimum Permit $30.00 Meter Service 
(Replace/Repair/Temporary) $30.00 Alternate Power $30.00 Circuits 
(New/Replaced) $25.00 plus $5.00 each circuit Main Service/Sub Panel 
(New/Replaced):  100 amp or less $100.00  200 amp $150.00  400 amp $200.00  600 amp $250.00  600 amp or more $300.00 License-New/Renewal: $125.00 HVAC: Minimum Permit $30.00 HVAC Equipment Installed $15.00 plus $15.00 each Commercial Hoods: No Suppression: $75.00 Fire Suppression: $150.00 Rooftop Furnace/Air: $75.00 Alternative Heating/Cooling: $50.00 Water Chillers: $75.00 Duct/Register Installation: 0-50 $30.00 51-100 $75.00 101+ $150.00 Gas Piping: Pressure Test: $30.00 License-New/Renewal $125.00 Plumbing: Minimum Permit: $30.00 Plumbing Fixtures: $25.00 plus $5.00 each Gas Piping: Pressure Test: $30.00 Fire Sprinklers: $50.00 plus $3.00 per head License-New/Renewal: $125.00 Residential: $300.00-$1,000.00 $30.00 $1,001.00-$5,000.00 $50.00 Add $25.00 per $5,000.00 after $5,000.00 up to $50,000.00 Add $25.00 per $10,000.00 after $50,000.00 up to $200,000.00 Add $25.00 per $25,000.00 after $200,000.00 Re-Inspection-Rough $50.00 Re-Inspection-Final $100.00 License-New/Renewal $125.00 Commercial: 300-2,500 $50.00 2,500-5,000 $100.00 5,000-7,500 $150.00 7,500-10,000 $200.00 Add $100.00 for every $10,000.00 up to $200,000.00 Add $20.00 for every $10,000.00 after $200,000.00 up to $1,000,000.00 Add $100.00 for every $100,000.00 after $1,000,000.00 Re-Inspection Rough $50.00 Re-Inspection Final $100.00 License-New/Renewal $125.00 Unmetered Water and Exh. Fans: Residential: $65.00 Apartments: Per Building: $50.00 Commercial: $135.00 Industrial Buildings: $600.00 Exhaust Fans: Per Fixture: $5.00 Wrecking and Demolition Permit: Minimum Permit: $30.00 Garage/Accessory Structure: $30.00 Residential House: $50.00 Commercial: $75.00 Swimming Pools: Residential In-Ground: $150.00 Commercial: $250.00 Moving Permits: Residential and Commercial: Over Public Road/Alley One or Two-Story: $150.00 Greater than Two-Story: $250.00 Miscellaneous Permits: Minimum Permit: $30.00 Change of Occupancy: $150.00 Commercial Fire Alarm: $100.00 plus $3.00 per device Commercial Suppression: $50.00 Fire Inspection Fees: $150.00 Underground Storage Tank: $150.00 Spray Booth: $200.00 Signs: 0-50 sq. ft. $30.00 50-100 sq. ft. $50.00 Add $25.00 per 50 sq. ft. after 100 sq. ft. Billboard: $50.00 Temporary: $30.00 License-New/Renewal: $125.00  
( Ord. No. 5635 , § 1, 12-3-2018) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5635 , § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2018, repealed App. A in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former App. A pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5268, § 3, adopted Aug. 17, 2010; and Ord. No. 5300, § 1, adopted March 21, 2011. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1968 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1968 Code which are included herein. 
1968 Code 
Section Section 
this Code tit. 10, § 1 46-2 tit. 10 § 2, tit. 10, § 3 46-6, 46-7 tit. 20, art. I, § 1- 
tit. 20, art. I, § 3 2-76-2-78 tit. 20, art. I, § 4 2-100 tit. 20, art. I, § 5 2-51 tit. 20, art. I, § 6 2-101 tit. 20, art. I, § 7 2-49 tit. 20, art. I, § 8 2-48 tit. 20, art. I, § 8a 2-50 tit. 20, art. I, § 9, 
tit. 20, art. I, § 10 2-102, 2-103 tit. 20, art. II 2-124 tit. 20, art. III, § 1 2-1 tit. 30, § 1, tit. 30, § 2 6-1, 6-2 tit. 30, §§ 3, 4, 
tit. 30, §§ 3, 5 6-23, 6-24 tit. 30, § 7, tit. 30, § 8 6-27, 6-28 tit. 30, § 9 6-26 tit. 30, § 10 6-25 tit. 40, art. I, § 1, 
tit. 40, art. I, § 2 10-19, 10-20 tit. 40, art. II, § 1 10-44 tit. 40, art. II, § 3 10-45 tit. 40, art. III, § 1 10-64, 10-65 tit. 40, art. IV, § 1 10-89 tit. 40, art. IV, §§ 2, 5 10-90 tit. 40, art. IV, § 3, 
tit. 40, art. IV, § 4 10-91, 10-92 tit. 40, art. V, § 3 10-113 tit. 40, art. VI, § 1 10-142 tit. 40, art V, §§ 1, 2 10-114 tit. 80, § 1 2-199 tit. 90, § 1 2-147 tit. 100, § 8(c) 101-35 tit. 111, art. 1 26-1 26-3 tit. 111, art. 3- 
tit. 111, art. 7 26-23-26-27 tit. 111, art. 10- 
tit. 111, art. 12 26-51-26-53 tit. 111, art. 13 26-28 tit. 111, art. 15 26-49 tit. 111, art. 16 26-29 tit. 111, art. 18 26-30 tit. 111, art. 19 26-2 tit. 150, § 1 101-125 tit. 150, §§ 2-4 101-236 tit. 150, §§ 5, 6 101-237 tit. 150, § 7 101-151, 101-152 tit. 150, § 8, 
tit. 150, § 9 101-177, 101-178 tit. 150, § 10 101-181 tit. 150, § 11, 
tit. 150, § 12 101-179, 101-180 tit. 150, §§ 13, 14 101-182 tit. 150, § 15 101-183 tit. 150, §§ 16, 17 101-205 tit. 150, § 17 101-206 tit. 150, § 18 101-154 tit. 150, § 19 101-153 tit. 150, §§ 20, 21 101-238 tit. 150, § 22 101-124 tit. 150, § 23 101-126 tit. 152, § 2 2-753 tit. 160, art. III 2-308 tit. 180, § 1 18-24 tit. 180, § 2(a)- 
tit. 180, § 2(c) 18-25-18-27 tit. 180, § 3- 
tit. 180, § 5 18-28-18-30 tit. 190, § 2 30-19 tit. 190, § 4, 
tit. 190, § 5 30-20, 30-21 tit. 190, § 6, 
tit. 190, § 7 18-706, 18-707 tit. 190, § 8 18-709 tit. 190, § 9 18-708 tit. 190, § 10, 
tit. 190, § 11 66-20, 66-21 tit. 200, § 1 46-5 tit. 210, § 1 54-188 tit. 210, §§ 2, 3 54-189 tit. 210, §§ 4, 5 54-190 tit. 210, § 6 54-191 tit. 220, § 1 54-221 tit. 220, §§ 2, 4 54-222 tit. 220, § 3 54-223 tit. 220, § 5 54-224 tit. 240, § 1, 
tit. 240, § 2 46-56, 46-57 tit. 240, § 3 46-55 tit. 270, § 1 2-443 tit. 270, § 1, 
tit. 270, § 2 2-468, 2-469 tit. 290, § 4, 
tit. 290, § 5 46-3, 46-4 tit. 300, § 1 2-286 tit. 330, art. I, § 1 2-255 tit. 330, art. I, §§ 2, 3 2-256 tit. 330, art. I, § 4 2-257 tit. 330, art. I, § 5 2-260 tit. 330, art. I, § 6, 
tit. 330, art. I, § 7 2-258, 2-259 tit. 330, art. II, § 1- 
tit. 330, art. II, § 3 50-1-50-3 tit. 340, § 1, 
tit. 340, § 2 18-64, 18-65 tit. 340, §§ 3, 4 18-67 tit. 340, § 5, 
tit. 340, § 6 18-68, 18-69 tit. 340, § 8 18-66 tit. 360, § 1 2-335 tit. 360, §§ 2, 3 2-336 tit. 400, § 1, 
tit. 400, § 2 54-141, 54-142 tit. 430, § 2 58-498 tit. 430, §§ 3, 4 58-499 tit. 440, § 1, 
tit. 440, § 2 38-19, 38-20 tit. 440, § 6 38-21 tit. 470, art. I, § 1- 
tit. 470, art. I, § 4 58-522-58-525 tit. 470, art. I, § 5 58-529 tit. 470, art. II, § 1 58-527 tit. 480, art. I, § 1 54-20 tit. 480, art. I, §§ 2, 7 54-19 tit. 480, art. I, § 3 54-22 tit. 480, art. I, §§ 4, 5 54-23 tit. 480, art. I, § 6 54-24 tit. 480, art. I, §§ 8, 9 54-21 tit. 480, art. II, § 1 54-52 tit. 480, art. II, § 2 54-54 tit. 480, art. II, § 3 54-53 tit. 480, art. III, § 1 54-82 tit. 480, art. III, § 3, 
tit. 480, art. III, § 4 54-83, 54-84 tit. 480, art. III, §§ 6, 7 54-86 tit. 480, art. IV, § 1, 
tit. 480, art. IV, § 2 54-116, 54-117 tit. 480, art. IV, § 4 54-118 tit. 480, art. IV, §§ 7, 8 54-121 tit. 500, § 1, 
tit. 500, § 2 18-188, 18-189 tit. 500, § 3- 
tit. 500, § 6 18-224-18-227 tit. 500, § 6 18-324 tit. 500, § 7 18-229 tit. 500, § 8 18-228 tit. 500, § 9, 
tit. 500, § 10 18-264, 18-265 tit. 500, § 11 18-267 tit. 500, § 12 18-230 18-266 tit. 500, § 13- 
tit. 500, § 15 18-298-18-300 tit. 500, § 17 18-325 tit. 500, § 18 18-327 tit. 500, § 19 18-326 tit. 500, § 20 18-190 tit. 510, art. I, §§ 1, 2 58-1 tit. 510, art. II, §§ 4-6 58-3 tit. 510, art. II, § 7 58-4 tit. 510, art. II, § 10 58-2 tit. 510, art. II, § 12 2-419 tit. 510, art. II, § 13 58-5 tit. 510, art. III, § 2 58-6 tit. 510, art. III, § 4 58-40 tit. 510, art. III, § 5 58-39 tit. 510, art. III, § 6 58-7 tit. 510, art. IV, § 1 58-119 tit. 510, art. IV, § 2 58-118 tit. 510, art. IV, § 4 58-120 tit. 510, art. IV, § 10 58-124 tit. 510, art. IV, § 13 58-121 tit. 510, art. IV, § 14 58-123 tit. 510, art. V, § 2, 
tit. 510, art. V, § 3 58-147, 58-148 tit. 510, art. VI, § 1 58-180 tit. 510, art. VI, § 3 58-181 tit. 510, art. VII, §§ 1, 2 58-201 tit. 510, art. VII, § 3 58-202, 58-203 tit. 510, art. VII, § 8 58-44 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 6 58-45 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 8 58-43 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 9 58-41 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 10(c) 58-443 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 15(b) 58-62 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 17 58-63 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 20 58-122 tit. 510, art. VIII, § 21 58-42 tit. 510, art. X, §§ 2-5, 7, 8 58-420 tit. 510, art. X, § 6 58-422 tit. 510, art. X, §§ 9, 10 58-421 tit. 510, art. X, §§ 11, 12 58-416 tit. 510, art. X, §§ 14(a), (c), 19 58-414, 58-415 tit. 510, art. X, § 15, 
tit. 510, art. X, § 16 58-417, 58-418 tit. 510, art. X, § 18 58-419 tit. 510, art. XI, §§ 2, 3 58-265 tit. 510, art. XII, § 2, art. XIV, § 6 58-256 tit. 510, art. XII, § 3 58-257 tit. 510, art. XII, § 4 58-264 tit. 510, art. XII, § 5- 
tit. 510, art. XII, § 7 58-258-58-260 tit. 510, art. XII, §§ 8, 9 58-261 tit. 510, art. XII, § 10, 
tit. 510, art. XII, § 11 58-262, 58-263 tit. 510, art. XIII, § 1, 
tit. 510, art. XIII, § 2 58-294, 58-295 tit. 510, art. XIII, §§ 3, 4 58-296 tit. 510, art. XIII, § 5 58-297 tit. 510, art. XIII, §§ 6, 7 58-298 tit. 510, art. XIV, § 1, 
tit. 510, art. XIV, § 2 58-230, 58-231 tit. 510, art. XV, § 1 58-471 tit. 510, art. XV, § 2 58-470 tit. 510, art. XV, § 3 58-42 tit. 510, art. XV, § 4 58-64 58-472 tit. 510, art. XVII, § 1 58-10 tit. 510, art. XVII, § 14 58-8 tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 1 58-555 tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 2 58-553 tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 2(a) 58-554 tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 3, 
tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 4 58-574, 58-575 tit. 510, art. XVIII, § 6 58-576 tit. 510, art. XIX, § 1 58-552 tit. 510, art. XX, § 1- 
tit. 510, art. XX, § 4 58-330-58-333 tit. 540, § 1 2-387 tit. 550, § 1, 
tit. 550, § 2 62-381, 62-382 tit. 550, § 2 62-413 tit. 570, §§ 3, 10 18-357 tit. 570, § 7, 
tit. 570, § 8 18-358, 18-359 tit. 570, § 18 18-360 tit. 580, art. X, § 1 137-379 tit. 580, art. XV, § 2 137-732 tit. 580, art. XIX, § 4 137-35  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1985 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code, as updated through December 15, 2003, which are included herein. 
1985 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 10.01 1-1 10.01-10.03 1-3 10.04, 10.05 1-2 10.06 1-8 10.08 1-2 10.11 1-2 10.14 2-1 10.99 1-7 11.01-11.03 2-2 30.01-30.04 2-48-2-51 30.10-30.12 2-76-2-78 30.20-30.25 2-100-2-105 30.30 2-124 31.01 2-147 31.10 2-148 32.001 2-180 32.010 2-199 32.011 2-611 32.015, 32.016 2-222, 2-223 32.033 2-753 32.040-32.046 2-255-2-261 32.055 2-286 32.065-32.067 2-306-2-308 32.075, 32.076 2-335, 2-336 32.085-32.088 2-361-2-364 32.095 2-387 32.100 2-418 32.109, § 70.12 2-419 33.01, 33.02 2-468, 2-469 33.10, 33.11 2-492, 2-493 33.20 2-525 33.30-33.32 2-544-2-546 33.40, 33.41 2-571, 2-572 33.99 2-443 34.01-34.07 2-595-2-601 34.09-34.17 2-602-2-610 34.25-34.27 2-642-2-644 34.28 2-641 34.29, 34.30 2-645, 2-646 34.40, 34.41 2-668, 2-669 34.50 2-697 34.60 2-723-2-726 35.01 2-751 35.02, 35.03 2-752 50.001, 50.002 62-19, 62-20 50.010-50.014 62-44-62-48 50.020 62-70 62-103 50.021-50.027 62-71-62-77 50.035-50.039 62-98-62-102 50.041-50.052 62-104-62-115 50.060-50.072 62-144-62-156 50.080-50.096 62-181-62-197 50.100-50.106 62-218-62-224 50.115 62-243 50.116 62-242 50.117-50.123 62-244-62-250 50.130-50.144 62-279-62-293 50.150-50.160 62-320-62-330 50.999 62-331 51.01-51.03 62-381-62-383 51.10 62-412 51.99 62-413 52.35-52.41 62-462-62-468 70.01 58-1 70.11 58-2 70.14, 70.15 58-3, 58-4 70.17 58-5 70.26-70.29 58-6-58-9 70.99 58-10 71.00, 71.006 58-42 71.002, 71.003 58-39, 58-40 71.005 58-41 71.008, 71.009 58-43, 58-44 71.035-71.037 58-62-58-64 71.043 58-45 71.050-71.052 58-118-58-120 71.058-71.060 58-121-58-123 71.062 58-124 71.071, 71.072 58-147, 58-148 71.080, 71.081 58-180, 58-181 71.093-71.095 58-201-58-203 72.01, 72.02 58-230, 58-231 72.13-72.19 58-256-58-262 72.21-72.23 58-263-58-265 72.30-72.34 58-294-58-298 72.40-72.43 58-330-58-333 72.55, 72.56 58-355, 58-356 73.02 58-414, 58-415 73.07-73.13 58-416-58-422 73.21 58-443 74.01-74.03 58-470-58-472 75.02, 75.03 58-498, 58-499 76.01-76.07 58-522-58-528 76.99 58-529 ch. 77, sched. I-ch. 77, sched. IV 58-552-58-555 ch. 78, sched. I 58-574 ch. 78, sched. II(B)-(H) 58-575 ch. 78, sched. III 58-576 90.01 30-71 90.02 30-70 90.03, 90.04 30-72, 30-73 91.01 14-1 91.02 2-420 91.03-91.24 14-2-14-23 91.25-91.28 14-50-14-53 91.29-91.34 14-56-14-61 91.35 1-2 91.99 14-24 92.01, 92.02 22-1, 22-2 ch. 93, app. A 34-32 93.02, 93.03 34-1, 34-2 93.04 34-31 93.06-93.08 34-60-34-62 93.09, ch. 93 apps. A, B 34-32 93.10, 93.11 34-33, 34-34 93.12, 93.13 34-63, 34-64 93.14 34-35 93.15-93.17 34-65-34-67 93.41-93.48 34-93-34-100 93.51-93.56 38-48-38-53 93.59 38-54 93.96-93.98 34-3-34-5 94.01 30-46 94.10 30-19 94.11(A)-94.11(D) 18-706-18-709 94.13, 94.14 30-20, 30-21 94.15, 94.16 30-47, 30-48 94.20-94.22 66-20-66-22 94.23 66-19 96.01-96.04 54-188-54-191 96.15-96.18 54-221-54-224 96.19 54-192 96.99 54-167 97.01-97.06 30-105-30-110 97.99 30-104 98.01-98.03 50-1-50-3 100.01-100.04 38-19-38-22 101.01-101.06 54-19-54-24 101.15-101.17 54-52-54-54 101.25-101.29 54-82-54-86 101.40-101.45 54-116-54-121 101.55, 101.56 54-141, 54-142 102.01-102.12 66-50-66-61 103.01 42-20 103.02 42-19 103.03-103.07 42-21-42-25 110.01, 110.02 6-1, 6-2 110.03-110.08 6-23-6-28 111.01, 111.02 10-19, 10-20 111.10, 111.11 10-44, 10-45 111.20 10-64, 10-65 111.30-111.33 10-89-10-92 111.40, 111.41 10-113, 10-114 111.50 10-142 112.01 26-1 112.02 26-3 112.10-112.17 26-23-26-30 112.20-112.24 26-49-26-53 112.99 26-2 114.01-114.07 18-24-18-30 116.01-116.06 18-64-18-69 117.01-117.11 18-104-18-114 117.99 18-115 118.01-118.09 18-154-18-162 119.01-119.03 18-188-18-190 119.10-119.16 18-224-18-230 119.25-119.28 18-264-18-267 119.35-119.37 18-298-18-300 119.45-119.48 18-324-18-327 120.03, 120.04 18-358, 18-359 120.07 18-360 120.15, 120.19 18-357 121.01-121.07 18-414-18-420 121.99 18-421 122.01-122.12 18-446-18-457 123.01, 123.02 18-498, 18-499 123.03-123.11 18-522-18-530 123.12-123.29 18-564-18-581 124.01-124.13 18-606-18-618 125.01-125.22 18-660-18-681 130.01 46-2 132.01, 132.02 46-3, 46-4 132.10-132.12 46-31-46-33 132.20 46-5 132.30-132.32 46-55-46-57 132.40, 132.41 46-88, 46-89 132.50-132.53 46-107-46-110 132.60-132.62 46-134-46-136 132.99 46-1 133.01, 133.02 46-6, 46-7 134.01-134.07 46-191-46-197 135.01-135.06 46-156-46-161 150.02-150.16 101-20-101-34 150.40 101-59 150.41 101-61 150.42 101-60 150.43-150.50 101-62-101-69 150.60-150.64 101-97-101-101 150.66-150.69 101-102-101-105 150.99 101-35 ch. 151, app. A, § 1 Ch. 109, App. A, § 1 ch. 151, app. B, § 1 Ch. 109, App. B, § 1 151.01, 151.02 109-1, 109-2 151.10-151.22 109-23-109-35 152.01 113-19 153.01, 153.02 101-125, 101-126 153.10-153.13 101-151-101-154 153.20-153.26 101-177-101-183 153.35, 153.36 101-205, 101-206 153.45-153.47 101-236-101-238 153.99 101-124 154.01-154.03 121-1-121-3 154.04-154.10 121-27-121-33 154.99 121-4 155.01 101-291 156.01, 156.02 101-270, 101-271 157.01 129-1 157.03 129-2 157.05, 157.06 129-4, 129-5 157.07 129-3 157.08, 157.09 129-6, 129-7 157.10-157.13 129-33-129-36 157.14, 157.15 129-72, 129-73 157.15A 129-74 157.16, 157.17 129-75, 129-76 157.18-157.23 129-37-129-42 157.24-157.27 129-96-129-99 157.28-157.34 129-43-129-49 158.02 133-1 158.03-158.09 133-3-133-9 158.10 133-2 158.20-158.27 133-41-133-48 158.30-158.40 133-70-133-80 158.50-158.60 133-104-133-114 158.70-158.72 133-142-133-144 158.80, 158.81 133-172, 133-173 158.90-158.94 133-200-133-204 158.99 133-10 ch. 159, app 137-860 159.001, 
159.002 137-1, 137-2 159.004 137-3 159.006, 
159.007 137-5, 137-6 159.008- 
159.011 137-101-137-104 159.012 137-4 159.025- 
159.027 137-164-137-166 159.035- 
159.037 137-186-137-188 159.045- 
159.047 137-215-137-217 159.055- 
159.057 137-243-137-245 159.065- 
159.068 137-300-137-303 159.075- 
159.077 137-325-137-327 159.085- 
159.087 137-358-137-360 159.095, 
159.096 137-379, 137-380 159.100- 
159.102 137-404-137-406 159.103- 
159.105 137-426-137-428 159.115- 
159.117 137-455-137-457 159.130- 
159.132 137-483-137-485 159.135, 
159.136 137-509, 137-510 159.140, 
159.141 137-529, 137-530 159.145- 
159.147 137-585-137-587 159.160- 
159.162 137-608-137-610 159.175- 
159.177 137-639-137-641 159.185- 
159.193 137-671-137-679 159.215, 
159.216 137-731, 137-732 159.230, 
159.231 137-763, 137-764 159.240- 
159.246 137-782-137-788 159.260- 
159.263 137-68-137-71 159.270 137-815 159.275- 
159.284 137-35-137-44 159.295 137-839 159.305- 
159.308 137-857-137-860 159.997- 
159.999 137-45-137-47 160.01- 
160.03 125-1-125-3 160.04, 
160.05 2-421 160.06, 
160.07 125-25, 125-26 160.08- 
160.10 125-56-125-58 160.11- 
160.17 125-90-125-96 160.30- 
160.32 125-123-125-125 161.01, 
161.02 105-1, 105-2 161.10, 
161.11 105-3, 105-4 161.12- 
161.28 105-27-105-43 161.40- 
161.47 105-75-105-82 161.50- 
161.59 105-108-105-117 161.60, 
161.61 105-149 161.62 105-150 161.70- 
161.79 105-169-105-178 161.80- 
161.83 105-210-105-213 161.90- 
161.93 105-235-105-238 161.98 105-239  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances included in the Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code 300  8- 6-1906 2-48-2-51 2-76-2-78 2-100-2-103 10-19 10-44, 10-45 18-64-18-69 18-357-18-360 46-3-46-5 54-82-54-84 54-86 54-116-54-118 54-121 54-221-54-224 58-527 334  5- 4-1908 62-381 375  6- 3-1912 18-357-18-360 469  4- 1-1918 62-382 62-413 546  1-21-1924 2-335  1-22-1924 2-336 597  5-19-1926 54-141, 54-142 903  1- 4-1932 2-147 751 12-18-1933 2-124 761  4- 2-1934 2-199 774 10-29-1934 10-142 790 10-21-1935 10-89-10-92 792 10-21-1935 10-64, 10-65 793 10-21-1935 10-20 866 10-21-1940 10-113, 10-114 926  5- 7-1945 2-308 927  5-21-1945 18-24-18-30 937  3-18-1946 18-188-18-190 18-224-18-230 18-264-18-267 18-298-18-300 18-324-18-327 981  7-19-1948 54-19-54-24 988 10- 4-1948 58-498 994  5- 2-1949 101-35 1008  4-17-1950 101-35 1022 10-16-1950 46-2 46-6, 46-7 1073 10-19-1953 46-55-46-57 1087  6-21-1954 6-1, 6-2 6-23-6-28 1121  4-16-1956 101-35 1137 11-19-1956 18-188-18-190 18-224-18-230 18-264-18-267 18-298-18-300 18-325-18-327 1166  2- 3-1958 2-387 1203  2-15-1960 54-188-54-191 1209  7-11-1960 54-52-54-54 1226  4-17-1961 2-1 1264 10-15-1962 38-19-38-21 1290  3- 2-1964 101-124-101-126 101-151-101-154 101-177-101-183 101-205, 101-206 101-236-101-238 1329  6- 7-1965 50-1-50-3 1334  7-20-1965 2-286 1354  2- 8-1966 58-522-58-525 58-529 1360  5- 2-1966 2-419 58-1-58-8 58-10 58-39-58-45 58-62-58-64 58-118-58-124 58-147, 58-148 58-180, 58-181 58-201-58-203 58-230, 58-231 58-256-58-265 58-294-58-298 58-330-58-333 58-414-58-422 58-443 58-470-58-472 58-553-58-555 58-574-58-576 1378 11-21-1966 137-35 137-379 137-732 1406  7-17-1967 2-255-2-260 1420 12- 4-1967 1-7 1534 11- 3-1969 2-48-2-51 2-76-2-78 2-100-2-103 1560  3-16-1970 10-113, 10-114 1568  5- 4-1970 50-1-50-3  6- 1-1970(Ord.) 18-706-18-709 30-19-30-21 66-20, 66-21 1585  7-21-1970 101-124-101-126 101-151-101-154 101-177-101-183 101-205, 101-206 101-236-101-238 1600  9-30-1970 101-124-101-126 101-151-101-154 101-177-101-183 101-205, 101-206 101-236-101-238 1664 11-16-1971 101-124-101-126 101-151-101-154 101-177-101-183 101-205, 101-206 101-236-101-238 1678 1971 18-188-18-190 18-224-18-230 18-264-18-267 18-298-18-300 18-325-18-327 12-16-1974(Ord.) 58-499 1882 12-19-1974 2-124 1887  3- 3-1975 101-35 1799 11- 5-1975 26-1-26-3 26-23-26-30 26-49 26-51-26-53 1933 11-17-1975 2-492 1957  4-19-1976 2-222, 2-223 1963  6- 7-1976 2-419 58-1-58-8 58-10 58-39-58-45 58-62-58-64 58-118-58-124 58-147, 58-148 58-180, 58-181 58-201-58-203 58-230, 58-231 58-256-58-265 58-294-58-298 58-416-58-422 58-470-58-472 58-553 58-555 58-574-58-576 1960  7- 6-1976 58-6 1968  7- 6-1976 58-1-58-4 58-7, 58-8 58-10 58-39-58-45 58-62-58-64 58-118-58-124 58-147, 58-148 58-180, 58-181 58-201-58-203 58-230, 58-231 58-256-58-265 58-294-58-298 58-330-58-333 58-414-58-422 58-443 58-470-58-472 58-553-58-555 58-574-58-576 1974  8- 2-1976 2-419 58-1-58-8 58-10 58-39-58-45 58-62-58-64 58-118-58-124 58-147, 58-148 58-180, 58-181 58-201-58-203 58-230, 58-231 58-256-58-265 58-294-58-298 58-330-58-333 58-414-58-422 58-443 58-470-58-472 58-553-58-555 58-574-58-576 2036  3-21-1977 109-1, 109-2 109-23-109-35 2072  8-15-1977 18-324 2082  9- 6-1977 10-91 2083  9- 6-1977 58-443 2130  4-18-1978 2-753 2139  5- 1-1978 2-308 2150  6- 5-1978 62-412 2214 10- 2-1978 2-101, 2-102 2223 11-20-1978 26-50 2257  2-19-1979 62-412 2296  7-16-1979 18-324 2337 12-17-1979 Ch. 109, App. A, § 1, Ch. 109, App. B, § 1 109-1 109-31 2364  5- 5-1980 137-35 2398  9-15-1980 66-21, 66-22 2434  3-16-1981 18-324 2493 12-21-1981 2-48, 2-49 2-51 2-76-2-78 2-100-2-103 2499  1- 4-1982 2-753 2500  1- 4-1982 58-554 2505  3- 1-1982 18-154-18-162 2537  7-19-1982 30-70-30-72 2539  7-19-1982 58-522-58-529 2562 10-18-1982 62-412 2564 10-18-1982 62-412 2580 11-20-1982 2-199 2575 12- 6-1982 2-419 58-5 2581 12-20-1982 2-124 2605  4-19-1983 62-412 2631  8- 1-1983 113-19 2635  8-16-1983 2-180 2647 12- 5-1983 58-330-58-333 2682  5- 7-1984 2-180 2681  5- 9-1984 2-180 2690  6- 6-1984 2-148 2694  6-13-1984 62-462-62-468 2778-2  6-17-1985 58-575 2823 10-21-1985 58-10 2843 12- 2-1985 101-152 101-206 2848 12-16-1985 137-379 2858  2-18-1986 58-355, 58-356 58-575 2870  4- 7-1986 18-324 2874  4- 7-1986 58-575 2875  4- 7-1986 137-164-137-166 2876  4- 7-1986 137-186-137-188 2893  6- 2-1986 137-215-137-217 2894  6- 2-1986 137-243-137-245 2915  8- 4-1986 137-325-137-327 2916  8- 4-1986 137-358-137-360 2917  8- 4-1986 137-404-137-406 2930  9- 2-1986 137-300-137-302 2931  9- 2-1986 137-585-137-587 2945 10- 6-1986 137-608-137-610 2946 10- 6-1986 137-639-137-641 2947 10- 6-1986 137-671-137-678 2975 12- 8-1986 66-21 2977 12- 8-1986 137-426-137-428 2978 12- 8-1986 137-380 2988 12-15-1986 137-1-137-6 137-36-137-42 137-45-137-47 137-68-137-71 137-101-137-104 137-763, 137-764 137-782-137-784 137-786 137-857-137-860 2989 12-15-1986 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-327 3002  1- 5-1987 62-412 3003  1- 5-1987 62-383 3014  3- 2-1987 18-104-18-115 3037  5-18-1987 58-555 3048  5-18-1987 66-50-66-60 3055  6-16-1987 58-470 3062  7- 7-1987 2-753 3064  7-20-1987 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 3065  7-20-1987 133-1-133-10 133-41-133-48 133-70-133-80 133-104-133-114 133-142-133-144 133-172, 133-173 133-200-133-204 3066  7-20-1987 137-327 3068  7-20-1987 18-324 3072  7-20-1987 62-412 3073  7-23-1987 62-383 62-412 3084  8-18-1987 58-574, 58-575 3088  9-10-1987 58-575 3092  9-18-1987 14-1-14-7 14-10, 14-11 14-13-14-19 14-51, 14-52 14-57, 14-58 14-60, 14-61 3105 10- 5-1987 14-19 14-57 3116 11-17-1987 137-39 137-45, 137-46 3131 12-28-1987 58-575 3137 12-28-1987 58-575 3150  3- 8-1988 137-839 3152  3- 8-1988 101-20-101-34 3159  5- 4-1988 137-35 3160  5- 6-1988 137-4 137-303 3177  7-18-1988 101-271 3180  7-19-1988 2-308 3084  8-18-1988 58-8 3205 10- 3-1988 58-575 3212 10-17-1988 50-3 3248  2-21-1989 58-575 3249  2-21-1989 58-9 3256  3-20-1989 137-42, 137-43 137-101 137-301 137-379 137-455-137-457 137-608, 137-609 137-639, 137-640 3258  3-20-1989 133-2 3260  4-17-1989 2-49 2-76 2-102 2-104, 2-105 3263  4-17-1989 137-4 137-35 137-101 137-186 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-302 137-327 137-360 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-483-137-485 137-587 137-610 137-641 137-785 3270  5- 1-1989 137-165 137-187 137-216 137-244 137-301 137-359 137-405 3297  8- 7-1989 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-302 137-327 137-360 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-587 137-610 137-641 3302  8- 7-1989 54-85 3303  8- 7-1989 58-470 3310  9- 5-1989 2-77 3339 12-18-1989 2-596-2-598 2-600-2-608 3350  1-15-1990 129-1-129-7 129-33-129-49 129-72, 129-73 129-75, 129-76 129-96-129-99 3363  3-19-1990 137-165 137-187 137-216 137-244 137-302 137-327 137-360 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-587 137-610 137-641 137-675 137-731 3365  3-19-1990 2-753 3372  5- 7-1990 34-1-34-3 34-5 34-31 34-33-34-35 34-60-34-67 38-48-38-54 3387  7- 2-1990 18-104 3388  7- 2-1990 18-414-18-421 3389  7- 2-1990 58-414, 58-415 3390  7- 2-1990 58-574, 58-575 3397  7-16-1990 30-71, 30-72 3413  9- 4-1990 58-333 3419  9-24-1990 58-575 90-86 10-15-1990 2-124 3427 10-15-1990 2-124 3429 10-15-1990 137-35 3430 10-15-1990 121-1-121-4 121-27-121-33 3433 11- 5-1990 58-554 3436 11-19-1990 54-167 54-192 3444 11-19-1990 2-421 125-2 125-25, 125-26 125-56-125-58 125-90-125-95 125-124, 125-125 3459  2- 4-1991 137-35 3464  3- 4-1991 58-555 58-575 3466  3- 4-1991 137-4 137-301, 137-302 137-326 137-359 137-379, 137-380 137-405, 137-406 137-456, 137-457 137-586, 137-587 137-609, 137-610 3473  4-15-1991 58-555 3475  5- 6-1991 18-420 3497  6-17-1991 58-574 3501  6-17-1991 101-152, 101-153 3513  8-19-1991 58-554 3514  8-19-1991 58-575 3525 10- 7-1991 58-554 3526 10- 7-1991 58-575 3533 10-21-1991 30-104-30-110 3541 11-18-1991 58-575 3548 12- 2-1991 62-412 3554 12- 2-1991 46-191-46-197 3563  1- 6-1992 2-49 2-77 2-101 2-104 3578  3- 2-1992 46-1 46-107-46-110 3583  4-20-1992 2-611 3588  5- 4-1992 42-19-42-25 3591  5- 4-1992 101-25 101-27 3592  5- 4-1992 2-261 3601  6- 1-1992 2-753 3602  6-15-1992 137-405 3614  8- 3-1992 137-4 137-165 137-187 3626 10- 5-1992 2-525 3653 12-21-1992 2-261 3655 12-21-1992 2-124 3656  1- 4-1993 2-544-2-546 3657  1- 4-1993 2-642, 2-643 2-645, 2-646 3662  3- 1-1993 137-4 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-787 3667  3-15-1993 2-76 3679  4-19-1993 58-574 3680  4-19-1993 58-262 3681  5- 3-1993 66-21, 66-22 3682  5- 3-1993 2-261 3683  5- 3-1993 133-73 133-76 3686  5- 3-1993 137-4 137-165 137-187 137-216 137-301 137-359 137-484 3695  6- 7-1993 121-2 121-27, 121-28 121-30 3697  6-21-1993 66-22 3698  6-21-1993 137-4 137-36 137-41 137-69 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-301, 137-302 137-325-137-327 137-359 137-380 137-404-137-406 137-428 137-457 137-484, 137-485 137-587 137-610 137-641 137-857 3703  6-21-1993 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-302, 137-303 137-359, 137-360 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-587 137-610 137-641 137-732 3720  7-19-1993 2-608 3725  8- 2-1993 137-4 137-787 3746  9- 7-1993 58-575 3756  9-27-1993 62-412 3759  9-27-1993 58-574 3761 10- 4-1993 58-555 3765 10-18-1993 2-147 3771 11- 1-1993 30-19 3774 11- 1-1993 137-35 3785 11-15-1993 101-35 101-59-101-69 3789 12- 6-1993 62-462-62-468 3792 12- 6-1993 101-35 101-97-101-105 3793 12- 6-1993 2-421 125-1-125-3 125-25, 125-26 125-56-125-58 125-90-125-96 125-123-125-125 3795 12- 6-1993 2-443 2-571, 2-572 3787 12- 7-1993 18-228 3805  1- 3-1994 2-77 3806  1- 3-1994 58-554 58-574 3809  2- 7-1994 2-51 3810  2- 7-1994 58-554 3820  3- 7-1994 58-554 3836  6-20-1994 137-815 3838  6-20-1994 137-4 137-165 137-187 137-216 3845  7- 5-1994 34-32 34-93-34-100 3847  7- 5-1994 58-574 3682  8- 1-1994 101-62 3875  9-19-1994 2-308 3879 10- 3-1994 2-180 3880 10- 3-1994 2-124 3899 A.A. 11-21-1994 58-574 3911 12-19-1994 30-19 66-20-66-22 3913  1- 3-1995 129-3 129-73, 129-74 3914 1995 2-261 3917  2- 6-1995 34-97-34-99 3923  3- 6-1995 129-74 3927  4- 3-1995 2-1 3934  5- 8-1995 137-4 3935  5- 8-1995 137-35 3941  5-15-1995 30-70 30-72 3947  7- 5-1995 30-73 3958  8- 7-1995 62-462-62-468 3974  9- 5-1995 58-554 3977  9-25-1995 46-3 3978 10- 2-1995 58-575 3993 12- 4-1995 58-554 3994 12- 4-1995 58-574 3995 12- 4-1995 58-575 4007 12-18-1995 62-19, 62-20 62-44-62-48 62-70-62-77 62-98-62-115 62-144-62-156 62-181-62-197 62-218-62-224 62-242-62-250 62-279-62-293 62-320-62-331 4018  2- 5-1996 2-752 4020  2-20-1996 129-6 129-73 133-6 133-47 137-4 137-35 137-216 137-301, 137-302 137-380 137-405 137-679 137-815 4036  4-15-1996 66-53, 66-54 66-59-66-61 4037  4-15-1996 2-261 4045  5- 6-1996 2-668, 2-669 4051  5-20-1996 2-641-2-646 4054  6- 3-1996 58-554 4055  6- 3-1996 58-575 4056  6- 3-1996 58-575 4072  7-15-1996 62-48 62-186 62-193 62-218, 62-219 62-221, 62-222 62-224 4078  8- 5-1996 137-4 137-44 137-301 137-326 137-359 137-788 4085  8-19-1996 26-24 4097 10- 7-1996 58-574 4098 10- 7-1996 137-4 137-301 4104 10-21-1996 2-697 4105 10-21-1996 58-575 4125 12- 2-1996 2-261 4134 12-16-1996 30-47, 30-48 4152  4- 7-1997 1-2 2-420 14-1-14-6 14-8-14-23 14-50-14-53 14-56-14-61 4164  5- 5-1997 129-73 4165  5- 5-1997 58-554 4169  5-19-1997 18-446-18-457 4170  5-19-1997 137-4 137-586, 137-587 137-609, 137-610 4171  5-19-1997 10-19, 10-20 46-5 4181  7- 7-1997 2-597 4182  7- 7-1997 1-7 2-2 4192  7-21-1997 58-470 4196  8- 4-1997 46-156-46-161 4218 10- 6-1997 34-4 4223 10-20-1997 58-39 4225 10-20-1997 58-574 4112 11-18-1997 62-218 4115 11-18-1997 38-51 4248  2- 2-1998 18-498, 18-499 18-522-18-530 18-564-18-581 4251  2-17-1998 2-261 4252  3- 2-1998 58-527 4256  3-16-1998 58-575 4257  3-16-1998 58-575 4263  4- 6-1998 46-1 46-31-46-33 4264  4- 6-1998 58-555 4265  4- 6-1998 58-555 4266  4- 6-1998 58-575 4267  4- 6-1998 58-575 4277  5-18-1998 2-2 4284  6-15-1998 2-751 4286  7- 6-1998 30-19 4300  8-17-1998 2-752 4302  8-17-1998 137-4 137-101 137-379, 137-380 137-509, 137-510 137-529, 137-530 4303  8-17-1998 137-4 137-301 4323  9-21-1998 2-2 4324 10- 5-1998 58-574, 58-575 4343 11-16-1998 2-421 125-2 125-26 125-56-125-58 125-93, 125-94 125-96 125-123 125-125 4354 11-16-1998 129-6 129-73 4358 12- 7-1998 129-74 4365 12- 8-1998 2-595 4374  2- 1-1999 2-752 4394  5-17-1999 18-324 4397  6- 7-1999 46-1 46-134-46-136 4398  6- 7-1999 58-575 4401  6-21-1999 137-4 137-586, 137-587 137-609, 137-610 4404  6-21-1999 58-574 4405  6-21-1999 58-470 4406  6-21-1999 58-575 4409  7- 6-1999 18-606-18-618 4408  7- 8-1999 58-575 4413  7-20-1999 101-291 4415  7-20-1999 18-660-18-681 4462 12- 6-1999 62-412 4463 12- 6-1999 62-412 4469 12-20-1999 105-1-105-4 105-27-105-43 105-75-105-82 105-108-105-117 105-149, 105-150 105-169-105-178 105-210-105-213 105-235-105-239 4470 12-21-1999 137-360 4473  2- 7-2000 2-261 4477  2-21-2000 58-554 4478  2-21-2000 58-574 4482  5- 1-2000 2-180 4494  6-19-2000 62-412 4503  7-17-2000 26-1-26-3 26-23-26-30 26-49-26-53 4508  8-21-2000 46-32 4511  8-21-2000 2-753 4512  8-21-2000 58-554 4513  8-21-2000 62-412 4534 11- 9-2000 101-27 4535 11- 9-2000 129-44 4545 12- 4-2000 58-574, 58-575 4546 12- 4-2000 62-243 4562  1- 2-2001 2-610 4563  1-15-2001 137-44 4565  2-12-2001 137-166 137-188 137-302 137-360 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-510 137-530 4566  2-20-2001 38-19-38-22 4567  2-20-2001 2-610 4568  2-20-2001 137-301 137-326 137-380 137-456, 137-457 137-510 137-530 137-587 137-610 4575  4- 2-2001 2-222, 2-223 4576  4- 2-2001 137-166 137-188 137-217 137-245 137-302 137-327 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-510 137-530 137-587 137-610 137-641 4577  4-17-2001 30-72 4581  4-17-2001 62-185, 62-186 62-195 4583  5- 7-2001 129-74 4584  5- 7-2001 137-302 137-327 137-380 137-406 137-428 137-457 137-485 137-510 137-530 137-672 4589  5-21-2001 2-752 4590  5-21-2001 2-610 4591  5-21-2001 22-1, 22-2 4628  9-17-2001 2-609 4652 12- 3-2001 58-574 4656 12-18-2001 2-180 4661  1-22-2002 101-152 4663  2- 4-2002 58-574 4704  9-19-2002 2-723-2-726 4720 10-22-2002 2-124 4733 11-18-2002 58-574 4735 12- 2-2002 2-601 4745  2-18-2003 2-124 4747  3-17-2003 58-575 4750  3-17-2003 2-599 4764  7- 9-2003 2-669 4770  7- 9-2003 30-19 66-19 4771  7- 9-2003 30-46, 30-47 4772  7-21-2003 34-32 4786  9- 2-2003 2-364 4788  9-15-2003 18-660-18-681 4825 12-15-2003 58-575 4848  5-17-2004 1 58-574, 58-575 4851  6- 7-2004 1 58-554 4857  7- 6-2004 1(50.082)-1(50.085) 62-183-62-186 1(50.100)-1(50.105) 62-218-62-223 4899 11-15-2004 1-3 62-384 4926  2-24-2005 1(34.03) 2-597 1(34.14) 2-607 2 2-598 4948  7- 5-2005 1 50-4 4949  7- 5-2005 1, 2 50-1 4950  7- 5-2005 1 58-414, 58-415 2 58-414, 58-415 4955  8- 1-2005 1-3 2-753 4958  8-15-2005 1(150.02)-1(150.16) 101-20-101-34 1(150.40) 101-59 1(150.41) 101-61 1(150.42) 101-60 1(150.43)-1(150.50) 101-62-101-69 1(150.60)-1(150.66) 101-97-101-103 1(150.68), 1(150.69) 101-104, 101-105 1(150.99) 101-35 4959  8-15-2005 1(153.01), 1(153.02) 101-125, 101-126 1(153.10)-1(153.13) 101-151-101-154 1(153.20)-1(153.26) 101-177-101-183 1(153.35), 1(153.36) 101-205, 101-206 1(153.45)-1(153.47) 101-236-101-238 1(153.99) 101-124 4969  9- 6-2005 1(exh. A) 1-2 2-420 14-1-14-24 14-50-14-61 4978 10- 3-2005 1 2-642, 2-643 1(I) 2-644 1(II) 2-641 1(III)-(V) 2-645 1(VI), 1(VII) 2-646, 2-647 4987 10-17-2005 1, 2 125-97 5010  1- 3-2006 1, 2 2-124 300  8- 6-2006 2-443 2-468, 2-469 5074 11-20-2006 2 2-752 5085 12- 4-2006 1(162.01) 117-1 1(162.02)-1(162.08) 117-3-117-9 1(162.09) 117-2 1(162.10)-1(162.12) 117-10-117-12 1(162.13) 117-32 1(162.14) 117-103 1(162.15) 117-13 1(162.16)-1(162.30) 117-33-117-47 1(162.31) 117-14 1(162.32)-1(162.34) 117-70-117-72 1(162.35), 1(162.36) 117-104, 117-105 1(162.37) 117-48 5086 12- 4-2006 1(1.1) 62-351 1(1.2), 1(1.3) 62-353, 62-354 1(1.5) 62-355 1(2) 62-352 1(3.1), 1(3.2) 62-356 1(4)-1(7) 62-357-62-360 1(8.1-8.4) 62-361 5097  4- 2-2007 1 58-575 5103  5-10-2007 1 58-554 5111  7- 2-2007 1 46-90 5147  3- 6-2008 1 2-261 5162  6-16-2008 1 62-243 5179 10- 7-2008 1 58-574, 58-575 5181 10- 7-2008       Added Adopting Ord., p. xi 5183 10-20-2008 1       Rpld 2-668, 2-669 2       Added 2-668-2-672 5201 12-15-2008 1       Rpld 2-222 5210  1-22-2009 1 62-184       Rpld 62-185, 62-193       Added 62-362 5235 11- 2-2009 1 58-554 5242 12- 7-2009 1       Added 58-266 2 58-333 5249  2-15-2010 1-12       Added 2-612 5250  3-15-2010 1       Rpld 2-641-2-647 5253  4- 6-2010 58-552 58-554 5261  6-21-2010 58-554 5263  7- 6-2010 2 58-554 3 58-555 5265  8- 2-2010 1       Rpld 62-19, 62-20, 62-44-62-48, 62-70-62-77, 62-98-62-115, 62-144-62-156, 62-181-62-197, 62-218-62-224, 62-242-62-250, 62-279-62-293, 62-320-62-331, 62-351-62-362 2       Added 62-19, 62-20, 62-44-62-48, 62-70-62-77, 62-98-62-115, 62-144-62-156, 62-181-62-197, 62-218-62-224, 62-242-62-250, 62-279-62-293, 62-320-62-331, 62-351-62-362, 62-481-62-499 5268  8-17-2010 1       Rpld 2-752, 2-753 2       Added 2-752 3       Added App. A 5283 11- 3-2010 1       Rpld 121-1-121-4, 121-27-121-33       Added 121-1-121-4, 121-27-121-36, 121-51-121-53, 121-71-121-78, 121-91-121-97 5289 12- 6-2010 1 121-29(4) 5298  1- 3-2011 1       Added 2-180(3)       Rnbd 2-180(3)-(15)       as 2-180(4)-(16) 5300  3-21-2011 1 App. A 5332 12- 5-2011 1 121-78 5366 12- 3-2012 1 2-124 5381  3- 4-2013 1, 2 62-412 5395  7-15-2013 1 105-171(a), (b) 105-179 105-180 5412  8-19-2013 1       Added 50-3(a)(8) 5426 11-18-2013 2(Exh. A)       Added 62-469, 62-470 5439  5- 7-2014 1 18-226 18-227(a)(1)-(3), (b) 5440  6- 2-2014 1 18-67(b) 18-157(a) 18-159 18-162 18-614(c)(6), (g) 18-616 5485  6- 1-2015 1(exh. A) 14-1-14-24 14-50-14-61       Added 14-62 5503 11- 4-2015       Rpld 121-1-121-4, 121-27-121-36, 121-51-121-53, 121-71-121-78, 121-91-121-97       Added 121-1-121-4, 121-27-121-36, 121-51-121-53, 121-71-121-78, 121-91-121-97 5532  6-20-2016 1-3       Added 2-444 5552 11-21-2016 1 62-244(a)(1) 2 62-246 5553 12- 5-2016 1 58-552(a) 2, 3 58-554, 58-555 5568  3- 6-2017 1 62-147(10) 62-183(d) 62-184 62-362 5569  3- 6-2017 1(Exhs. A, B) 62-412 5570  4- 3-2017 1 2-286 5571  4- 3-2017 1       Rpld 18-522(e)(1), (2)       Rnbd 18-522(e)(3)       as 18-522(e)(1) 5635 12- 3-2018 1       Rpld App. A       Added App. A 5639 12-17-2018 1-3 2-444 5649  3- 4-2019 1 62-243  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Indiana Code. 
IC Section 
this Code 1-1-4-1 et seq. 1-2 4-21.5 125-125 5-3-1 105-30 5-3-1-2 133-74 5-4-1-18 2-147 5-14-1.5-1 et seq. 2-77 5-14-1.5-5 2-78 5-16-9-1 et seq. 58-330 5-16-9-2(e) 58-331 5-22 2-751 5-28-9-1 et seq. 109-1 7.1-1-3-5, 
7.1-1-3-13 46-107 7.1-5-1-3, 
7.1-5-1-6 Ch. 46, Art. V 8-6-4-1 58-498 8-6-4-1(c) 58-499 8-23-20 et seq. 137-732 9-13-2 et seq. 58-1 9-13-2-1 30-71 9-13-2-105 46-107 9-13-2-150 46-107 9-17-2-12 58-9 9-18-18-1 et seq. 58-330 9-20-1-3 Ch. 58, Art. V 9-20-1-3(a) Ch. 58, Art. VI, 
Ch. 58, Art. VII 9-20-1-3(a)(1) 58-42 9-20-1-3(c) 58-470, 58-471 9-21-1-3(a)(1) 58-265 9-21-1-3(a)(2) 58-147 9-21-1-3(a)(3) 58-45 9-21-1-3(a)(4) 58-181 9-21-1-3(a)(9) Ch. 58, Art. IV 58-420 9-21-1-6 58-7 9-21-4-3 58-118, 58-119 9-21-8-21 58-147, 58-148 9-21-11-1 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. IV 9-21-11-2 58-416 9-21-11-8 58-415 9-21-16-4 58-8 9-21-17-1 et seq. 58-39 9-21-17-4 58-121 9-22-1-1 et seq. 30-71 9-22-1-2 30-70 9-22-1-27 30-72 9-24-2-3 18-264 9-24-5-1 et seq. 18-264 9-26-1-7 58-3 9-29-4-2 58-9 14-21-1 125-123 14-28-1 121-75 14-28-1-26 121-75 14-28-3-1 et seq. Ch. 121 14-32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 117 15-2.1-2-15 14-1 15-2.1-6-1- 
15-2.1-6-13 14-11 16-18-2-135 38-19 16-19-3-4.1 Ch. 18, Art. X 16-19-4-4.2 Ch. 18, Art. X 22-9-1-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 22-9.5-1-1 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 22-11-14-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV 22-12-7 101-34 23-7-8-2 26-1 23-14-65 22-2 23-14-65-1 et seq. Ch. 22 24-6-3-4 et seq. 18-357 24-6-3-5 18-358 24-6-3-11 18-359 25-28.5-1-1 et seq. Pt., Art. IV 25-28.5-1-2 101-271 25-37-1-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. IV Ch. 18, Art. VIII 28-7-5-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 32-30-6-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VII 32-30-7-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VII 32-30-8-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VIII 33-36-2-1 et seq. 2-2 33-36-3-1 et seq. 2-2 35-1-5-6 1-3 35-42-2-1, 35-42-2-2 46-156 35-43-2-2 14-1 35-43-5-3(a)(4) 18-359 35-44-3-3 46-156 35-45-1-3 46-156 35-45-4-1 Ch. 18, Art. XII 18-664 35-45-4-2, 
35-45-4-3 46-156 35-45-5-1 46-156 35-46-1-8 46-156 35-46-3-1 14-53 35-46-3-8 et seq. 14-56 36-1-3-8 Ch. 18, Art. II Ch. 18, Art. V, 
Ch. 18, Art. VI Ch. 18, Art. IX- 
Ch. 18, Art. XI 121-36 133-10 137-47 36-1-3-8(9), 
36-1-3-8(10) 1-7 36-1-4-11 Ch. 117 117-3 36-1-5-3 1-1 36-1-5-4 30-71 38-21 36-1-6-1 et seq. 1-7 36-1-6-2 Ch. 66, Art. III 36-1-11-1 et seq. 2-493 36-4-5-8, 
36-4-5-9 2-148 36-4-6-3 2-124 36-4-6-6(3) 2-102 36-4-6-7 2-76, 2-77 36-4-6-7(b) 2-78 36-4-6-8 2-48 2-76 36-4-6-9 2-49 36-4-6-10 2-100 36-4-6-13 2-102 36-4-6-14 2-48 36-4-6-15, 
36-4-6-16 2-103 36-4-7-2, 
36-4-7-3 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-4-9-5 2-199 36-4-9-6(c) 2-199 36-4-9-7 2-148 36-7-4 121-1 36-7-4-200 et seq. 2-335 36-7-4-202 137-40 36-7-4-207(a) 2-336 36-7-4-216 2-336 36-7-4-217, 
36-7-4-218 2-336 36-7-4-220 2-336 36-7-4-311(a) 105-31 36-7-4-601 et seq. Ch. 137 36-7-4-602 137-44 137-47 36-7-4-613 105-39 36-7-4-700 et seq. Ch. 133 36-7-4-900 et seq. 2-418 36-7-4-901 137-42 36-7-4-1014, 
36-7-4-1015 137-46 36-7-4-1106 137-857 36-7-4-1400 105-28, 105-29 36-7-4-1401 et seq. Ch. 105 36-7-4-1402(c) 105-31 36-7-4-1406 105-35 105-37 36-7-9 66-22 36-7-9-1 et seq. Pt., Art. V 101-292 36-7-9-1- 
36-7-9-28 101-292 36-7-9-2, 
36-7-9-4 101-292 36-7-9-12 101-292 36-7-9-14, 
36-7-9-15 101-292 36-7-9-25 46-192 36-7-11-1 et seq. Ch. 125 36-7-12-1 et seq. Ch. 113 36-7-12-4 2-286 36-7-14-3 2-387 36-8-2-8 Ch. 30, Art. V 36-8-2-10 Ch. 18, Art. II Ch. 18, Art. IV- 
Ch. 18, Art. VI Ch. 18, Art. VIII- 
Ch. 18, Art. XI 36-8-2-11 Ch. 18, Art. IV Ch. 18, Art. VIII Ch. 26 36-8-2-12 Ch. 18, Art. VII 36-8-3-20 2-364 36-8-6-1 et seq. 2-363 36-8-7-1 et seq. 2-308 36-8-8-1 et seq. 2-308 2-363 36-8-17-1 et seq. Ch. 34 36-8-17-5(a) 34-60 36-8-17-7 34-67 36-8-17-9(d) 34-2 36-8-17-10 34-3 36-10-2-2 Ch. 50 36-10-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 Ch. 50 36-10-3-4, 36-10-3-5 2-256 36-10-3-8 2-257 36-10-3-10, 
36-10-3-11 2-260 36-10-3-17, 
36-10-3-18 2-258, 2-259 36-10-3-22 2-261 36-10-3-31 2-259  
